
























































Hansard: April 04, 1974


2038 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

44th Day 
 

Thursday, April 4, 1974 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce at this time 16 Grade Seven 
students from Gravelbourg Elementary School under the direction of Mr. Forest. The students are seated 
in the west gallery. I trust they will have an educational experience today and I look forward to meeting 
with them at around 3 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Error in Leader Post Re SEDCO 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 
should like to correct an error which appeared in the Leader-Post for April 1st, 1974 and I understand 
may have appeared in other newspapers as well. It has to do with information that was tabled in the 
Crown Corporations’ Committee with respect to investments made by SEDCO. The information as 
tabled indicated that SEDCO lost money on investments in two companies, Ad Fab Structures Ltd., and 
Rolloflex Ltd. Unfortunately when the information appeared in the Press it indicated that SEDCO had 
made a profit on those two investments and that was clearly an error and I should not like that to go 
uncorrected. 
 
I may just say, Mr. Speaker, that with respect to those two companies the loss in Ad Fab Structures Ltd., 
was $50,000 on a preferred share investment; and in the case of Rolloflex Ltd., $1,750, again preferred 
shares were purchased. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Malting Facility in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, may I take the moment to say to the House that 
Henninger International and the Government of Saskatchewan (through SEDCO) have organized a 
company whose object will be to develop a malting facility in the Province of Saskatchewan. This 
facility is to be located in the Biggar area and provided our application to the Department of Regional 
Economic Expansion for assistance is approved by that Department, we should see the development go 
forward fairly quickly. 
 
It is estimated that the malting facility will use about 8 million bushels of barley from Saskatchewan 
annually and the total employment when the facility is fully operational should be in the neighborhood 
of 60 jobs. 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2039 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Local School Board at Ile-A-La-Crosse 
 
Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Education and also the Acting Minister of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. The Government has argued many times during this Session that one of their major 
accomplishments to date has been the establishment of the Ile-a-la-Crosse local school board. The 
Government has been holding this school board up as an example of local autonomy, where the local 
people have been participating. The other day this local autonomous school board made a decision by 
the majority of the members of the board regarding school teachers for the coming year. 
 
My question is, why is the Minister interfering in the affairs of this local autonomous board when the 
Government has made so much of the fact that they are running their own affairs, the Minister is now 
interfering in these affairs by setting up a mediator? The Minister has closed down the school for an 
indefinite period of time. 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Member for Athabasca, 
the Minister of Education and the Acting Minister of Northern Saskatchewan are not interfering with the 
affairs of that school board. There is obviously a really serious community problem as a result of the 
decision that that board made. So serious a problem that we have had a sit-in, we have had a sit-in in that 
school from last Thursday until Tuesday evening. On condition that the sit-in end and the parents return 
to their homes and the community become a much quieter community emotionally, we, in discussion 
with the Director of Education for northern Saskatchewan and the chairman of the school board at Ile-a-
la-Crosse suggested to that chairman that the school be closed for yesterday and today. Holidays begin 
tomorrow and continue on into next week in northern Saskatchewan and at Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
The purpose of sending in a mediator was to try and present to the community some vehicle by which 
they can settle their differences, still maintaining the school board and the autonomy of that board. And I 
have, as of this morning, appointed Mr. Hugh Thompson who is a Regional Superintendent to do that 
job. He is familiar with northern Saskatchewan having worked there and I hope he can help that 
community settle their differences. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The Minister, of course, has not answered the 
question as to why he interfered in the affairs of an autonomous school board. And if what he says is 
true, if we are to support his argument my question is, is he going to shut down communities and 
schools every time there is a sit-in? Because if he is why doesn’t he shut down the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan because there have been several sit-ins against the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. The best thing that could happen would be to shut 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2040 

it down for good. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I have not interfered with the school board. I have made public 
statements in support of the autonomy of that particular duly elected school board. There is no question 
about that. I might also reply to this supplementary statement that it was not the Minister who closed the 
school, it was the chairman of the school board, Mr. Joe Favel. 
 

Steel Development in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the 
Hon. Mr. Thorson in his capacity as Minister of Industry and Commerce. There has been considerable 
discussion in the Press obviously about the impending steel development within Saskatchewan and 
western Canada. My question concerns, what will be the distribution of investment and jobs between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta in general terms? Given obviously that IPSCO has been very anxious that 
Alberta pick up options on a large number of shares, which would seem to indicate that IPSCO is 
anxious to become the steel company of western Canada and to assure itself some kind of state 
monopoly in western Canada, what guarantees do we have that there is not within IPSCO a desire and 
an intent to try and locate as much of any new investment in Alberta as opposed to Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I really think I cannot answer that question. The Government of Alberta 
up to this point has not invested in the IPSCO Company. Discussions are going on involving the 
Company, representatives of the Government of Alberta and certainly there are discussions going on 
between the Company and representatives of the Government of Saskatchewan. What they will lead to 
will eventually become known and I shall be able to answer such questions. 
 
Mr. Richards: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, we have headlines in the Leader-Post talking 
explicitly about this project, some unofficial news release, and we try and raise the issue in the 
Legislature and we get no co-operation. There exists an option which the Alberta Government can take 
advantage of up until mid April. All the indications from unofficial sources are that they do intend to 
take up this option. What does it mean in terms of the role of the Alberta Government in IPSCO? I think 
it is highly legitimate that in this Legislature we ask questions about that and the Minister should be able 
to provide more information than he has to date. Can the Minister say, in general terms, what is going to 
be the relative impact of investment in iron and steel in Saskatchewan relative to Alberta? If he can’t say 
definitely what will be final policy, how far has it gone to date? What are the options being discussed by 
the Provincial Government, the Alberta Government and the Federal Government and IPSCO? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the discussions are going on. What they will lead to 
eventually will be announced but clearly I can’t lay out various proposals and counter proposals that are 
being discussed and still carry on the negotiations. It is quite obvious I am sure, Mr. Speaker, and I 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2041 

think that is the point of the question of the Hon. Member, that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
not agree to an arrangement which would jeopardize the employment of people in the steel industry in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question just raised is a good example of asking questions on future policy. 
Members, the rule says, shouldn’t be asking the Government to make statements on future policy but 
what is fait accompli and I think the Hon. Member is asking for a projection. I think we should try and 
stay away from that type of question. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I should like to direct a question to the Premier 
or in his absence, the deputy, or in his absence which ever one of the three frontbenchers may be Acting. 
I wonder, first of all, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is aware that when he isn’t here very few other 
Members of Cabinet seem to consider it worthy enough to take their time to come into this House for the 
question period. 
 
On the question of Government announcements, whether they are future policy or present policy, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to know if it is the intention of the Government to continue making announcements 
outside of the Legislature at a time when the Legislature is in Session, which I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is 
acting in contempt of this House. I refer to the announcement on The University Act, several 
announcements by the Minister of Education – he called a Press Conference in Saskatoon. We have the 
announcement of the minimum wage by the Minister of Labour, it’s a good one. I don’t know why he 
wouldn’t want to make it here in this House when the Legislature is in session. The steel mill, that’s a 
little bit different, we understand that kind of a sleazy sneak preview, something like a stag movie, we 
understand why that was held outside of the House. But my question is, is the Government going to 
demonstrate its respect for this House and discontinue this practice of showing contempt as I say by 
staging announcements and so on outside of the Legislature when it is in session. 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier and 
the Deputy Premier, I guess it becomes my turn to attempt to answer some of the questions that the 
Leader of the Opposition referred to last night. I hope perhaps I am more successful than the Deputy 
Premier. I don’t know whether that is the reason for his absence today or not. But I do want to respond 
to the opening remarks that the Member for Wilkie made in regard to other Members of the Cabinet 
being absent. I want to let it be known to the House that the Premier is not here because of illness, the 
Attorney General is not here because of other Government business and is representing, I believe, the 
Premier. The Minister for Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) is hospitalized and the Minister of 
Natural Resources (Mr. Kowalchuk) is also away because of illness. These reasons are beyond the 
control of those individual Members and I known want the impression left that Members are off on a 
holiday or something like that as may have been read into the remarks of the Member for Wilkie. 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2042 

Turning to the question that the Member for Wilkie made in regard to whether or not it is going to be 
Government practice to make all announcements outside of the Legislative Assembly rather than here, I 
should like for the benefit of the Members to your left, Mr. Speaker, to remind them of the policies of 
the Liberal Government when some of them were on the Treasury Benches, in regard to announcements. 
I can recall a good many announcements being made in the Press before and perhaps not even to be 
announced in the Legislature. I believe that it is a decision that the individual Minister has to make in 
regard to when and where he is going to make his announcements. Certainly a good many 
announcements are made by the Government when the session is not in process, they are made by 
calling a Press Conference. I think that this is a standard procedure and I don’t think there is any real 
requirement that a Minister, if he so chooses to announce something that relates to the Government or 
his particular department, that he necessarily has to make the announcement here before the Orders of 
the Day, before he makes the announcement to the general populace of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, just a short supplementary on that point. At least we now know from the 
Minister that it is up to the choice of the Minister whether he wants to announce it in here or outside. 
Obviously most of them have chosen to take the outside route and not come into the House. I can ask the 
Government and ask the Premier, and I hope it is conveyed to the Premier, that he reconsider that kind 
of a policy. It breaks from the tradition of the Liberal Party when we were in power and it breaks from 
the tradition of their party when they were in power before because the House was used and should be 
used for these announcements. I suggest very, very sincerely that they consider returning immediately to 
that practice. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Acting Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 84 – An 
Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the prime purpose of the Property Improvement Grant is to relieve the owner of a 
large portion of his property tax which is levied for the operation of our school system. This program to 
say the least has received wide public support and the Budget presented at this Session provides funds to 
greatly increase this grant and to further reduce the tax burden on property for education purposes within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will increase the maximum grant for a principal residence from $144 in 1973 to 
$160 in 1974. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — This Bill will increase the maximum grant for business property from $180 in 1973 to 
$200 in 1974. This Bill will increase the maximum grant for farm property from $270 in 1973 to $300 in 
1974. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2043 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, grants from the Department of Education should hold the average mill 
rate for school purposes in 1974 to 43 mills. One of our promises to the electorate was to effectively 
reduce the average property tax for education to 25 mills. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, provides for a Property 
Improvement Grant based on 20 mills which will reduce the average tax rate for school purposes to 23 
mills for the majority of property taxpayers. A promise made and a promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, a person who owns the residence in which he lives can qualify for a grant 
equal to one-half of the property taxes levied against his residence up to a maximum of $160. Although 
the ratio for municipal taxes to school and hospital taxes varies between municipalities, the average ratio 
is 50-50 between municipal and school taxes. A refund of one-half the taxes to the property owner will 
mean the Government has completely removed the school taxes on his property. 
 
A minor amendment is made in the Bill to clarify that where an eligible applicant dies the payment of 
the grant may be made for that year to his executor or other person entitled by law to apply for authority 
to administer the estate. 
 
Services such as roads and streets, sidewalks, police and fire protection are services to property and this 
constitutes sufficient reason to charge the property for the cost of these services. 
 
The benefits of education, however, Mr. Speaker, are not a benefit to property nor are they confined to 
any one municipality. Rarely does a person use the benefits of his education in the municipality in which 
he received his training. In many instances he practices his profession in a province other than the one in 
which he took his training. These reasons, I think, clearly indicate that the cost of education should be 
removed from property and transferred to a source at either the provincial or federal level or a 
combination of both which more accurately reflects the ability to pay by the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last Liberal budget, provided 183,000 residents with homeowner grants totaling $12.3 
million. In 1972, our first year of office, we reviewed this grant program and made the grants available 
to a greater number of residents of this province. At the same time we increased the maximum grants 
that could be claimed by an applicant. In 1973 we again increased the amounts and over 233,000 
residents, some 50,000 more than in 1971 received $30.2 million in grants. 
 
Let me just review a moment, Mr. Speaker. One hundred and eighty-three thousand eligible residents in 
1971, were paid out $12.3 million under a Liberal government. Two years later, 233,000 eligible 
residents, more than 50,000 more, received grants under a New Democratic government, $30.2 million 
in 1973, an increase of $18 million in a two year period of time to the residents of Saskatchewan, under 
a New Democratic government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have added an additional $2.4 million to this program for 1974. The increase in the 
1974 Budget over the 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2044 

1971 Liberal budget, three years ago constitutes an increase of 265 per cent in this grant program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is abundantly clear that our promise to effectively reduce 
the property taxes for schools is indeed being carried out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said these brief few words, I take great pleasure in moving second reading of this 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is obviously a good Liberal idea and a good Liberal 
program that is being improved with the spending of more money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill evidences a failure on the part of the Government opposite, however, to solve the 
gut problems of municipal financing. Municipality after municipality is announcing in the papers these 
days and on the media that they are forced to up their mill rates. They are upping their mill rates in some 
cases considerably more than the increased monies being given to them. And surely this papering over 
approach, although the money is welcome, this papering over approach is not solving any basic 
problems and is not helping the municipalities who are being forced into more and more municipal 
spending by the Government. 
 
I mentioned in the Community Capital Fund debate that there are activities on the part of the 
Government which will force many municipalities to spend more money than perhaps they should. It 
forces them to take programs within a certain time period and forces them to assess their priorities and 
change their priorities to bring them in to line with a provincial government priority and not their own. 
Certainly the added money is welcome, but let’s make no mistake that the increase in the Property 
Improvement Grant or the Homeowner Grant does not solve the basic problems of municipal financing. 
We will have more to say, Mr. Speaker, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 90 – An Act to amend 
The School Act (No. 2) 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill 90 contains a number of minor housekeeping amendments to The School Act 
and one amendment which will be of major significance to the teachers of our province. 
 
The major amendment is a change to Section 270 of The School Act dealing with the right of teachers to 
hold office as elected trustees. Prior to 1968 the teacher could stand for election to office of a trustee, 
providing that that teacher did not stand in the district in which he was employed. This makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s natural, understood by most people, that when negotiations are involved, a teacher should 
not sit as a member of the board which employs him. Conflict of interest could well arise. Having to 
make decisions concerning the teaching staff of which he is a member, could be difficult for both the 
teacher 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2045 

and the board. It is a common and an accepted labor practice that in any one organizational unit the same 
person cannot play the role of both employer and employee at the same time. 
 
It would be ludicrous to suggest, however, that because such a practice does exist and because it’s 
accepted, it also means that a person cannot function as an employer at the same time as he is an 
employee in another organization or in another business. Indeed to suggest the latter is true would be 
very undemocratic. How could democracy function if the normal citizen could not sit on a board which 
was the responsible employer of employees charged with a specific service to the public? The whole 
basis of democracy, it seems to me, is that the public elects representatives to make decisions on its 
behalf concerning the policies, concerning the personnel of the organizations which serve it. Such a 
practice operates from the humblest level of public office to the highest and it is difficult to imagine 
anyone seriously questioning that process. It is difficult enough to imagine anyone questioning the 
process, but it seems to me it’s downright impossible to imagine anyone not honoring that process when 
there is a challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what took place under the administration of the Members opposite after their 
election in 1968. Not only did the Liberals not honor the process, they enacted legislation which was, in 
effect, contrary to that process. Prior to 1968, Section 270 of The School Act permitted a teacher to hold 
office as an elected trustee in any district other than the district in which he was employed. In passing 
The Teachers Salary Agreements Act, 1968, the Liberals repealed Section 270 and enacted an 
amendment to say that a teacher could not be a school trustee in the negotiation area in which he was 
employed. Now there were 13 negotiation areas in the province under The Teachers Salary Agreements 
Act. The areas were large enough, but the problems of distance would make it virtually impossible for a 
teacher to serve as an elected trustee in another area. 
 
If a teacher did want to serve, it’s obviously difficult to get elected because it would be difficult to be 
well known that far away. And anyway why should a teacher want to serve? It’s extremely doubtful that 
a teacher would have any of his children attending school in another area. So they had it pretty well 
figured out and were safe in assuming that their legislation would prevent any teachers from serving on 
school boards as elected trustees. 
 
The present amendment, Mr. Speaker, restores teachers to the status they enjoyed prior to 1968. Their 
rightful status as citizens fully eligible for election to public office as school trustees in any district other 
than the one in which they are employed. 
 
This amendment is important now and will increase in importance as more and more people live in 
communities other than those in which they work. Teachers who work elsewhere can now assume their 
full rights and responsibilities as citizens in the community where their children attend school. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill contains three other minor amendments and two housekeeping amendments. 
 
Section 70 subsection 2 is an amendment to make it not mandatory to swear a religious oath as a 
condition of being a 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2046 

candidate in school elections. This removes any possible charge of discrimination in the matter of who 
can attend as a candidate for school trustees. 
 
Section 83 subsection 1 provides for any voter who is called upon to take an oath to identify whether he 
is a public school or a separate school supporter. This was formally done, formally done verbally by the 
Deputy Returning Officer and the amendment simply removes the possibility of error. 
 
Section 264 is an amendment to include loiterers in the group of undesirables listed in the section which 
the school authorities may remove from the school premises if necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendments are of minor housekeeping nature, designed to bring The School Act 
in line with other Acts presently passed. 
 
The changes to The School Act No. 2 contained in this Bill are progressive changes, Mr. Speaker, and I 
am pleased to move that Bill 90 be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments on the Minister’s remarks. 
 
First of all, after listening to the Minister I was sure now, that a school teacher living in Avonlea could 
now absolutely participate in any school board in the province. I suggest that this does very little for the 
school teachers in the Province of Saskatchewan. Let’s take an example of a rural school unit. The rural 
school unit may be 75 miles square. All of a sudden a teacher is located in the middle of that, say the 
Milestone school unit, such as the town of Avonlea. Now this says he can’t hold office as a school 
trustee on the board that employs him. The Minister says he could go to Moose Jaw or he could go to 
Regina and he could stand as a school trustee there and nobody debates that. And it was very little 
different than the area clause that was put in in 1968. It narrows it down, it opens it up and because now 
there has been a transference of negotiations and collective bargaining power from the local board to the 
provincial board this now broadens it so that a teacher doesn’t have the same restrictions as he might 
have had in the 1968 Act. 
 
Certainly we support the principle of this particular Bill. We will not oppose it, but let’s make sure that 
we understand very clearly what the Minister is doing here. He is saying that really no school teacher, 
unless he happens to work for the public system in the city of Regina can then hold office on the 
separate school board in the city of Regina, Saskatoon, or wherever there are two boards and we 
certainly agree with that principle, but it’s not broadening it. He’s really got the same basic fundamental 
right as was contained in 1968. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a very brief comment to reiterate the points made by 
the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). I listened with some interest for the Minister, as he began 
debate on this Bill 90 which is the second set of amendments to The School Act he has had to bring in 
this year. I’m not sure 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2047 

whether this little section here has resulted from a little conference, or cocktail party or whatever he may 
have had with some of the Federation and decided to bring this back in, but it’s a very small little move. 
It doesn’t do any of the great things the Minister would lead the House to believe. It does, I’m sure, 
perhaps apply to maybe 10 per cent of the teachers employed in the province and there’s nothing wrong 
with the move that the Minister is making, and we’ll certainly support it, but I just wish to point out that 
he did get carried away somewhat in his introduction. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy moved second reading of Bill No. 77 – An Act to amend The Teacher Collective 
Bargaining Act, 1973. 
 
He said: In moving second reading of the amendment to The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, 
perhaps I might just bring the Members of the Legislature up-to-date on the reasons for bringing forward 
the amendment. 
 
In an action initiated last year by the Board of Education for the Moose Jaw school district No. 1, the 
Board of Education for the Moose Jaw separate school district and the Board of Education for the 
Moose Jaw high school district and the Moose Jaw unit, against the Attorney General of Saskatchewan 
and the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation, the plaintiffs sought to declare Sections 3 to 34 inclusive 
and Section 37 of The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, 1973 be declared ultra vires of the 
Legislature. The ground was that the Legislation is repugnant to Section 17 of The Saskatchewan Act 
which amends the BNA Act Section 93. Now Section 17 of The Saskatchewan Act states that nothing in 
any such law will prejudicially affect any right or privilege with respect to separate schools which any 
class of persons have to have at the date of the passing of this Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Roman Catholic faith expects that religion will permeate a Roman Catholic 
school system in all its relationships. The plaintiffs argued that the right and privilege to operate their 
systems in this fashion was transgressed by The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, 1973. 
 
It was submitted that province wide bargaining has caused the separate school boards representing the 
Roman Catholic minority to lose control of their budgeting. Secondly, the plaintiffs argued that province 
wide bargaining causes the separate school board to lose control of its teachers. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Justice MacPherson did not accept either of these arguments. There was one 
section of The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, 1973 which in his opinion constituted a means by 
which the Act may be employed to trespass upon the rights and privileges of a separate school board and 
that is Section 32. 
 
It provides to each party to a grievance, a right to have it resolved by arbitration. It provides that 
Sections 19, 20, and 21 of the Act shall apply to the arbitration. Subsection 3 of subsection 19 provides 
that such arbitration is binding and it’s final. The grievances defined in Section 2 (h) as including any 
disagreement between the parties to a collective bargaining agreement with respect to the meaning or 
application of the bargaining agreement, to any violation of it or any matter 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2048 

involving disciplinary action by a school board against a teacher except dismissal. That last clause is the 
offending one, since a grievance could not get to binding arbitration without a board’s consent, 
involving one of the rights and privileges of a separate school board. Namely, it is the regulation of the 
selection of teachers or the administrative and instructional duties of teachers, or the nature or quality of 
an instructional program including religious instruction. 
 
Mr. Justice MacPherson stated that Section 32 is ultra vires because it permits interference with the 
school board’s right to operate the system to such an extent as to affect it prejudicially. 
 
The amendment as proposed removes from the definition of grievance, the words, or any matter 
involving disciplinary action by a school board against a teacher except dismissal. By making this 
amendment, the Legislature will be following Mr. Justice MacPherson’s recommendation and the Act 
would henceforth operate without further litigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a brief comment. First of all I am not going to 
go into the suit filed by the Moose Jaw and District Area School Trustees or School Boards against the 
Attorney General. I, in principle, think they had a very valid argument, or a very good argument and 
certainly one that I think is now being considered for appeal. I am not sure whether they have made a 
final decision to proceed or not. I think it was a good idea to bring it before the courts and clarify it once 
and for all. 
 
The argument for the rights of separate schools in the Province of Saskatchewan is a traditional one and 
a very important one that is held very sacred by many, many people of the province, particularly that 
minority group, Roman Catholics. 
 
I am not going to get into that. Judge MacPherson has brought down his decision in that regard. As I say 
I think there was a valid reason for going to the courts and I am not sure what the final decision will be 
if the decision is appealed. 
 
I think this amendment is a good one because if I have read the amendment correctly, and I understand 
the amendment properly, and taking from what the Minister has said, by removing that portion, that last 
clause or phrase from Section 32 or any other matter involving the disciplinary area action against a 
teacher, except dismissal, means at least, and the Minister can inform me when he closes debate, it 
means that this removes any question that the school board has the authority over the teachers whom it 
hires. And this was the point that Judge MacPherson was making, by making it a grievance, and the 
arbitration procedures that follow. It meant that in reality some of the decisions of a board in relation to 
the teachers it hires, could be brought to binding arbitration and therefore the school board did not have 
complete control over the people whom they hired in the areas as set out in the Act, 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2049 

So I do support the amendment. I think it does clarify it; it removes once and for all any question of an 
agitation or an aggravation between teachers and school boards in the province. Clearly, once again it 
stipulates what is a grievance, those things that come within the collective bargaining agreement and all 
of the things the school board then has, the power and the responsibility in control of the teachers whom 
it hires. 
 
I hope that the Minister can tell me if I have interpreted the Act or the amendment correctly. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Just a brief comment, Mr. Speaker. Regardless of the legal action that 
may have resulted in this amendment, I think it is a good amendment. The Minister well knows that for 
many years the objective of the Federation by and large has been to get almost everything and anything 
considered as a grievance as such, whether or not it directly related to the collective bargaining 
agreement. 
 
I think the amendment before us cleans up the definition of ‘grievance’ which previously was a very, 
very wide definition, which allowed almost anything to be considered as a grievance, even though there 
may have well been other channels for dealing with those matters. As I say, regardless of where it comes 
to us from, as a result of court action or elsewhere, I do think it is a definite improvement and should 
result in an improvement with respect to definition of grievances and so on with respect to collective 
agreements, be they provincial or otherwise. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I think the statement of the Member for Milestone and the Member 
for Wilkie are accurate in terms of interpretation. Certainly as we stated in our speeches and was 
provided in the legislation that what is taught, how it is taught, and who is to teach it, should not be a 
negotiable item. This was obviously, as Judge MacPherson pointed out, contrary to that original position 
and obviously contrary to the rights and powers of the school board. 
 
I am surprised, Mr. Speaker, to note the earlier comments by the Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald) where he is saying that he is still supporting the efforts of the school boards in Moose Jaw. 
That obviously he is still taking the position of opposition to The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, 
even after a year’s trial, where we have seen settlements for three years – one for 1973 and a recent and 
very major one, for 1974 and 1975 and I will be bringing forward legislation with respect to the 
superannuation and group life insurance which were very much a part of that package. 
 
We think it is going to work. We think that it has already shown that and I must say that I am surprised, 
but I am pleased that they support this amendment. I think that as we review both teachers, trustees and 
government review, the experiences, that we might have further amendments to bring forward for The 
Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, probably in the next session. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2050 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 
No. 79 – An Act to Regulate the Ownership and Control of Agricultural Land in Saskatchewan be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I think you will agree that it was fortunate that I 
looked over this Bill before I broke my glasses. I think this is the kind of a Bill where you are better off 
if you are not able to read the fine print. If you could just read the title of the Bill, then deal in 
generalities, as the Minister did in his second reading speech, perhaps you would not be too concerned. 
If you could listen to some mythical farms by the Arabs or some multinational corporation, perhaps you 
would be taken in. But not if you read the Bill carefully. I think if you look at the Bill carefully, certainly 
any Saskatchewan resident or any Canadian would be concerned when he actually sees what is in this 
Bill and realizes the true intent of the Bill. 
 
I should just like to add that this Bill should have included some mention of recreational land. The Bill, 
in itself, is poorly drafted and we should like to see the Bill withdrawn, as it was in 1972. But any kind 
of a Bill that is looking at land use, in any province today, should certainly have some reference to 
recreation land. The Minister, in his speech, talked about Americans coming up and buying large tracts 
of land for hunting or something of this nature, and of course, nothing was done in the Bill about that. 
 
He refers to land use Bills in Prince Edward Island or British Columbia or Nova Scotia or elsewhere and 
largely they are concerned with recreation use of land and perhaps rightly so. I don’t think anyone wants 
to see someone from another country coming in and buying a great deal of land around the Okanagan 
lakes in British Columbia or around our lakes in northern Saskatchewan. There should be some control 
over this and this is completely left out of this Bill. 
 
The Members, I believe, would all have no real objection to some restrictions on corporations, but we 
would like to make it clear that there is absolutely no statistical evidence to indicate this is an issue right 
now or is likely to be in the very near future. The Minister should not be using this as an excuse to bring 
in this Bill. 
 
He mentioned how many millions of dollars that Exxon made in the last year and typically NDP scare 
tactics, where he indicates that these people may be interested in our agricultural land. Of course, there 
is no evidence of this. The evidence, in fact, is the other way around, the very few corporations who 
hold any agricultural land in this province are trying to divest themselves of this land, and I am sure the 
Minister knows this better than anybody because he has access to records which indicate that such 
companies as the CPR, Marathon Realty and one or two others – and this is about all there are that have 
any land, that they are selling this land as they get the opportunity because they have no intention, of 
course, to use it for agricultural purposes. 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2051 

In looking at the Bill, Mr. Speaker, we realize quite readily that the intent of the Bill is the same as the 
Bill that was brought in on Foreign Ownership in 1972. In this case we are calling the people non-
residents, who are under the regulations of the Bill instead of foreigners as this may sound more 
palatable. But the intent of this Bill is to place restrictions on other Canadians. This leads to the intent of 
the NDP Government for domination of our agricultural lands. 
 
I want to say, again, that the Foreign Ownership of Land Committee, which was set up by this 
Legislature, did a very good job. I wasn’t on the Committee but I read the report. I am sure they were 
conscientious; they studied the problem in depth; they had good consultation with the people of the 
province and even some people outside the province and it is very significant that no member of this 
Committee advocated, or apparently wanted any restrictions on Canadian ownership of land. It just 
wasn’t suggested, it wasn’t advocated by the Liberal members of the Committee nor the NDP members. 
Apparently this is what they found from consultations with people at the meetings that they had. The 
recommendations of the Committee were ignored in this regard, and of course, through them the 
recommendations of the public were ignored. 
 
When you look at the Bill and see the very severe restrictions that are placed on Canadians, you wonder 
why the recommendations of the Foreign Ownership of Land Committee were ignored. Of course, the 
real reason is that the NDP want to control the land and place restrictions on other Canadians regardless 
of what the Committee indicated. 
 
So this is the true intention then of the NDP Government, I mentioned in my remarks yesterday some of 
the discrepancies in the Bill, certainly the one which favors some Americans over Canadians in other 
parts of Canada, and the ridiculous situation where an American farmer living a few miles south of the 
border, at Bowbells or Crosby, North Dakota, can come up into Canada, come up into Saskatchewan and 
under the Bill as it stands here, could buy an unlimited amount of land 450 miles away, at Meadow 
Lake, and the Bill simply wouldn’t apply to him because he is within 20 miles of the Saskatchewan 
border. Even though he is a foreigner, by our usual conception, he doesn’t have to abide by our laws 
here, our income tax laws and other responsibilities, but he is free to buy all the land he wants, whereas 
a Canadian living near Virden, Manitoba, if he wants to have some holdings around Maryfield, 
Saskatchewan, 30 miles away, of course he is under the restrictions of this Bill because he may be just 
over 20 miles outside of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I suppose someone is going to suggest that perhaps regulations may be brought in to correct this 
inequality and this perhaps could be done, but it certainly won’t make the Bill any more acceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — The true intention of the Bill is to make Canadians foreigners as far as we are 
concerned, when they want to own land in Saskatchewan. They are foreigners in their own country as a 
result of this Bill. 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2052 

We also indicated yesterday our concern over Section 19. I hope that everyone takes a good look at this 
section because it is the key as far as this Bill is concerned. I want to remind you that Section 19 is not 
referring to non-residents, as described in the Bill; it is not talking about someone living in the United 
States or even someone living in other parts of Canada. It is talking about any farmer who has farmed in 
this province and maybe has been here for two or three generations. Any farmer can be investigated. He 
has to prove that he has been here 183 days a year if they ask him. He has to indicate how much land he 
owns. They can ask for all of his records, books, papers, documents and so on and if he fails to provide 
them he is subject to a $500 fine. 
 
We are not talking here about non-residents, people outside of Canada or people outside the province, 
we are talking about farmers who live right in this province. It is further control and harassment of our 
own farmers by this NDP Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious that we can’t support a Bill, which promotes the shabby treatment for 
our friends and our neighbors elsewhere in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — It is a bad precedent for Canada; it is against the concept of our Canadian heritage and 
we will be very strongly against this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, may I say to this House that it is with a great sense, deep 
sense of fulfillment and satisfaction that I rise in support of this Bill. I say that for two main reasons. 
First, as I stated one year ago when we were debating the report of that Committee and of which I was a 
member, and I say again that since I first came to this Legislature in 1956, I have talked of the necessity 
of doing something constructive to keep our rural communities alive; farmers on the farms, and business 
in our communities. For too long governments have neglected our rural communities and our farmers. 
 
I say this by remembering what I said in 1957 when I made an address in this House in which I talked 
about how that winter that in my community there was quite a large number of farmers who, because of 
the economic conditions, were working and had found jobs in the city and that I was afraid that a 
number of them would not return to the farm because of having got jobs in the city. 
 
Since 1956 when I came here and since that time, I have seen great changes, great changes in our rural 
communities. At that time in Touchwood constituency, a six quarter section farmer was a large farmer. 
And I might say that at that time I was a six quarter section farmer. 
 
Today there are lots of three and four section farmers. In 1956 nearly every farmyard had its flock of 
turkeys, geese, chickens or all three of them. Each spring the housewife bought 100 turkeys, young 
turkeys, or young geese or a couple hundred chicks and raised them herself. She lovingly 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2053 

tended those young fowl all summer and yes, I can remember my wife going out and the chickens 
jumping up onto her shoulders and on her head. She did it with love because she loved those chickens. 
 
By November those chickens were sold, those turkeys or those geese, to the public. This money was 
used to get winter clothes for the children, for presents for the family at Christmas or indeed, to help pay 
farm debts. But suddenly and all at once, Mr. Speaker, all within about two or three years, there 
developed the eviscerating plants, local eviscerating plants, and in turn they silently got into partnership, 
and we saw 20,000 turkey farms, 20,000 egg laying plants, etc., and in no time this farm housewife was 
forced out of her little business. These super farms were able to force the price down to the level where 
she couldn’t compete and I can think again in my home community of the women saying – well, let me 
put it to you this way that one of my friends who owned a 22,000 turkey plant, told me that he netted 45 
cents a turkey, 45 cents a turkey on 22,000 turkeys was not a bad net income. But the woman with 50 
turkeys she was unable to net 45 cents and that 45 cents wasn’t a very worthwhile income for her work. 
 
Since those days I have watched the change in the agricultural scene, in cattle and in pigs, to some 
degree the same thing has happened. I’m not saying in this House that it is all bad, but the advent of the 
worship of size has always made me shudder. Rather we should be thinking of maximum efficiency and 
productivity of the land each farmer does farm. 
 
I should like to quote from the Final Report of the Special Committee on Ownership of Agricultural 
Lands which was filed a year ago, a quote about one of the livestock operations that we visited. I’ll 
quote from that part which deals with the owner of this very large feedlot that we visited in Greeley, 
Colorado. Monfort was the owner and we saw 100,000 head of feeders in one feedlot. He owned another 
feedlot of the same size seven miles away. He owned also the slaughtering plant, he owned the trucks 
that delivered the meat from the slaughtering plant, they were refrigeration trucks, to his customers 
basically on the eastern seaboard where he said the processed meat was sold. He bought the alfalfa from 
the local farmers and I say that he was one of the better types. He was much better than one of the other 
companies that we visited, the Ceres Land Company where they were into everything from cow-calf 
operations, grew their own feed, owned their own packing lot, wholesaled the meat from the time the 
calf was born to the time the meat was sold on the retail market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote just a little bit from the Report: 
 

Warren Monfort began feeding cattle on a year round basis in the thirties near Greeley, Colorado. His 
son, Ken, now operates the company, Monfort of Colorado, which has six subsidiary companies and 
feedlots and slaughters and markets with 600,000 head of cattle per year. Monfort cattle buyers 
purchased stock weighing from 600 to 800 pounds throughout the western United States. Each of the 
two feedlots holds 100,000 head and the feeder is fed about four months. There are around 250,000 
acres in Nebraska, Kansas and Colorado and Iowa that supplies the corn, the grain that’s consumed. 
The Company owns its own elevators, owns its 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2054 

own cattle, refrigerator cars and many kinds of trucks. 
 
I want to say also that Mr. Monfort owned only 2,500 acres and in many ways I would say that he was 
better, much better than the other company we met, the Ceres Cattle Company. But I see these things 
and I know that some Member from the Opposition will rise and say, oh, yes, but there is nothing in the 
Bill. I’ll be dealing with that a little further on in my remarks. 
 
During our hearings and traveling across Saskatchewan, I became more and more convinced that action 
has to be taken. In the words of a number of people, both from Denver, particularly in the Denver, 
Colorado area said, “Lock the door before the horse is stolen.” And we had also this same suggestion 
from numerous delegations who met before us in Saskatchewan. I admit I am not counting it as a 
majority. But on page 26, I should like to quote again and in a sense possibly answer my hon. friend 
from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) who just sat down when he talked about the CPR or rather Marathon 
Realty which is a fully owned subsidiary of CPR, are trying to sell their land. This is certainly not true in 
some areas of Saskatchewan and I am now going to quote again from the Report on page 27, at a 
meeting held in Kerrobert and I am quoting again, Mr. Speaker, from the Committee Report: 
 

Most people in Saskatchewan know that the Canadian Pacific Railway and the Hudson’s Bay 
Company have in the past been owners of very considerable amounts of land in Saskatchewan. 
Examples of corporate farm operators are less known well across the province but their effect on the 
communities around them can be illustrated by several examples. 
 
One example was cited as evidence at the Kerrobert meeting. The evidence was that Marathon Realty, 
a wholly owned subsidiary of CPR, owns approximately 40 sections in the RM of Rosemont, No. 378. 
Eight sections are operated by the Mesa Ranching Company which is reported to be from Minnesota. 

 
Still quoting from the Report but I am quoting the words of the director of district 6 of the National 
Farmers’ Union when he stated, and he was referring to the Marathon Realty land company: 
 

All of this land was formerly used by local farmers who needed it as a pasture to provide themselves 
with a viable cattle operation. They were dependent on this land for income. It would appear that 
Marathon is leasing pasture land to Mesa in preference to renewing the leases to the farmers. For at 
least seven farmers the leases were not just renewed to them but they were subsequently granted to the 
Mesa Ranching Company. The major purchases of these eight sections are not done locally but are 
reported by businessmen to be done in Calgary. Lumber and treated posts and cattle are bought by 
semi-carloads from elsewhere. The farmers who formerly leased this land did their shopping locally, 
thus supporting their local community. 

 
And I would like to add that as long as farmers rented land from Marathon, he was not allowed to take 
any of his neighbor’s cattle into the pasture. But now Mesa Ranching Company is 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2055 

actively soliciting cattle put on pasture. 
 
I was sure that my hon. friends, the Liberal Members across the way would oppose this Bill with their 
laissez-faire attitudes. In a sense possibly I’m glad that they do. It will then be our Bill and we will take 
the credit for it. I see this Bill as the culmination of one of my great hopes over my many years in the 
farm movement acting as a local co-op board member, my activities in the Farm Union Movement, as a 
CCFer and later as a New Democrat. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the passage of this Bill will be an 
historic day for the farmers of this province. 
 
There are one or two other things that are not included in this Bill which I would be happier to see in it. I 
believe that it should cover the size of intensive livestock operations. After seeing that 100,000 head of 
livestock in one feedlot in Colorado and knowing, as I say, that he owned another feedlot of the same 
size, and hearing that owner admit that such an operation might be better operated as a Co-op, it leaves 
with me a fear of what can happen here. Nevertheless this Bill can be amended at some other time if this 
danger becomes evident. 
 
This Bill follows fairly closely the Report of the Special Committee on the Ownership of Agricultural 
Land. For this reason I congratulate the Minister of Agriculture who has introduced the Bill. It follows 
the suggestions of stopping the purchase of large tracts of land by large corporations either inside the 
province or out. It defines an acceptable agricultural corporation as one in which 60 per cent of all legal 
shares are owned by farmers who are resident persons and are primarily engaged in the business of 
farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is important to me. During our hearings we were told of the operation of large parcels 
of land being owned by a Florida based company which took some of the prime land in the Fillmore 
district. We were told of a farmer from the United States farming around 70 quarters of land south of 
Weyburn. He moved his machinery over the border, farmed the land, moved the machinery back. Along 
with it he took the revenue of the land. Such happenings cannot be anything but bad for our 
communities. 
 
Within this Act such companies have 20 years to dispose of their properties. In my own personal opinion 
20 years is too long a period. In 1932 in North Dakota, when they passed their legislation banning 
corporations from owning land, they gave the corporations only 10 years to dispose of their holdings. I 
should be much happier if ours were the same. I realize it was a compromise and I am prepared to go 
along with it. 
 
The main thing is that we have this legislation which will stop any takeover of land by large 
corporations in the future. In other words the door is locked before the horse is stolen. There is only so 
much land, Mr. Speaker, on this earth and it is said that of all the total land mass only about seven per 
cent of it is arable. So in my opinion that land must remain in the hands of as many farmers as possible. 
Farmers should not be thinking so much of acquiring more land but rather of producing more food for a 
hungry world on the land that they do own. 
 
I agree with the definition of a ‘resident person’ as one 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2056 

who lives at least 183 days of a year in Saskatchewan. Many of our older farmers wish to spend some of 
the winter in warmer climates. In no way should they be stopped from being able to move to a warmer 
climate than we get in Saskatchewan during our winter months. 
 
I am glad to see that any corporations which have in the past done their own farming have only five 
years to stop this practice and either rent the land to a bona fide farmer or sell their holdings. This is as it 
should be. In all fairness you have to give them the opportunity to get the most out of their machinery 
that they presently own but I think it should be stopped. Such companies have in the past contributed 
little or nothing to the local communities. We must return the farmers to the land and this will help our 
local communities. 
 
Another think not studied by the Committee and not in the Bill is anything about farm size. We visited 
an area around Mott, North Dakota, where farm size had grown to the point where eight or ten farmers 
were farming nearly the whole community. Farms had reached up to the size of 125 quarter sections. We 
met with a dozen local businessmen and they didn’t like it. Their town of Mott, once with a population 
of 3,000 had dropped to less than 2,000. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in the future another Select 
Committee of this Legislature should be set up to study this problem. In my opinion this problem must 
be faced and solved in the near future. 
 
I support the Bill that there be a limit to the amount of land of non-residents in Saskatchewan. I think the 
$15,000 aggregate assessment is a reasonable one. Absentee ownership drains all the profits out of the 
province and out of the community. I also agree with the special exceptions for inheritors and relatives 
of one time farmers. 
 
Above all the holding of non-agricultural corporations being restricted is what I had hoped for. That is to 
me the key of this Bill. This kind of ownership is the worst. We must keep Saskatchewan for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to quote from a news report headed Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, 
March 1974. I’ll quote just two paragraphs: 
 

The SFA agricultural policy proposals presented to the Government of Saskatchewan caucus and to 
the Liberal caucus March 6th and 8th, were well received. Those proposals covered a wide range of 
subjects including a recommendation of nationalizing the western rail network, a feed grains plan, and 
a grain stabilization plan. 
 
The brief stressed a need for ownership controls on farm land owned by non-agricultural corporations 
and by persons not actively engaged in farming. 

 
So I say again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill brings me a feeling of fulfillment. When I retire after the next 
election I will feel that I have had some small part in the work of seeing this Bill being enacted and 
becoming the law in the Province of Saskatchewan. I see the passing of this Bill the making of a better 
Saskatchewan and a better Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2057 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I was one of the three Opposition Members 
who served on this Foreign Ownership Committee. The largest number of course were Government 
Members and the reservations of the three of us which differed substantially from the Government 
Members is printed in the Report. I cannot help but reflect at this time that it is unfortunate that the 
directions to the printer put the type face of the Opposition Members at a size far smaller than the body 
of the Report and the remarks of the Opposition Members are truly fine print. 
 
It was very enlightening to be a member of this Committee. As we went around Saskatchewan at almost 
every place we stopped a member or a representative of the local New Democratic Party came forward 
and made a brief to the Committee. Those briefs probably gave us a greater insight into the thinking of 
the New Democratic Party than even this legislation before us today and it is frightening. In almost 
every case there were wails about the people leaving rural Saskatchewan and we subscribe to that 
concern but the solutions are enough to shock any person who listened to all of the debates and the 
presentations. There was a consistent pattern of attempting to keep people on the land by force and by 
legal restrictions. There were numerous requests to restrict the size of lands, the amount of farm land 
that any farmer in Saskatchewan could operate. I see that this is continued in the Bill. 
 
I refer specifically to Sections 9 and 10, along with Section 7, but particularly 9 and 10. If a man should 
leave Saskatchewan and move to British Columbia for seven or eight years and if he should then die and 
pass his land on to anyone, that land falls within the restriction set forth in Section 7. Because it provides 
that there is only a five year limitation, if you do not farm land five years before it is transferred to your 
son even that is not exempt. 
 
The effect of Sections 9 and 10 is the start of an effort to force people to stay in Saskatchewan. It is the 
beginning of an effort to freeze people into this area and I can assure you that I oppose every effort to 
drop an iron curtain around the Province of Saskatchewan which is what this Bill starts to do. An iron 
curtain is being cast around Saskatchewan. If you leave Saskatchewan obviously you leave your land 
behind, but more than that you are very limited in the people to whom you may transfer the land after 
you have gone. 
 
I oppose this Bill because I think it is a bundle of nonsense and with respect to the remarks of the Hon. 
Member for Touchwood, genial nonsense. We all look back with some nostalgia on our younger days. I 
spent all my childhood and youth on the farm and we raised the chickens referred to by the Hon. 
Member for Touchwood and we took them to town and sold them. When I got to be a little older, we 
farmed south of Tisdale, with a dairy operation and we were obliged to discontinue it because we could 
not afford to install the pasteurization equipment, the very expensive equipment required, before we 
could continue. 
 
And while we look back with some nostalgia the fact of the matter is the procession of events was 
natural and sensible. It’s a dreamlike world that we are living in if we believe that we should go back in 
every case to the kind of days we had before. It cannot happen and it will not happen and it will not 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2058 

happen because it doesn’t make sense for it to happen. But if it could happen or should happen there is 
nothing in this Bill which in any way solves one of the problems raised by the Hon. Member for 
Touchwood. The speech of the Hon. Member for Touchwood did not in any way except by accident deal 
with the realities of Bill 79. The fact of the matter is that this Bill is ill conceived, to suggest that other 
Canadians should still be regarded as foreigners is totally anathema to us. 
 
We oppose the concept that someone living in Virden or Portage La Prairie or Lethbridge should be 
regarded as a foreigner so far as Saskatchewan is concerned. But further we do not think it makes sense 
to give the person in Scobey, Montana or North Portal or Noonan or any of those places 20 miles south 
of the border unlimited rights to buy land in Saskatchewan. That kind of nonsense makes this whole 
exercise totally futile and ridiculous. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, while I have supported and will 
support a sensible foreign ownership Bill and for those who want to know the kind of a Bill, they need 
not look too far, we have laid our recommendations clearly in the fine print, to be sure, on page 48 of the 
Final Report of the Special Committee on the Ownership of Agricultural Land. That is the kind of 
foreign ownership Bill to which I subscribe, that is the kind of foreign ownership Bill that at least one or 
more others of the Liberal Members will subscribe to and support in this House. But I can assure you 
that I would be very disappointed if even one Liberal Member supported this Bill, in fact I would not be 
surprised if Members such as the Hon. Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) and the Hon. Member for 
Elrose (Mr. Owens) didn’t look at this Bill with a considerable amount of shock, particularly having 
regard to the remarks and their reservations in the Report. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, and I quote – they are referring to the retroactive effect the recommended 
Bill would have had and the recommendations of the majority members would have: 
 

We do not feel that there is sufficient agricultural land owned in our province by corporations to 
warrant such drastic measures. 

 
Even two of the Government Members regard as nonsense some of the stuff that is being said in the 
House and is presented in this Report. They go on further to say: 
 

These corporations purchased this land in good faith and under the rules, regulations and Government 
restriction in effect in the years in which the transactions were completed. They did nothing wrong or 
illegal. 

 
Despite that, the Government prejudice against corporations continues to make itself apparent. As a 
matter of fact the whole report is filled with nonsense. They talk glowingly of the activities of Monfort 
of Colorado – the fact that it’s a good corporate citizen, providing work for people, has carried on 
business with the best of ethics. Then it says with the greatest of gloom and suspicion, they say that just 
because it has done this in the past there is reason to expect that somebody else would take over that 
corporation and carry on differently. This kind of suspicion and gloom has no place in the Report and 
has no place in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entire Bill and the remarks of the Hon. Member for Touchwood require further 
attention. I wish to 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2059 

deal with some of the points raised by him in detail. I can assure you though that it is my intention to 
vote against this Bill and to fight here and outside the House as long as I can in an effort to get the 
Government to withdraw this piece of nonsense. If they can’t bring in a Bill which follows the 
reasonable recommendations of the Opposition Members in the Foreign Ownership of Agricultural 
Lands Report then I have no choice but to oppose it. I will give further details at a later date and I beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 
No. 73 – An Act respecting the provision of Financial and Other Assistance to Urban 
Municipalities for Capital Works Projects be now read a second time. 
 
Hon. A. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, there are just a few comments I should 
like to make on this Bill at this time. I think Members on this side of the House, and I would certainly 
hope Members on the other side, will agree that this is a rather exciting new concept in capital funding 
for the communities of Saskatchewan. For too long the communities have been waiting to find out what 
will be available next year before they can make their plans. This may have been a next year country in 
many ways, but municipalities find it extremely difficult to make their own long-range plans without 
some idea of what will be available from the senior governments. This Bill provides them with that 
knowledge in the field of capital financing. It will be well accepted by most communities in the 
province, if not all. 
 
May I give you some examples, Mr. Speaker, of what this will mean in some of the communities which 
I represent. The town of Kindersley, under the Community Capital Fund, will have $258,000 over a 
five-year period. The town of Kerrobert, around $88,000 in a five-year period or $17,000 a year. The 
town of Eston $106,000 over a five-year period or $21,000 yearly, over a five-year period or $9,000 per 
year. So we could list a good number of others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The communities in this way will be able to develop their plans for new town halls or city halls, as the 
case may be; streets and road improvements, rinks, swimming pools and other recreational facilities. 
They will be able to know what is available to them not just this year but in the next four to five year 
period. 
 
One of the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, indicated that somehow or another we don’t trust the towns 
under 500 because of the indication we had given that these towns would not have to submit five-year 
plans. Well, Mr. Speaker, this, of course, is a total misrepresentation of the facts. But then I suppose the 
Members opposite don’t really want to be confused with the facts anyway. The facts of the matter are 
that the small communities under 500 can, in fact, submit five-year plans and can, in fact, receive the 
full benefits from this. Indeed, the Department will assist them in developing five-year plans if this is 
their wish. It has been the feeling of the Government, however, that we should not bind these smaller 
communities to 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2060 

having to submit such five-year plans. Some will not wish to do so, and some will not feel capable of 
doing so. This we feel should be the freedom of choice for these towns and communities. We think this 
is a legitimate argument. The larger centers certainly should have no problems in preparing and 
submitting five-year plans since they themselves usually have planning staff available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few more words about this particular Bill, I, therefore, ask leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Snyder that Bill 
No. 80 – An Act to provide for Workers for injuries sustained in the course of their Employment 
be now read a second time. 
 
Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski (Department of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is certainly a 
very substantial one and I know that one could say a great deal about many of the amendments that are 
being incorporated within the old legislation. I want to spend some time on two areas which are of 
particular interest to me. 
 
I want first of all to say that the Bill presented to the House by the Minister of Labour is a progressive 
one in that it takes account of contemporary changes and circumstances. Traditionally it has been the 
man in the household who has gone outside the home to earn an income for the family and in that setting 
the role of the wife was that of homemaker whose place was in the home with the growing family. To a 
large extent that situation still exists with the father away from the home during the day, earning the 
family income. For many couples that is a desired and mutually agreed upon method of raising a family. 
In the last number of years greater numbers of women and many of them married women have secured 
employment in the nation and in the province. I am sure that figures in Saskatchewan would bear this 
out and in view of our excellent economic conditions in the province I am certain that there are more 
female employees than there were two years ago. 
 
Now the income of the wife and the husband may complement each other or in some cases it may be the 
wife and the mother who is the sole income earner in the family. The previous Act ensured that the wife 
of a deceased worker is entitled to benefits regardless of her ability to be self-supporting, whereas the 
husband of a deceased worker would be eligible for benefits only if he were an invalid. Under the 
present Act, if the wife dies while on the job her financial contributions to her family will not be 
recognized unless she has an invalid husband even though she may have assumed part of the family’s 
financial responsibilities. 
 
The Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women commented on this situation as part of 
Recommendation No. 13 and it said: 
 

We recommend that the provinces and the territories amend their Workmen’s Compensation 
legislation so that the provisions applicable to the wife of a person deceased will also be applicable to 
the husband of the person deceased. 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2061 

The new Act, Mr. Speaker, meets the concerns of the Royal Commissioners and the concerns of people 
in the province many of whom are working wives. Now the Act recognizes the financial contributions of 
working women to their families. It acknowledges the right of working women to provide the same 
benefit to their families as do working men in regard to pensions. The Act also recognizes the situation 
of the married woman being employed outside the home for an increasing number of families today 
which may be economically necessary and desirable for married persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last three years many changes have been made in the area of providing equal 
opportunity for women in today’s society. And some of the other actions that have been taken in this 
area have been amendments to the Labour Standards Act in 1973 which provides for equal pay for male 
and female employees performing similar work and also providing maternity leave of up to 18 weeks for 
female employees. Another significant action taken by the province was the establishment in 1972 of the 
Human Rights Commission, just to mention some of them. So I consider this area affected by this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, to be very significant and very important. 
 
I want to also briefly comment on the raising of disability pensions. As a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly I have become aware of many individuals in the province and particularly in my constituency 
who have received for long periods of time benefits which were outdated, and outdated because they 
were based on economic factors of another day. The raising of the full disability allowance to $325 per 
month is a step in the right direction and a move that will be welcomed by disabled workers, many of 
whom have begun to lose faith in government and particularly during the seven lean Liberal years when 
inaction seemed to be the keynote of the day. The raising of the maximum limit will raise the benefits 
substantially to such people and it is a welcome move that gives the injured worker a better income than 
that which he or she has been receiving. 
 
These people have given themselves in service to the people of this province and for many years many 
injured workers and their families have had to turn to alternate forms of employment, if one is able to 
obtain such work, in a field which often is unrelated to the job where the injury occurred, even though 
medically and physically that worker may have found it almost impossible to carry on employment. The 
provisions in the new Act indicate this Government’s concern for these workers and their families who 
have suffered because of mishap and tragedy. 
 
Now with these few words, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that I will be more than pleased to support 
this legislation. I want to have some more to say on it and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 1 – An Act respecting the Protection of Privacy be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Government saw fit to bring in 
this window dressing piece of legislation. It is also unfortunate that the Government would not give the 
public 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2062 

and the Opposition its stand on what effect this legislation will have on the Press of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. There was some considerable debate in the past as to the necessity of press councils in 
the Province of Saskatchewan and of course the Government opposite turned tail after flying a kite and 
backed off on the matter of press councils. So the Attorney General can not say that he did not have 
enough time in which to consider that very important aspect. But the Attorney General insists on 
bringing in a Privacy Bill and then not mentioning the effect of the Bill on the Press and says that will be 
a matter of a House amendment. 
 
I say that is rather an unfortunate way of proceeding on this very vital issue. And it certainly indicates, I 
think, the real stand of the Government opposite on the matter of privacy. 
 
We are concerned not only with the rather devious approach of the Members opposite when it comes to 
the matter of Press Councils but the Bill also conceals the failure of the Government to deal with the 
matter of individual information or private or privileged information. 
 
We have some examples – computer information now can be fed anywhere in North America. These 
records – information on individuals is no longer private once it has been put into a computer. Surely 
there is a role in this particular aspect for the Government of Canada and I am advised that the 
Department of Justice is taking an aggressive approach in this field and is attempting to come up with 
legislation that will protect the information which has been computer stored – information about 
Canadians and which will prohibit the information about Canadians from going outside the country 
without their permission. 
 
The matter of private information was completely excluded from the Act, again more evidence that the 
Bill is simply window dressing. We have for example no concern in the Bill about the growing – ever 
growing problem of government information about individuals. As governments get bigger and 
especially the Government opposite they are demanding more and more information about individuals. 
Practically every program that has been introduced requires an application form. In some cases a means 
test – the Day Care Centres. And of course some very, very personal information is requested. There is 
information required for Senior Citizen Home Repair, whether or not the individual who applies for this 
program is prepared to permit inspection of the home before work is carried out. Really I don’t think 
that is a matter of government information because I don’t think that the question of whether they are 
prepared to allow an inspection or not should be an influencing factor. And yet obviously if the 
Government has gone to the trouble of printing up forms with that request it could be an influencing 
factor. Frankly, I don’t think it is any of the Government’s business whether or not the individual is 
prepared to permit inspection. If you insist on it, let it be done after. 
 
We have also the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership, certainly a strong interference in individual’s 
privileged information. No doubt the questions will range from citizenship, residence and every other 
factor, income and that is an unfortunate approach. It is unfortunate that the Government in its Privacy 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2063 

Bill did not take into account the matter of individual information or private information. 
 
There are other examples of Government questioning. FarmStart has such questions as what household 
furnishings do you have. Surely that is an unnecessary question and an unwarranted question. And it is 
something that the Government opposite should be encouraged to avoid. It is unfortunate that the Bill 
before this House does not take into account such picky questioning by the Government opposite. You 
want in FarmStart applications present debt summary, loan purpose, a person now has to give the 
creditor’s name and address, the balance owing, the years left to pay, annual payment, security taken, 
amount in arrears and that includes personal loans. 
 
As I say, the Government in a Bill before this House is completely ignoring its own faults and its own 
wrong-doing when it comes to the matter of protecting individual privacy. 
 
I have another example, Mr. Speaker, Return No. 94 – the 1973 session, and I use it for example. I asked 
the Government the names of all government departments etc., which supplied the names of all 
government departments etc., which supplied mailing lists to any individuals or corporations in the year 
1972. I got a reply, the Department of Public Health, the Department of Industry and Commerce, 
Finance, Provincial Library, Department of Continuing Education and the Department of Education all 
supplied mailing lists of names of Saskatchewan citizens to other companies or corporations or 
governments about individuals. 
 
Now surely, Mr. Speaker, when the Government of Saskatchewan supplies a list of the citizens’ names, 
addresses, occupations, we don’t know what information to Ogawa Seike Company Limited of Tokyo, 
Japan, there has got to be something wrong. Kramer Tractor Limited got a list of names of all the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. So did the Edmonton Journal and lo and behold, Miss Sandra Cook and 
unfortunately I haven’t had a letter from Miss Sandra Cook, I don’t know if anybody else has. The 
Department of Finance has sent a list of information about Saskatchewan citizens to R. L. Polk in 
Toronto. The Department of Saskatchewan citizens to MacLean Hunter Limited. I don’t know whether 
that has got anything to do with door to door sales results from the mailing list, I don’t know. It certainly 
is something that a Privacy Bill – a proper Privacy Bill should take into account. Premier Sports of 
Calgary Limited got lists of Saskatchewan citizens. What did that include? Did that include age, 
income? I don’t know. But surely it is a practice that should be strenuously restricted by the Government 
and again I find it very unfortunate that this legislation ignored this very pressing problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — Sometime I think the Government are going to have to tell us why they sent all sorts of 
information about Saskatchewan citizens to Athletes Wear Company Limited. Why they would want the 
list of Saskatchewan citizens, age, occupation, salary, income, whatever it may be, I don’t know. But the 
Government opposite supplied it. They supplied the same information to Betty Anderson Associates 
Company, Alberta Ceramic Supplies Limited, and one Adam Thomson, to pick just a few. The Augi Bus 
Company Limited also got a list. 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2064 

This may seem facetious but I think there is a valid criticism of the Bill, it doesn’t take into account the 
fact that so much of the personal information about an individual is no longer private. The Bill doesn’t 
solve that problem, it avoids that problem. And for that reason I feel I must oppose the Bill and also of 
course for the reasons stated by the Member for Albert Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I must first of all say that to a large extent, I 
think many of the comments made by the Member for Lumsden were, in my judgment, well taken. I 
thought the comments with respect to governments and how government protects privacy of the 
information that it has were very relevant indeed. I am concerned about the increasing computerization, 
information that government has and places on the computer record. And then seemingly 
indiscriminately gives out lists. For whatever it is worth, I, as one Member of the Government, have 
opposed giving out the names of operators’ lists to such companies as R. L. Polk and the like. 
 
I think one of the difficulties has been that as legislators – I say this now in defence of the Bill – we 
don’t give enough consideration to the role that government has and the nature of government activity 
vis-à-vis privacy. Up until now we have thought that government and information that the government 
gets is public, by and large. We have felt that under these circumstances, subject to traditional rules of 
privilege, government information was in a category different than in a category say of personal 
relationships of individuals who meet or deal on a social or personal or business basis. 
 
I get annoyed myself when I see many of what I think are frustrating and bureaucratic questions that are 
asked. I am not sure that The Privacy Bill, however, such as we have before the House, is the proper 
avenue to come to grips with this. 
 
My judgment is, and that of my department officials is, that, it should really be dealt with in a special 
type of legislation which is forthcoming indeed from the Federal Government and by the provinces as 
they consider the question of their role vis-à-vis privacy. So I think that the questions that were raised by 
the Hon. Member were valid questions. I think misplaced in terms of the context of this Bill which deals 
with private individuals and their relationships, I think they can be properly dealt with and should be 
properly dealt with by governments in another form in another type of legislation, such as computer 
control legislation, data bank information legislation and so forth which is being actively reviewed by 
federal and provincial authorities. 
 
The comments of the Hon. Member for Lumsden with respect to Press Councils were in my judgment 
totally misplaced. It is correct to say that I believe in Press Councils. I believed in them three years ago 
when I started giving some thought to this matter and I believe in them as strongly, if not stronger, 
today. 
 
When you stop to think of a situation in Saskatchewan where, for example, the two daily newspapers are 
essentially controlled by the one company, registered, owned and operated 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2065 

by outside interests outside Saskatchewan. When you look at the tremendous influence that in the city of 
Regina one radio station has, also linked through a subsidiary to the same eastern company, I think that 
it is incumbent upon all of us to ask whether or not under these circumstances we can be assured of 
accurate, fair reporting. That is not to say that reporters go out willfully to distort information, not at all. 
But I do say that it raises some valid questions about the role of the Press in a democratic society. I am 
not sure that a Press Council is the answer. I am not sure that a voluntary organization where publishers, 
working journalists and the public together on a Press Council are represented, whether that in fact is the 
answer to breaking what might be in the minds of many people, an unhealthy Press situation that exists 
in this province. But I tell you, I think that it is one approach which is certainly much deserving of 
consideration. My regret has been that the suggestion which I made, which was a purely personal 
suggestion, and not a Government suggestion, was dismissed strongly by the two dailies to which I have 
made earlier reference; dismissed without any public comment or criticism. I think the day will come 
when we as legislators and when we as members of the public will in fact begin to look at the role of the 
Press in Saskatchewan just as the Press looks at our role as legislators. We should look at their role, and 
I submit to the Member for Lumsden that Press Councils is an idea, a concept that is worthy of further 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make just one or two comments, in closing, about the statements made by the 
Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), when he spoke to the Bill. 
 
The Member for Albert Park really missed the boat on two counts. He missed the boat firstly, in saying 
that the Bill would result in anti-social behavior. I think his exact words were that the Bill could lead to 
anti-social attitudes. He went on to give examples of people who are on a bus being subject to the 
provisions of the Bill because they have overheard the conversations which might take place in the bus. 
He advocated this point of view publicly outside the Chamber when he was asked by the Press. 
 
The Bill may be frivolous and vexatious, but in my judgment, Mr. Speaker, the comments from the 
Member who would describe the Bill as leading to anti-social attitudes are certainly frivolous and 
vexatious. No one can reasonably portray that this Bill would lead to the type of consequences that the 
Member for Albert Park talks of. 
 
First of all the Bill talks of circumstances which are reasonable. A judge has a great deal of latitude in 
the sum of all of the circumstances to determine what is an invasion of privacy and what isn’t an 
invasion of privacy. I just don’t believe that there is a Judge of the Queen’s Bench Court who would 
under those examples say that overhearing a conversation at a cocktail party or on a bus is an invasion of 
privacy, and that the result would be anti-social attitudes on the part of the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I really believe that the Member’s criticisms in that regard were totally misplaced. 
 
I want also in this area to point out to the Hon. Member for Albert Park that the Bill talks about willful 
violation of the privacy of another person. So that if one does overhear a 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2066 

conversation, the key words in the Bill in Section 2 is that it is a tort for the person to willfully and 
without claim of right, willfully, violate the privacy of another person. 
 
Surely any of the examples that have been stated by the Hon. Member would be exempt from the 
provisions of the Act because it could not be reasonably portrayed as being a willful attempt to violate 
the privacy of any individual. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — How do you . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That in fact is the law. That is what the provisions say. It would be willful. I can 
point out also to the Hon. Member that in British Columbia for seven years and in Manitoba for four 
years that not one action of that type was raised. No lawyer would advise anyone to raise an action of 
this nature and it could never be sustained in a court of law. I can tell you that if it did come to that type 
of situation we’d be the first to come back with this Bill either to amend it further if needed or to rescind 
it if that was the actual end result. So I say to the Hon. Member for Albert Park he was totally in error 
there and I thought that his comments were frivolous when he talked about anti-social attitudes in the 
end result of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other comment which I should like to make with respect to the role of the Press and 
the proposed amendment. This is an area that leaves a politician like myself totally confused. Frankly, I 
don’t know as a Government whether we are to listen to the Opposition or whether we are not to listen 
to the Opposition. Up to now I thought that it was smart politics to listen to them, maybe not to 
acknowledge it publicly very often but at least listen to them to see what the criticisms are about. When 
this Bill was first tabled in December, the comments by the Leader of the Opposition and by all the 
Opposition Members who spoke on the Bill at that time was that generally they weren’t opposed to the 
Bill but that the one big worry they had was the potential threat it had to the freedom of the Press. That 
this was really an attempt by the Attorney General to come back around what he couldn’t get by way of 
Press Councils, namely, to muzzle the Press with the Privacy Act. But that if we could overlook and 
overcome this worry about muzzling and freedom of the Press, it was implied by the Leader of the 
Opposition that the Bill would be acceptable. 
 
Well, in any event, the position was by the Liberals opposite . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — . . . said that . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, the Leader of the Opposition did not say that. I have a newspaper clipping, but I 
can’t put my finger on it immediately, but I could dig it up in a matter of minutes, where the Leader of 
the Opposition is quoted on this. In fact I might be able to put on my finger on it while I am making my 
remarks exactly on the Bill. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, the point that I make is that 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2067 

the position of the Opposition basically was that the threat to freedom of the Press is the biggest 
opposition that they had to this Bill; that it was an attempt or could be an attempt to muzzle the Press so-
called. 
 
This also was the concern of the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper Association – “Privacy Bill 
Concerns the Weeklies.” And I might say it was also the concern of the newspaper types whom I spoke 
to, both privately and publicly. This was the big concern of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, freedom of the 
Press. That somehow if we could correct this business of restricting freedom of the Press, then the Bill 
would be all right. So we listened to the Opposition, I feel as if I have been had. We listened to the 
Leader of the Opposition and we listened to the Press and we said, well maybe they have a point. Maybe 
we should clarify this position. So we proposed the amendment. 
 
Now the Opposition says, we don’t want to make the Press into a special category. Now they say they 
oppose the Bill because we are singling out the Press from the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been saying to the people of Saskatchewan everywhere that I travel, and I repeat to 
the House in this Bill, that it is precisely that type of stance taken by the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan 
having any belief in the credibility of the Liberal Party any longer. It is precisely the position that the 
Liberal Party took on this Bill in December when they said that the freedom of the Press was the main 
danger to it and now say that they are not going to support the Bill because we gave the freedom of the 
Press protection. The contradictions leave the people of Saskatchewan totally incredulous of anything 
that the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal Party opposite says. 
 
I tell the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberals of this province that the credibility of the Liberal 
Party is zero, because they continually flip-flop on public positions. One day they say that they are 
against the Bill because it affects freedom of the Press, but if we can correct that they say they will vote 
for the Bill. The next day we correct and they say they are still against it because we corrected it. 
 
I could name you example after example, Mr. Speaker. Their position on Bill 42. Their position with 
respect to agricultural policies. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan and tell this 
House again, that one of the very serious difficulties for a government is to face an Opposition which is 
like trying to poke at a balloon. It is very difficult to do this. It is an Opposition which changes its color 
and its hue and its attitudes. It is an Opposition who doesn’t have any solidified positions. I say to the 
people of Saskatchewan that the people do not have any confidence and don’t believe in any of the 
positions taken by the Liberal Party in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It is precisely because of the position such as they take on The Privacy Act. 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2068 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. There is one gross misconception which the Member for Albert Park 
(Mr. MacLeod), on this business of the amendment, has made. He said that this amendment singles out 
the Press and puts them into a special category. False! It does not! We could do without the amendment 
and it wouldn’t matter one iota to the way the Bill is presently worded and the role of the Press. We can 
do with the amendment and it wouldn’t add or detract one iota from the way the Bill is worded. 
 
Section 4 of the Bill says it is a defence in this matter, that there is no violation where there was 
reasonable ground for belief that the matter published was of public interest or was fair comment on a 
matter of public interest. That is in the printed Bill now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the protection for the Press. The Press has under 4 2(a), now in the printed Bill, 
every opportunity to continue with their activities with or without the House amendment that I proposed. 
Anything which is fair comment; anything which is commenting on reasonable grounds in the public 
interest is the Press avenue for their full continued activities. 
 
All the amendment does is elaborate on 4 2(a) to simply say that in ordinary news gathering activities on 
a day to day basis, the Bill doesn’t apply. This is precisely what 4 2(a) says. So then you ask, why did 
you bring in the House amendment? 
 
We brought in the House amendment because at that time the Press media in Saskatchewan, I say 
wrongly, didn’t understand the impact of 4 2(a). The Opposition said they misunderstood the impact of 4 
2(a) and we felt that nothing could be harmed by the Bill. Nothing much would be gained by it, but at 
least we could allay concerns of those who felt the freedom of the Press was an issue. 
 
I need not move that amendment and the Bill would still give full protection to the Press. Make no 
mistake about it! When the Member for Albert Park says that the proposed amendment singles out the 
Press for special privilege, that is not true. Absolutely not true! All I say to the Member for Albert Park 
is that he has allowed himself to be trapped in the games that the Liberal Party plays, with respect to 
positions that they tell the public of Saskatchewan. He has allowed himself to be trapped into a position 
where the Opposition feels that it is fulfilling its role, when it opposes everything and anything that this 
Government advances. 
 
He has made the mistake, Mr. Speaker, of not giving credit where credit is due, as a general tactic and he 
finds himself now in faulty legal reasoning and in pure political logic advancing the point of view that 
this is a special exception for the Press. 
 
I repeat, Mr. Speaker, there are no special exemptions for the Press. Without the House amendment, 
Section 4 2(a) as it is in the printed Bill, I said then, I say now, was adequate protection for the Bill and 
the only reason that we advanced the amendment was to try to appease some of the concerns that the 
Opposition had at that time and that members of the Press had at that time. 
 
I have concluded now, sadly, that all the Liberals are 



 
April 4, 1974 

 

 
2069 

interested in is playing politics rather than improving upon Bills. I was prepared to listen to you and to 
make the changes as you recommended but now I am going to be very careful, with respect to any other 
Bills that we introduce, about taking your word seriously. I am sure the people in the Province of 
Saskatchewan will be very wary with respect to any of the words that you have to say and they certainly 
aren’t going to take it very seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, in conclusion, that the stance of the Liberal Party on this Bill is 19th century 
at its worst or at its best. In fact I tell the Hon. Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) and I tell him for his 
benefit because he hasn’t been here very long, everything that this Liberal Party provincially has done is 
19th century. I tell the Hon. Member that the Liberal Party opposite opposed the Ombudsman. They 
opposed The Human Rights Commission Bill. They opposed the Consumer Affairs Bill. They opposed 
the Environment Bill. Everything that this provincial Liberal Party does is 19th century and that is why 
you are only 15 in the Opposition. 
 
I want to tell the Member for Lakeview, if I can, that it is very easy for a government to govern in 
Saskatchewan so long as we have an Opposition Party which adopts this type of right wing, out of touch, 
out of date approach on all issues. As far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, from the pure partisan 
political point of view, they can maintain their 19th century attitudes right beyond 1975 and beyond, 
because as long as they do there will be 14 or 15 sitting to the left of you, Mr. Speaker. And all that I can 
say is that perhaps that is 14 or 15 too many. 
 
When they oppose The Privacy Act, when they oppose a Bill the principle of which is an attempt to 
ensure privacy in a complicated, increasingly technological world, when the Bill may not be the perfect 
Bill but at least a Bill that most of the 10 provinces have agreed upon; when the Bill can be amended at a 
later date; when the Bill should be given a chance to operate, on the principle of protection of the 
privacy of people. When they oppose that I ask the Hon. Member for Lakeview, are they not back in the 
19th century? Mr. Speaker, they are! They oppose everything because they think their role is simply to 
oppose. They don’t advance positive ideas. They don’t give credit where credit is due. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, small as it may be in the scheme of government activity; this Bill coupled with 
Bills on Land Bank and coupled with Bills on Workmen’s Compensation and Farm Ownership, positive 
Bills dealing with 20th century problems, will come back to haunt the Liberals, mark my words, in 
1975. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They will haunt you and the people of Saskatchewan will defeat you because of your 
reactionary approaches to these and other issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not too late yet. Some Members of the Liberals opposite voted for the Ombudsman. 
There was a split vote at that time. They said they were going to oppose it in second reading, but it is not 
too late yet. I urge the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone), I urge the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) 
to break the 19th century approach of the Liberal 



 
April 4, 1974 
 

 
2070 

Party and to vote for this Bill. 
 
Some of us still have confidence in a few of the young Members and some of the new Members in the 
Liberal Party opposite. If their continued voting record however maintains itself the way it is, we will 
soon have to conclude that the Liberals in Saskatchewan really haven’t changed from the days when 
they were in power in 1964 to 1971. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce and move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could interrupt proceedings to 
introduce the students from Nokomis School with their Science teacher, Mrs. Paronsky, seated in the 
Speaker’s Gallery. They have had a most exciting day, they tell me. They visited the RCMP Barracks 
this morning and visited IPSCO before coming here. They witnessed an explosion at one of the furnaces 
at IPSCO but I assured them that while it gets exciting here, that they are quite safe and will not be 
injured by any explosions in the Legislature. 
 
They are going on to the Science Fair this evening, so they are having a very full day. We welcome them 
here and we hope their day will be an enjoyable one. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:34 o’clock p.m. 
 


	Steel Development in Saskatchewan
	ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE GOVERNMENT
	SECOND READINGS
	SECOND READINGS

