
























































Hansard: April 30, 1974


2776 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

61st Day 
Tuesday, April 39, 1974. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

PAGE GIRL LEAVING 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before I call the Orders of the Day, I would like to advise the members that one of our 
page girls will be leaving us as of today; she'll be here today but will not be here tomorrow. Debbie Mitchell 
has taken a job with the Red Cross and we have known for some time that she would start work on the 1st of 
May with the Red Cross, so she'll be leaving after today. I think rather than doing the blood letting in here 
for the balance of the Session, Debbie will be glad to oblige any of us down there. But I do believe that all 
the Members will wish Debbie well in her efforts in her new employment. I am sure all Members enjoyed 
the service which Debbie gave at this Session. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

DISTRIBUTION OF HONEY 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I want to 
bring to the attention of all Hon. Members a one pound container of honey. I just noted the label reads, "VIP 
packets provided on behalf of the Saskatchewan Beekeepers Association." I don't know whether this means 
they have lowered their standards or not as far as giving away honey. At any rate I want to bring to the 
Members' attention a little proverb that is attached, "Who is afraid of the sting never earns the honey." 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that Members of the Assembly will agree with me that if beekeepers were not 
willing to take the risk of a few stings we certainly wouldn't have the honey industry in Saskatchewan which 
we now have. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I believe some of and perhaps many of the MLAs deserve a little bit of 
honey as well, because they sometimes subject themselves to the odd sting, not only from the Members of 
this Legislative Assembly, but the general public and even sometimes from myself, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure for me to make this available to the Members of the Assembly. I thought perhaps a more 
appropriate time would be at some difficult time during my Estimates, but I don't know whether my 
Estimates are ever going to come, so I thought I would break loose and make it available at this time. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

GRANT TO CATTLE BREEDERS ASSOCIATION 
 
MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2777 

Orders of the Day I should like to ask a question of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
I understand this morning that some people from the Cattle Breeders' Association are meeting with your 
department officials regarding a grant that they have been requesting. I wonder if the Minister is aware that 
the Government officials have insisted that in lieu of a grant they be provided with a secretary for their 
association who would be a civil servant. They have shown some concern about this because they feel it 
would be interfering with their independence having someone from the Government actually a secretary of 
their association. I wonder if the Minister would consider a grant to these people, the Cattle Breeders, 
certainly a worthy organization, a grant in money with no strings attached so that they can hire their own 
secretary. 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, we would consider such a proposal and I 
think that is one of the reasons that my officials are now meeting with the cattlemen, certainly we have not 
made up our minds that a grant is not an alternative to providing secretarial services from within the 
Government. 
 

CONSTRUCTION STRIKE 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). I think the Minister of Labour knows that the construction 
industry has been struck for five weeks and that this strike is right at the height of the construction season, 
millions of dollars in value of projects are now idle, thousands of working people are no longer earning 
regular income. I wonder if the Minister of Labour could tell me, first of all, what is the total value of the 
projects that are shut down in the Province of Saskatchewan because of the dispute, many people do not 
know the magnitude of the problem and second, how many men directly and indirectly are idle because of 
the shutdown or strike? Could the Minister also tell me what was the precise date that this strike originated 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Well, I am not sure that I can answer with precision any one 
of the three questions that the Member has directed to me. In terms of the actual dollar value of construction, 
that has been interrupted, I think that is one of the intangibles because there is a direct and indirect effect any 
time there is a work stoppage of this nature. As far as the actual number I am sure that I can't put a precise 
figure on that number and the actual date it began. I can find out for the Member, I know it's in its 
approximate fourth week, the end of the fourth week since the construction strike actually began. There 
wasn't an exact beginning date with respect to all of the projects that were shut down. It began in Regina, 
went to Saskatoon, I believe that was the next provincial point that was affected, laterally in the city of 
Moose Jaw and Prince Albert. So for a precise date when the work stoppage actually began it is not easy to 
detail. I should say perhaps that the Deputy Minister of Labour, Mr. Ching, has been directly involved in 
discussions with the construction association and the various building trades. There is a meeting taking 
place, I believe, at this moment and 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2778 

we are hopeful that before the end of the week there will be something encouraging to report. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Again, a supplementary question. I find that very difficult, Mr. Minister, to 
understand where a strike that is probably the biggest in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan with the 
number of people involved and the total value of dollars that the Department of Labour and the Minister of 
Labour is completely unaware of the value of the projects involved and the number of people that are out of 
work. I think that the Minister of Labour should certainly know exactly what that dollar value is and the 
number of people involved. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the Member ask his question and not make a statement please? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — My supplementary question. I heard a news report on Friday that the construction 
industry had asked for a high level negotiator to be appointed. I am sure that Mr. Ching is doing his best. Is 
this correct? If so, has the Minister appointed a new high level negotiator or has he used his personal good 
offices to bring about a settlement in this strike and get these people back to work and once again get the 
construction industry operating again in the province? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don't know if I should reply to the editorial that the Member for Milestone always 
seems to preface his questions with. But I think it is not unexpected that I should be unaware in total of the 
total value of construction projects that are not presently in operation, because as I suggested earlier, that is a 
matter that has progressed over a period of time, and the Department of Labour as such hasn't assumed a 
direct responsibility for gathering statistics and tabulating the precise number of people out of work at any 
given time or the precise figure with respect to the value of construction. What we are interested in and our 
principal concern is the provision of services to the parties in dispute in an attempt to bring about a 
resolution to the construction strike or any other work stoppage that takes place. 
 
With respect to the Member's second question, as to whether an outside mediator has been requested, I 
understand that that is not correct. I heard the report on radio, at least I heard of it, I didn't hear it directly, but 
it was referred to me. The undertaking that was given to me by the Deputy Minister was that prior to the 
strike, a matter of two weeks prior to the breakdown in negotiations, a request was made by the building 
trades involved. At that time it was rejected by the Labour Relations Council of the Construction Association 
and since that time there has been no request. We think that everything has been done at this point that can 
possibly be done and I am perfectly satisfied that Mr. Ching and the Department of Labour has done all of 
those things that are required at this stage. I don't believe that at this point an outside mediator could serve 
any more useful purpose than is being provided at the present time. As I suggested earlier, I think things are 
progressing and I would hope by the end of the week there would be something further to report. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2779 

REGINA CORRECTIONAL CENTRE 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Before the Order of the Day I have a question for the Minister 
of Social Services. As the Minister is aware there have been three major incidents at the Regina Correctional 
Centre in recent months. The first of these was in the fall where there was an attempted mass breakout; about 
two months ago there was a major riot in the institute and recently a successful mass breakout, although I 
understand some of those people have been recaptured. My question is: Has the Minister determined the 
causes for these incidents and secondly what if anything has he done to ensure that these incidents don't 
happen again in the future? 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, the Member asks the causes of the 
incidents, the causes of the one attempted escape and the one actual escape was a dissatisfaction of being 
incarcerated. That seems to me a fairly standard cause. The riot is far more complex. At present we are 
investigating. We know what the surface cause was, we think there must be something deeper and we are 
investigating to attempt to discover what this is. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, by way of a supplementary question, it was a very flippant amusing 
answer, but it doesn't come to the problem. Now, what, if anything, are you doing to ensure that there won't 
be major mass breakouts again in the future? Have you tightened security, have you found whether there is 
any problem with the institution, have you done anything? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, we are taking the steps that appear to us to be necessary which is emphasis 
on security in the institutions. Our staff are attempting at the present time to see if these can be strengthened 
to a greater degree and if there are more moves that they can take in this regard. They are attempting to find 
out where the weaknesses in the present system are. Once this is discovered, then we can take the necessary 
steps. 
 

PERMISSION TO MAKE ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, if I may just before the Orders of the Day, I 
have a very brief announcement on behalf of Dr. Penman, not in his capacity as chairman of the Medical 
Care Insurance Commission. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! We can't accept announcements or statements from private Members. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — With leave? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the House prepared to give permission? No, well . . . 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2780 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

FIRST REPORT OF THE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND PRINTING 

 
MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie) moved, seconded by Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): That the First 
Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be received. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the First Report of the Public Accounts Committee has now been read into the records 
of the House by the Clerk and I wish at the conclusion of a few comments here to make a motion at this time 
that this report now be received. 
 
Over the years, in looking back, Mr. Speaker, the usual motion has been, in dealing with this First Report of 
the Committee, to move concurrence. For reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I will discuss later I, at this time, cannot 
move concurrence in the Report and in a couple of the recommendations that are before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your Committee met 18 times during the course of this Session and a number of departments 
and Government agencies were called before the Committee. The Auditor's Report itself was studied in some 
detail and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, at this time that as Chairman of the Committee, I am sure I am 
speaking for all members, the vice-chairman and other members when I say that we want to thank, on behalf 
of the Members of the House, Mr. Lutz, the Auditor and his staff for their co-operation in our work and in 
our studies. Thanks also are extended on behalf of the Committee to the Comptroller, a new man this year, 
Mr. Schneider and his staff for their assistance to the Committee and their attendance at all of the meetings 
and I certainly mustn't forget to mention the former Comptroller, Mr. Al Kerr, who also attended many 
meetings and as Members will be well aware has, I think, close to 40 years service to the people of this 
province in that Department. 
 
I want also, Mr. Speaker, to thank the committee members themselves for their work and their attention to 
the general deliberations of the Committee. I think Members will be well aware, and I will review a little bit 
of the history of this Committee, that this Committee is chaired by a Member of the Opposition which in this 
case this year happened to be myself. At the same time the majority of the Committee by eight to four is 
comprised of Government Members. And in keeping with the reorganization of this Committee in a report 
that was tabled in here in 1965 and acted on in 1966, the actual meetings of this Committee are conducted in 
camera. At the same time the complete verbatim, and it is totally unedited in any way, and there may well be 
errors in it for that matter, but it is totally unedited and is then made available to the House, to the Press and 
to the public. I have a complete copy of all of the verbatim proceedings here to table. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that any material tabled with the Committee, any material that was circulated 
to the Committee by the Auditor or the staff, all answers to questions that were asked in the deliberations of 
the Committee is also tabled in the House as property of the Committee and, of course, all of this in turn is 
tabled with the Report and it becomes the property of the House, available to the Press, to the public 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2781 

and to all Members. 
 
Almost every year when the Committee begins hearings, the question is raised by at least one or two 
members of the Press as to the reasons behind these deliberations being held in camera. Mr. Speaker, that 
decision to change that procedure is not one for the Committee, or one for me, it can only be made by the 
Members of this House. However, at the beginning of our hearings this year I sought the comments of 
members on this procedure and on this practice and while I won't go into all the arguments pro and con at 
this time, the point was raised and was discussed by members of the Committee. And the discussion of 
course can be read in the verbatim record and I shall be tabling. But I think, Mr. Speaker, it is a fair 
assessment to state that by far the majority of Committee members felt that the present approach is the one 
that results in the most effective job being done by this Committee by the Public Accounts Committee on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. I support the present policy as it now stands and I believe that I am not 
revealing any secret to say the vice-chairman, the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) also supports it. 
But there may come a day, Mr. Speaker, when politicians may not be so tempted to embark on frivolous 
fishing trips as they seem inclined to do in the presence of the Press and there may come a day also when 
civil servants will feel just as free in front of the Press as they do in its absence. And if and when that day 
comes the Committee can work effectively either way, I am sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to comment on a number of the recommendations made by the Committee and 
read into the records by the Clerk. Recommendation No. 3 is one that comes to the Committee as a result of 
last year's report and I believe perhaps it was dealt with in the previous year's report. It reviews the matter of 
sinking funds and recommends that all of the various schedules dealing with that be assembled into one 
schedule, not condensed necessarily, or consolidated, or anything cut out of it, but assembled into one 
schedule so as to show the current status of each debt in relation to its corresponding sinking fund. Again 
this is a recommendation designed in order that the Public Accounts text and the material in it may be a little 
more easily readable, no only by Members here but by anyone of the public. 
 
The fourth recommendation dealing with the matter of Federal-Provincial cost-sharing agreements were 
discussed last year. It was brought to our attention in the Auditor's Report again this year. We do note some 
improvement in this regard but wish to point out that there is still room for improvement with respect to 
some Government departments and agencies to be maintaining and keeping these cost-sharing agreements 
more up-to-date and a little more current. And in regard to that, one of the steps that the Committee felt 
would be for the Department of Finance to establish a central registry of all of the various cost-sharing 
agreements between the Provincial Government and the Federal Government. The problem here is one of 
someone being able to keep on top of these various agreements, they are handled by each individual 
department but there seems to be more of them year after year and it was felt that the idea of setting up a 
registry would assist in keeping on top of those, keeping them current and keeping the federal moneys that 
are owing and accruing to the province in the Treasury rather than owing. 
 
The fifth recommendation, Mr. Speaker, deals with a uniform 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2782 

system of records and procedures to control public property. Now this recommendation was made last year 
by the previous Committee in 1973 and it is made again this year. We note that there is some improvement 
being made in this regard. We note and learn from the Finance Department that a private firm has been 
commissioned to look into ways and means to handle this question. But we also learned that it is going to 
take two, perhaps three years before that study is completed. For that reason, the Committee recommends 
that interim regulations and controls be applied to new departments and agencies until a final and an overall 
policy is finalized and developed as a result of studies. It was felt I think here that to wait two or three years 
to resolve this thing totally is to wait too long. 
 
Recommendations numbers six and seven, Mr. Speaker, deal with the format of the Public Accounts text 
that is now printed and put out. No. 6 is a recommendation that comes to the Committee from the 
Comptroller himself suggesting a somewhat different presentation of the facts in the Public Accounts 
Committee. Again to make the text and to make the facts and material in that book much more readable and 
much more easily accessible and understandable. At the same time as we recommend it, we bear in mind, 
Mr. Speaker, that this Committee can only recommend to the Government in this regard but that the 
Comptroller be allowed some flexibility to deal with those changes. 
 
Recommendation No. 7, I think is one that the Members should think about, some consideration was given 
to raising the limit of expenditures below which no reporting would be made in the Public Accounts. We 
look, for example, at the Province of Ontario where salaries below $20,000 are not reported or printed in the 
Public Accounts text of that province. At the other extreme we have the Province of British Columbia where 
they print everything and oddly enough the size of their book as a result is not as large as you might think. 
This whole question of reorganizing of the Public Accounts again to make the material more accessible, 
more readable and much easier to study and get at the facts was considered in one or two meetings at least of 
the Committee. 
 
However, a recommendation here I suppose is one that really says we'll put off the real battle with this until 
next year. We recommend that the entire matter or reorganization and a different segregation of some of the 
details of various programs, the House Building Assistance Grant and so on, that that be considered next 
year after the basic organizational changes recommended in recommendation No. 6 have been implemented. 
At the same time we did allow the Comptroller flexibility with respect to what he might wind up doing. 
Consideration was given I might say, Mr. Speaker, to putting out a second section, or an appendix or a 
second text in the Public Accounts. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 deals with the Provincial Auditor's Report where it was pointed out in 
Recommendation 12 of the Auditor's Report that payments were made without proper authority by the 
Human Resources Development Agency, the two specific organizations, namely the Metis Society and the 
FSI (Federation of Saskatchewan Indians). The recommendation here is that the Committee expresses its 
disapproval of such actions and recommends the adherence by all Government departments to new 
guidelines that have been inaugurated and are being developed by the Comptroller of the Department of 
Finance. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2783 

Now, Mr. Speaker, recommendation No. 9 and No. 10 and No. 11 are certainly the recommendations that 
are, if you like, the essence of this Report. They deal with matters a good deal more serious and it is with 
these recommendations that I want to take a few more minutes at this point in time to review what the 
recommendations are, what they are dealing with and why it is that I said at the beginning I cannot concur in 
the Report but rather I am going to move that this Report be received. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recommendation No. 9 sets out a recommendation resulting from a study of the Auditor's 
Report on page 11, Item 13, and that deals with commitments of funds in excess of the amounts appropriated 
by the Legislature. If you read page 11 you will note that: 
 

No department of the public service or a branch thereof shall contract any indebtedness or 
assume to bind the province in any amount in excess of the money appropriated by the 
Legislature or otherwise lawfully available. 

 
On the following page, page 12, you will notice that there were a number of departments and agencies, six or 
seven in actual fact, where over-commitments were made. And of those agencies and departments listed, Mr. 
Speaker, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan with a commitment in excess of the appropriation of 
$666,000 was the one that perhaps could be said to be the most serious offender in this regard. As a matter of 
fact in the course of deliberations of the Committee it was decided then to call the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan before the Committee. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair to say it was recognized and will be recognized by any Member in this 
House that this Department was established by legislation assented to on April 21st, 1972. It was a new 
department, it was brand new in the year under review, and I suppose, therefore one could expect some 
problems perhaps in that first full year of operation of this or any new department or a new agency. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly fair to say also when we examined DNS in some detail we found more than 
the forgivable kind of lapses that one might anticipate, as I say, in any new department. Certainly the kind of 
sloppy, shoddy, non-existent administrative practices that were discovered in that department, I believe 
shocked even the Government Members of the Committee just as much as the Opposition Members. All 
except perhaps the Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank) and I think his comments and his 
amendments with respect to the recommendations in regard to that department indicate one of two things. 
First of all either he is not too concerned with this slip-shod sort of slaphappy way that department has been 
operating or secondly, Mr. Speaker, he was concerned and his actions in trying to water down and dilute the 
final recommendations of the Committee in this regard was a deliberate attempt of his to shield the 
Government from this 'bonaventure' of northern Saskatchewan. Here again I only ask all Members of the 
House, both sides of the House to read the verbatims of the last day or two's proceedings of this Committee 
and go ahead then and form your own judgment. 
 
I think to put the situation with respect to DNS in some context, I should like, Mr. Speaker, to read into the 
records some excerpts of a letter addressed and sent to the Hon. Mr. Bowerman, written by Mr. Lutz, the 
Provincial Auditor. Now this letter .. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2784 

MR. SPEAKER: — If I could interrupt the Hon. Member for one moment, there is a school group in the 
gallery that the Member for Nutana South would like to introduce before they have to leave. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to the House a group of 72 students from Georges Vanier School. They are seated in the 
west gallery. I take very great pride in introducing these students because George Vanier is the school that 
my two children are attending. 
 
I hope that the students who are here will find this afternoon an interesting afternoon. It's a somewhat 
different afternoon in that you will be hearing a report of the Public Accounts Committee. I hope to meet 
with the students a little later. These students are accompanied by one of their teachers, Mrs. Stodola. 
 
The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on the First Report of the Committee on Public Accounts and 
Printing. 
 
MR. McISAAC: — The letter I referred to was one dated December 12th, 1973, addressed to the Hon. G.R. 
Bowerman, from the Provincial Auditor, W.G. Lutz, and I will just read to you, Mr. Speaker, some excerpts 
from the letter to try to put into context for the House the problems uncovered in DNS and the situation that 
we were faced with respect to DNS. 
 
In the middle of page 1 (and this is a seven page letter), Mr. Speaker, and I will quote directly. This is the 
Auditor speaking here: 
 

From the outset the Department appears to have experienced administrative difficulties, the 
nature and extent of which identification is made later in this report. Inadequate consultation 
with officials of transfer or departments, combined with an inaccurate appraisal of staff 
requirements (in terms of both quality and quantity) have been major contributing factors. 
The main cause, however, for the day-to-day administrative difficulties encountered was the 
failure to design an adequate system for the payment of suppliers' accounts. 

 
The next paragraph, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In June of 1973, the problems of the Department became apparent to officials in Regina and 
a special investigative team, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, headed by the director 
of the Budget Bureau, was assigned the task of: 

 
(i) diagnosing the administrative problems; 
(ii) implementing necessary systems changes; 
(iii) reducing the backlog of transactions to be processed; 
(iv) recommending action to prevent a recurrence of such problems. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, and I continue to quote: 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2785 

After reviewing a copy of the Task Force Report, which was made available to my office, it 
was considered impractical to conduct an examination in the usual manner because of the 
widespread internal control deficiency apparent. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by 
these deficiencies a course of action was adopted which it was hoped would permit my office 
to fulfil the substantive reporting requirements of Sections 21 and 24 of The Department of 
Finance Act, and any other statutory requirement which might come to light as a result of the 
review. 

 
Another paragraph in the centre of page 2, under the subheading 'Revenue and Public Property': 
 

During 1972-73 no systematic method for handling cash receipts was in use, nor was a 
revenue transfer account established for the purpose of depositing receipts intact in Lac La 
Ronge. No written record of cash received and transmitted was maintained by the 
Department. 

 
Down at the bottom of the same page, page 2, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Apparently due to the lack of consultation mentioned earlier, the sources of revenue for 
which the new department was to be responsible, were not clearly identified, and no controls 
were established to ensure that all revenue that should have been received, was received. 
Confusion appeared to continue in this area, as former officials of the DNR, now in the 
employ of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, continued to transmit revenue from 
licensed communications, etc., to DNR. 

 
And he goes on to point out other areas. I quote again from page 3: 
 

Since June of 1973 a system has been designed to control the use of CVA vehicles. 
 
And I point out, that's June of 1973. The Department had now been in operation for a period of about 14 
months (15 months if you want to be exact from the day it was officially assented to here in the House). 
Another quotation, Mr. Speaker, that I think is very much worth noting: 
 

Related to the revenue question, and of urgent concern, is the matter of establishing inventory 
controls for public property, which is now the responsibility of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Further down on page 3, the Auditor comments again: 
 

I must report that for the year ending March 31, 1973, these control features were not 
maintained nor were the revenues and public property of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Page 4 of the letter from the Auditor to the Minister deals with the slackness of Department officials in 
submitting claims under the Canada Assistance Plan. I think a figure is mentioned here of something like 
$800,000, which was owing to the province at the end of the fiscal year, March of 1973 and have not been 
claimed or not been bothered with whatsoever by Department officials. 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2786 

In respect to one other area that the Committee did considerable study on, Mr. Speaker, Accounts Payable by 
the Department to suppliers. Accounts Payable reported at March 31, 1973, are summarized as follows: I 
will just give you the final figure, it adds up to $1.12 million. There was some slight change in that when the 
officials from the Task Force group of the Budget Bureau were finished with it. 
 
I would turn now to page 6 of this letter of the Auditor's, dealing with the Social Services bank account. 
 

October 8,1972 an account was opened with the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce in La 
Ronge, entitled Department of Northern Saskatchewan Social Services Account. 

 
It goes on to point out that: 
 

Because of their failure to submit such payments promptly for reimbursement a bank 
overdraft existed at March 31st, 1973 of $565,000. 

 
Down on the bottom of that same page, Mr. Speaker, another bank account statement, another comment with 
respect to a Wage Bank Account, and that states: 
 

Again, because of the failure to provide an accountable advance and to submit payments 
promptly for reimbursement, a bank overdraft was incurred at March 31st, 1973, in this 
instance totalling $65,000. 

 
Small, I'll agree in comparison to the previous one mentioned. On page 7, the Auditor deals with the 
question of the Saskatchewan Assistance Program, or the Federal counterpart, the CAP, and I'll read a 
section here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

A thorough investigation of one suboffice was under way at the date of this report. 
 
This is November 12, 1973. 
 

In view of results documented in a preliminary report, it was estimated that overpayments 
could total close to $100,000 for a period of 12 to 18 months, when the study was completed. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is $100,000 of overpayments to Social Service recipients in one suboffice of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Whether it was during a by-election, whatever, these facts have yet 
to be unearthed and ascertained. The fact worth noting, Mr. Speaker, is that there are five suboffices of the 
Social Services people in northern Saskatchewan. This isn't to say (and I don't say) that because there is an 
overpayment of $100,000 in one suboffice that there's automatically $500,000 in total. I don't say that and 
this Report does not say that. 
 
MR. GUY: — But it's possible! 
 
MR. McISAAC: — But it's possible, is right, as the Member for Athabasca says. 
 
Another paragraph I can read here, Mr. Speaker: 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2787 

Where overpayments have been made because regulations were not followed, I would 
suggest that as soon as the amounts can be accurately determined, consideration be given to 
recovery of such overpayments from subsequent payments to beneficiaries. 

 
I think we all recognize and realize the extreme difficulty, the staff, and the Government is going to be faced 
with in this kind of action, and to think that it need not have occurred had any kind of administrative 
procedures been established when this Department was set up in the beginning. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal (and there's a good deal more that I could discuss — there's a good deal 
more that's contained in the Verbatim Report of the Committee in this regard), a good deal of time and a 
good deal of information is available and came out with respect to housing contracts awarded by this 
Department, and many, many other things, and I recommend the Report, the Verbatim, to all Members for a 
thorough study in this regard. 
 
I just want to go now, Mr. Speaker, to the recommendations contained in the First Report here that is before 
us. The recommendations particularly that deal with DNS. At the moment a recommendation is as follows: 
 

1. We go on to note the establishment first of all of the bank accounts without Treasury 
Board approval. 

 
2. The incurring of large bank overdrafts. 

 
3. Extended delays in payment of supplier accounts. 

 
I don't think there was much disagreement by Committee members on these three points. 
 

4. Delayed deposit and recording of revenue obtained by DNS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a detailed examination of this Department it was admitted by the DNS people themselves, it 
was stated by the Auditor, and it was stated by the Comptroller of the Department of Finance, that there was 
absolutely no recording, and no depositing of revenue received by this Department in the year under review. 
So to state, as the recommendation does, that delayed depositing and recording of revenue obtained by DNS 
is not a proper reflection and true statement of what actually happened. The next recommendation in the 
Report that was read by the Clerk: 
 

5. Substantial overpayment of benefits to Social Service recipients. 
 
These are five of the facts that were noted. Other notations might well have been made. 
 
The next aspect of the Committee recommendation is one that I cannot concur in and do not agree with: 
 

Your committee regrets that the Department did not correct the lax administrative procedures 
in the year under review. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is a total understatement 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2788 

of what this Committee should be saying to this particular Department. We go on to state: 
 

We recommend more thorough scrutiny of all new departments and agencies by the 
Comptroller. 

 
And I think the reason for that is pretty obvious. The next part of it I don't necessarily agree with again, 
personally, and we go on to state: 
 

If necessary, new staff and methods should be employed to prevent a recurrence of the lax 
administration procedures which existed in DNS in the year under review. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don't think that we would need to be recommending new staff or new people if the people that 
were employed by that Department were doing their jobs. If they were doing the job, this would not have 
happened, and that certainly starts, Mr. Speaker, with, I regret to say, the Deputy Minister and the Minister. 
As a matter of fact, in most jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the Minister and the Deputy 
Minister, both would have resigned and should have resigned when they became aware in June or July of last 
year of the kind of mess this Department was in. The fact that they didn't, I think, indicates their callous 
disregard for Treasury regulations and other regulations dealing with the proper handling of public funds in 
this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could point out to you a few of the detailed remarks in this respect. In formulating the 
recommendations I want to read from page 564 — the first I will read from is Mr. MacDonald, the Member 
for Moose Jaw: 
 

Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me, in my business, if I don't record and deposit E and H 
tax, for example, or if I didn't record and deposit funds that came into my office, I'm sure the 
Department of Internal Revenue would suspect that it is mishandling. It's clearly mishandling 
to receive funds and not make any recording of them, or deposit them. 

 
THE CHAIRMAN: — My own opinion to say, 'delayed deposit' (as we were developing 
this recommendation), certain doesn't describe it. If we had said, 'failure to deposit.' 

 
Mr. Lutz, at this point, Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

I think, Mr. Chairman, the reason there was never any mention in this regard of theft or sort 
of related activities, was simply because the situation was so terrible when this group of 14 
went up there, that they really had no way of establishing: (a) what had been received; (b) 
what should have been received; and how much was still there. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this regard the Auditor is speaking of the amount of something over one-half million 
dollars in cheques and cash that were found lying around the DNS offices in La Ronge, in open baskets and 
open boxes, they had been accumulating there for 12 months. This is the kind of thing we are talking about. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How much cash? 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2789 

MR. McISAAC: — Some Member opposite asks 'how much cash'. I think the fact of the matter is, nobody 
knows how much cash, nobody knows. Something in the neighborhood of $525,000 in cheques and about 
$1,100 in hard cash. Whether the figure of $1,100 should have been $11,000, nobody will ever really know. 
Nobody will ever really know. Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I think you can see, and any Member will see, 
when he peruses the facts that were given in the Verbatims, why the recommendation that's before you isn't 
strong enough, isn't adequate enough to deal with the situation that was uncovered and discovered with 
respect to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and their handling and mishandling of public funds. 
 
One further comment, Mr. Speaker, with respect to another item, and that is Item 11 in the 
Recommendations. Here, I will read that Item again, it refers to a section in the Provincial Auditor's Report. 
We called in the Land Bank Commission and a study of the Land Bank Commission revealed that the fiscal 
year-end of that organization, that agency, was established by a board minute. The Provincial Auditor, in his 
Report, suggested that any statute establishing a Government department, or a Government agency, contain 
specific recommendations for audit requirements, a specific recommendation for a year-end, and our 
recommendation No. 11 deals with that particular item. We were informed also, it's fair to say, that 
legislation, most of it this year, does comply with what has been previous practice in setting up new 
departments, new agencies, for a definite year-end and a definite audit requirement and procedures for 
financial reporting and is made a part of the statutes setting up new agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair to say that the findings with respect to the Land Bank, in a very minor way, and 
certainly the finding with respect to DNS are pretty clear indications of the haste with which this 
Government, in embarking to set up new agencies, new departments, is not showing the kind of concern and 
the kind of respect that they should for public funds, for proper procedures in the handling of public funds 
and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any Member of the House, or any member of the public wishing to peruse 
this Report, will certainly find that to be the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move, seconded by Mr. MacDonald, the Member for Moose Jaw that the First Report of 
the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be now received. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I was rather trying to extend a courtesy to the 
other Members of the House to speak on this before I rose to give a few remarks on this particular motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear the sooner the Government can get over this motion and this Committee the 
better. Because the Committee established I think one of the worst possible records for political and 
administrative management in the history of Saskatchewan government. 
 
One of the shocking things about it was that the undoubted shock to some of the new Members of the 
Government who had, I 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2790 

think, to date been blindly believing that their Government was rather an honourable government and was in 
fact capable of managing the affairs of the province rather well. That thought is no longer a reasonable or 
credible one in the minds of any Opposition Member who sat on this Committee. It is not possible to be a 
Member of that Committee and examine the political cronyism and the mismanagement and the clumsiness 
of this Government and still believe that this Government has any right to deal with the affairs of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I should like to refer briefly to one particular area. During the year under review the Government decided 
that it required certain housing for staff of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. It then sent out tenders 
under the hand of the Hon. G.R. (Ted) Bowerman, Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. According to the 
testimony before the Committee of the Deputy Minister, this was on a selected or invitational basis. There 
was no tender published in any newspaper in Saskatchewan; no tender to the public. There was however, a 
selected invitational tender to people who were known to the Government. The story unfolds about these 
people rather well known to the Government, as you can see. Somebody said, are these NDP supporters? 
Who would know, except they seemed to have received a rather unusual favor. The letter that I refer to is 
dated February 13, 1973, Regina, Saskatchewan. It is signed as I said by the Hon. Minister and it sets forth 
some of the requirements for northern housing and that the Government of Saskatchewan would enter a 
contract with the successful person when they had received their response to the bid. Just to make it look 
good, they sent copies to some six or seven people. If anybody phoned up and said, "I have heard about this 
thing, I want to be in on the bidding," a copy of the letter went forth to the bidder, to the person interested 
but of course without any chance whatsoever of his getting a contract; it had of course already been chosen. 
 
On February 13, the letter went forth to eight people in total. I am sorry, seven of them went out that day, at a 
later date a very well known contractor received a copy of this letter but of course he had no chance to get 
the bid and he didn't get the bid. 
 
One of the people involved was a Mr. G.W. Thorpe, Delta Holdings, Prince Albert. Now a very interesting 
thing happened. First of all Delta Holdings received the contract. A contract was entered into pursuant to that 
arrangement and I brought my file with the — I am sorry, I have already filed it with the Committee — I will 
read some of the information which I have received from the office of the Registrar of Companies, in Regina 
dealing with this company. 
 
The Minister's letter is dated February 13, 1973, addressed to Delta Holdings, Mr. G.W. Thorpe. That 
company was incorporated the following day, February 14, 1973. Obviously he was satisfied that the 
contract was likely to be awarded to him and he proceeded post haste. 
 
The officials of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan admitted that they had made no investigations 
into the affairs of the people to whom they gave contracts. Not a one. And the reason was that if this 
company built these houses the Government would enter a contract to rent the houses from them. So 
presumably the Government of Saskatchewan had no financial interest in this nor was it their concern to see 
whether these companies 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2791 

were financially sound or not. It was sufficient if the Government determined that the company was a strong 
supporter of the Government, that was the sole criterion. 
 
Now, therefore, this company was incorporated and I have also before me a copy of Form I. To the 
uninitiated this is the form which sets forth the capital and shares of the company. There were shares issued, 
there were three of them issued. They were worth a dollar each. The owner of one of these shares was 
George Walter Thorpe, Prince Albert, one common share; Alfred Phaneuf, teacher, one common share; and 
Boris Mamchur, one common share. So this company boldly starting out to build many thousands of dollars 
worth of construction for the Government of Saskatchewan, started out with a three dollar capitalization. 
 
It is very, very interesting to notice some of the history of this batch of companies. On the 11th of June, 
1973, Delta Enterprises was incorporated with George Thorpe having one share worth a dollar and Morris 
Mamchur — this is Morris not Boris — one dollar share. So this company, an associated company, has two 
dollars in capitalization and on the 20th of June, these shares were transferred to their wives. 
 
Delta Systems seems to have something to do with it. It was incorporated earlier than that. It has the grand 
total of a two dollar capitalization. So this is the corporate structure to which the Government of 
Saskatchewan entrusted the construction of their government rented housing. There were to be two large 
apartment blocks and some 30 other houses. So, Mr. Speaker, with obviously a good deal of hope but with a 
good deal less care the Government of Saskatchewan put Delta Holdings Limited in the position of fleecing 
everybody in sight. 
 
It is interesting to see what has happened to Delta Holdings. To begin with the testimony before the 
Committee as it appears in the verbatim was that the Government of Saskatchewan had no concern with the 
finances of Delta Holdings Limited for the very reason that they were going to rent these houses after the 
housing was constructed and the Government of Saskatchewan therefore, wasn't going to worry until they 
were up and going. 
 
I wonder how this company is getting along? "Delta Holdings in Difficulty" is the heading in the headline of 
a story in the Leader-Post on the 24th of April, 1974. Very interesting to note that a Government contract .., 
same company apparently, Delta Holdings Limited — a company which was awarded a Government 
contract to build two 24 unit buildings and 30 three-bedroom houses in La Ronge is in financial difficulties. 
One scarcely wonders. But what about the suggestion that the Government of Saskatchewan needed not to 
concern itself because they had no financial commitment. 
 
I see here further that what has happened is that the Government of Saskatchewan appears to have lent 
$145,000 to this company and has guaranteed loans of $675,000. In other words, Mr. Speaker, while we 
were told with the straightest of faces a week or two ago that the Government would have very little or not 
be concerned with the financing of it — the Government seems to have $800,000 worth of the people's 
money of Saskatchewan at stake in a company which was handed a gravy contract. 
 
It is very interesting also — when I filed this material 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2792 

with the Committee the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willow Bunch (Mr. Engel) said, "Well just a minute you 
are pulling a fast one here." He said, "Just a second, that letter is addressed to Mr. G.W. Thorpe, Delta 
Holdings and the contract was awarded to Delta Holdings Limited." He says, "There is no difference." And I 
refer the Hon. Members to page 508 to the testimony of the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willow Bunch. He 
said, that he, himself, had been a contractor all around Saskatchewan. He bid on lots of jobs and he didn't 
incorporate his company until he got the job. He overlooked the fact that this incorporation had occurred the 
day after this stuff was put in the mail. It seems rather quick work by Mr. Thorpe having regard to the fact 
that this had to come to Regina and undoubtedly went into the mail about the 13th of the month. But he said 
they are the same person there is no difference between a corporation and an individual. Quite apart from the 
fact that this is rather strange since we have heard lots of nonsense about the grave difference between 
corporations and individuals in the House. 
 
I want to draw the attention of the Hon. Member to the fact that Mr. Thorpe is now trying to draw rather a 
big distinction. Because while the letter was to Mr. Thorpe, (Delta Holdings not Delta Holdings Limited) the 
contract was awarded to the limited company. But Mr. Thorpe has now filed a lien himself against this 
property. In other words a lien against his own company and his own property and here I read what is said 
and reported in the Leader-Post and I assume that it is accurate. The most recent lien against the apartment 
property is a claim of $58,000 registered by one of Delta's three partners, George W. Thorpe. 
 
So, Mr. Thorpe having received a contract, having put that contract into a corporation, Delta Holdings 
Limited, now seeks to have a $58,000 lien registered against the property and share in whatever is left over. 
This company has just passed its first birthday, and this one year old infant which hardly walks seems not to 
be able to survive the current year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is only one of a long list of mismanagement of affairs of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. And severe as it is, it almost loses its size when you match it up with all the other things done 
by the Hon. Minister. This Department undoubtedly must win the blue ribbon as the worst run department in 
the history of western Canada, certainly in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just to indicate the severity — oh, he deserves the red ribbon also and every other ribbon for 
mismanagement and clumsiness and total destructiveness in everything that was touched by this Department. 
Just as a matter of interest liens at the present time approach $300,000. The fact is that people who dealt with 
Delta Holdings, believing that the Government of Saskatchewan was involved in it and would see to it that 
all was well, are going to lose $300,000. Small businessmen, sub-contractors, perhaps even workers and 
workmen, are going to suffer loss because the Government of Saskatchewan was so careless as to give this 
contract directly to Delta Holdings Limited. 
 
Now the fact is that if there was a little less cronyism, if there was a little more concern with whom we were 
dealing with, a little more concern with the validity, with a little more concern with the support given to your 
political party, you would not have got the Department into this mess, the people of Saskatchewan 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2793 

into this $800,000 loss and you would not have got the small contractors and businessmen in that 
neighborhood into the terrible mess. 
 
The Hon. Minister shakes his head, and well he should. After all it is his Department, it is his involvement, 
his people who handed out this plum, they are the people who created the situation which has caused such 
devastation in this one area alone. 
 
It is rather interesting to note that the mess and the difficulty involved with Delta Holdings is only one small 
fraction of the mess in northern Saskatchewan. Before I go ahead though, I should say that I had presented to 
me a moment or two ago the Resolution from the Hon. Member for Prince Albert East (Mr. Feschuk) dealing 
with northern Saskatchewan. And then I listened to the remarks from the Hon. Member for Hanley (Mr. 
Mostoway), Chairman of the Welfare Committee. And he said in this House that when they went to northern 
Saskatchewan they found nothing wrong. Nothing wrong. As a matter of fact there was in the case at Buffalo 
Narrows alone, one suboffice of the Department of Social Welfare in northern Saskatchewan over an 18 
month period, overpayments under Saskatchewan Assistance Plan of $100,000 according to the report of the 
Provincial Auditor. One hundred grand in one suboffice alone, not including La Ronge itself, not including 
Uranium City, Green Lake, Creighton and so on. The fact of the matter is that the Hon. Member for Hanley 
said, "We found nothing wrong." I will tell you why we find nothing wrong in the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan or in northern Saskatchewan, it's because when you go up there you can't see anything because 
you are not allowed to see anything. 
 
You try to talk to officials up there and they shut up like clams, it is a closed door. Oh, yes, they are friendly, 
they smile and they shake hands and they stand around moving from one foot to the other. But to get 
information there is no possibility of getting information up there. The Hon. Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan has made it abundantly clear that nobody up there is to talk. He has made it abundantly clear 
that the only person who can go up there is the Provincial Auditor. Were it not for the fine work of the 
Department of the Provincial Auditor in this province, not one of these things would have been exposed. I 
have no doubt that there will be an effort by this Government to muzzle the Provincial Auditor. That has to 
be the next step. Because you can't possibly have him running around finding out all the nonsense that is 
going on in Saskatchewan. 
 
I predict that the Government will muzzle him. The first step in the muzzling process took place in the 
Committee of Public Accounts. Resolution after resolution was presented by the members of the Public 
Accounts Committee and resolution after resolution calling for information was defeated or amended 
 
Let us give you one example, Mr. Speaker. I asked for information on the number of civil servants who 
travelled into northern Saskatchewan into the Athabasca constituency during the year under review. That 
happened to be the year that the Hon. Member who now serves Athabasca was in the midst of a by-election. 
I can tell you that we got very little information. That was amended and it was amended not to provide the 
civil servants who had gone North that year, just those people who travelled into the area during the exact 
period of the election. They were careful to deny us any information concerning people who travelled 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2794 

into that area prior to the by-election so that we are not able to obtain — and the Government Members 
outvoted the Opposition Members — denying us the right to know who went into that constituency just 
before the election. They refused to tell us and all you have to do is look at the verbatim and you will find 
that the Hon. Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Oliver) moved an amendment so that we would be effectively 
denied the information we required. The first step that is going on to muzzle people, to deny people 
information is to deny the Members of the Public Accounts Committee information and it is almost 
impossible to believe that there could be as many resolutions defeated, that were defeated. But I invite the 
Members to look at the resolutions presented at the Public Accounts Committee. Resolution after resolution 
was defeated if there was any chance at all that it would reveal something embarrassing to the Government. 
Last year we saw step one, the Committee last year got some information relating to Service Printers. I can 
assure you that is the last time we will ever directly obtain information of that kind. The majority members 
of the Committee will deny us information as they have done this year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — Oh, we received lots of information as soon as the Government had a chance to study it 
and consider whether or not it would reveal anything to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So here we have, Mr. Speaker, a record unparalleled in Saskatchewan. How we can possibly have a half a 
million dollars of bucks in a basket, just lying around unrecorded and then the Minister of Government 
Services (Mr. Brockelbank), gee whiz that isn't very good, fellows. He came very close to congratulating the 
Government, that would have been the next step. We think that that conduct should be condemned. We were 
prepared to step back and say, we deplore it but that wasn't acceptable to the Minister either. He said, how 
about regretting, we'll regret. Just a little slap on the wrist. In the ratio that goes from condemnation to 
congratulation, we came very close to congratulations according to the way the Minister wanted it worded. 
 
Now there is so much in this Department that is worthy of condemnation and this alone focuses our attention 
on the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Our committee examined the Land Bank and, of course, we were denied all sorts of information. We 
examined other departments of Government. The fact of the matter is it is almost a shame that we have got 
to concentrate so much on the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and overlook all the other wrong doing 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. I hope that the members of the Committee had their eyes opened. I 
hope that the New Democratic Members whom I believe went into that party as dewy eyed people, believing 
in right, and believing in justice and believing in the truth and virtue of their cause, will forever have the dew 
removed from their eyes. They will see the utter and abject truth of what they are saying. No wonder the 
Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) is starting to vote against the Government. I think he is starting to see the 
light, starting to see what a bunch of incompetent people are running this Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my desire and intention in the coming 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2795 

days to examine at greater extent some of the other errors and ways in which the Government has 
mismanaged the affairs of the people of Saskatchewan. How they have wasted money and consequently I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
I might say before doing so that I am sorry to have had to speak today. I wasn't quite prepared to go today but 
the obvious reluctance of the Hon. Member, the Minister who sat on this Committee moved me. And I might 
say also that I rather enjoyed the presence of the Minister there. Certainly he more than adequately protected 
the interests of the Government and I should tell the Premier that the presence of the Hon. Minister (Mr. 
Brockelbank) on that Committee justified his presence there. He was there every moment as a watchdog to 
see to it that the Public Accounts Committee got nothing that would cast even the slightest shadows upon the 
affairs of the Government. The Hon. Minister did a good job and I rather enjoyed our jousting. Clearly he is 
an expert politician and clearly I have to take my hat off to him. 
 
Also before sitting down I should say this that the staff of the Public Accounts Committee did an outstanding 
job, most excellent. I appreciated the appearance before the Committee of the various public servants and 
obviously we do have many, many very fine public servants in Saskatchewan. Perhaps Saskatchewan over 
the years has developed one of the finest public services in Canada. I certainly hope so and that covers both 
governments. It is unfortunate that they are being led in such a helter skelter fashion. The leadership of the 
Civil Service must be an embarrassment to the public service. There is no question in my view that the Civil 
Service in Saskatchewan must in many cases hang their heads in shame for the kind of leadership that they 
are being given by Government Members. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — On a Point of Privilege, I thought the Member was going to adjourn or I would 
have raised the point at that time. He said I was in the Committee at every waking hour of the Committee if I 
heard him correctly. If he checks the records I think he will find that I missed at least three days of the 
Committee where I wasn't watchdogging it constantly as he states. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, those were the days we got most of our information. I 
do have to say that the Hon. Minister should be congratulated by the Premier because he did his job very 
well, he is an expert politician, if a politician means to deny the Opposition and the people of Saskatchewan 
information which casts any shadow upon the work of the Government. 
 
Now I want to make a remark about the Hon. Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). The Hon. Member for 
Touchwood has undoubtedly been a member of that Committee for many years. His experience and his work 
on the Committee I think deserves some vote of commendation from this House. I have greatly appreciated 
his advice, greatly appreciated his sincere efforts to improve the work of the Public Accounts. I believe that 
the Hon. Member for Touchwood has done a good job over the years and I think that much of the good that 
has been done heretofore and up to now by the Public Accounts Committee is due in no small measure to the 
work of the Hon. Member for Touchwood. I want it on record that in many cases when disputes came about, 
the wise counsel of the 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2796 

Hon. Member for Touchwood in fact helped us over the hurdles. And I think that the Public Accounts are 
better today than ever before, due in no small measure to him and of course to other Members of the 
Committee who worked to put the accounts themselves in good order. But what the Committee has no 
control over is what they look at. The mismanagement of the Department is something that the Committee 
has no control over. We watch, we look, we examine and to the extent that we are allowed to see, we 
observe the actions of the Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said those few words on this Committee Report, I now beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Would the Member permit a question before he resumes his seat? 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — Sure I'll be glad to do that. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of his remarks the Hon. Member held himself 
out as generous and said he extended the opportunity for a member on the other side of the Committee to 
speak on this debate today. Unfortunately I wasn't prepared to take him up at that time. I would ask him if he 
at this time would sit down, not adjourn the debate and allow me the opportunity to reply. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — I noticed the Hon. Member was in his seat, I don't think the Hon. Member for 
Touchwood was in his seat but I noticed that the Minister was in his seat and I waited and waited, Mr. 
Speaker, until somebody on the other side, not on this side, called Questions and that's the reason I spoke, 
Mr. Speaker. I do beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 186 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
186 showing: 
 

For the period July 1, 1971 to March 31, 1974, the persons under contract to supply personal 
or other services to any government department, branch, commission, agency, or Crown 
corporation, giving in each case: (1) the name of the individual or corporation; (2) the 
department, branch, commission, agency or Crown corporation to whom or with whom the 
contract was made; (3) the period of commencement; (4) the time of termination or if not 
completed, anticipated date of termination; (5) the purpose; (6) the cost, or if not completed, 
the estimated total cost. 

 
He said:  I might say, Mr. Speaker, that what prompts this Motion is that some things that we have been 
reading from time to time and hearing that the Government is using contract personnel 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2797 

for purposes, first of all using contract personnel and these do not show up very readily as employees of the 
department. They are people who are not employed at all by Government but are subject to contract. I don't 
want to go into this because certainly if I knew all the answers I wouldn't be asking the question. But I know 
that in the past Mr. Gerry MacDonald, who was a candidate who opposed me in Regina Albert Park, was 
employed under contract to the Minister of Education. Another one who has recently come to my attention is 
Mr. Ralph Danchilla, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, who wrote a letter to the Prince Albert Herald. The letter 
to the Editor was in fact published and the heading "Credibility of Blakeney Government Concerns Writer." 
That was published in the Prince Albert Herald the 29th of March, 1974. I should like to read only a small 
bit of this and then file this copy of the letter, Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to file it with the Clerk. Let me 
read the first paragraph and then one or two other little paragraphs: 
 

During the 1971 provincial election I worked day and night for the NDP candidate in Prince 
Albert West. As one of those who then felt confident that the affairs of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers would be better handled by Allan Blakeney I am now deeply disappointed, even 
shocked at the course which this Government is following. 

 
Later on in it, he does have I might say — well I'll read another paragraph then: 
 

DNS Minister, Ted Bowerman, saw fit to spend our tax money in order to repay the party 
workers who worked in his 1971 campaign. Mr. Bowerman gave several months severance 
pay to some even before the individual was out of a job. That is putting the cart before the 
horse. 

 
That's just another little bit of the cute operation of the Hon. Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I read 
again: 
 

I can personally testify to the NDP Government using public funds for political purposes. In 
1972 I was under contract with the Provincial Department of Agriculture to assist in various 
aspects of agriculture policy. About a month before the Federal election I received a 
telephone call from the Hon. Jack Messer and I was instructed to make myself available to 
the Federal NDP candidate in Prince Albert. I was to be paid with provincial tax money, not 
with NDP funds. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think we are getting off on this motion into a topic which the motion doesn't 
cover. When the debate is opened too wide we shall have too wide an answer coming back. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I was merely giving a little background for the reasons that we must have 
this. The motion itself as stated above I will propose to move and I observe that it is debatable, I assume it 
will be amended. I hope that the amendment if it does come forward and I am not speaking to it because it 
isn't there yet, I hope the amendment if it does come forward does the following: That it gives us a chance to 
see who has been contracted by the Government of Saskatchewan during that period so that we may examine 
further the presence of these gentlemen in and around election time and in and around NDP election 
campaign headquarters. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2798 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious to us that when somebody is contracted by this Government to deal in the area of 
policy, it is quite obvious that that contract, the word policy is an euphemism for a political campaign word. 
Consequently I so move that motion, seconded by the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words briefly 
with respect to this Motion for Return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that is presented by the Hon. Member is one which really almost defies answering 
because of the complexity of Government contracts and Government work that is involved. There is, Mr. 
Speaker, almost no practical way to list all the kinds of contracts that are entered into by departments and 
agencies and commissions and Crown corporations. 
 
For example, to give you just a couple, what about the Department of Highways? The Hon. Member for 
Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) would know of this. There are gravel hauling contracts with hundreds of operators. 
What about the Department of Agriculture? Hundreds of construction contracts per year of one form or 
other. What about the Department of Government Services? Hundreds of construction contracts per year. 
What about contracts for such things as the engagement of solicitors for various activities of the 
Government? Mr. Speaker, one can readily see that to answer this type of question in this form is certainly 
one which is wildly impractical; wildly impractical for the Hon. Member even to ask. 
 
I also have another concern about the proposed motion and that is that it seeks to include Crown corporations 
in this form of revelation of contracts. They, too, have many contracts, all sorts. I can think of all sorts of 
contracts that are entered into. Contracts of insurance, individual insurance, for example. We all enter into a 
contract with SGIO. There is no delineation of that. Does the Hon. Member want this as well? I don't know 
how many thousands of contracts SGIO or SGIO agents enter into with individuals of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. The Member simply hasn't asked his question with precision with any degree of precision 
which would enable the Government to reasonably answer what the Hon. Member asks for. 
 
Now, I want to make it clear that we have no objection to answering questions with respect to contract 
employment, individual service contract employment. I think we have done that. In fact, in some areas where 
the Hon. Members have placed questions on the Order Paper where technically we could have simply 
answered, No, technically and correctly, the Government has adopted the attitude of answering where at all 
possible. 
 
Again an example, it was a question involving one Barrett Halderman. Is he employed with the Government 
of Saskatchewan? The technical answer to that is, No. We answered, Yes, with Government Finance Office 
Crown Corporation. I used that only as an example that where any of these questions are specific we will 
show you whether by contract or by straight employment. But if you look at what the Member asks for. He 
asks for the persons under contract that supplied personal or other services? What in the world does, 'other 
services' mean? Should we list all of these operations? And I say quite honestly and quite 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2799 

sincerely to the Members, without any political connotation to it, that is so massively wide as to be 
meaningless. 
 
In the area of Crown corporations I have expressed some concerns with respect to contracts. But what about 
the situation where a contract has been entered into and the revelation of it may prejudice the commercial 
position of corporations to divulge information in this regard. We all know that there many be a consultant's 
contract which may be involved in Sask Tel or Sask Power or SGIO, which is not related to anything other 
than a strictly business type of operation, which to reveal would be in effect open showing to all the 
competitors of those Crown corporations. Now I say to the Hon. Member that really this question has so 
many loopholes and problems with it that it is almost unanswerable. I am almost tempted to recommend to 
the House that we defeat it and ask the Member to resubmit in a way that it could be more specifically 
answered. But I don't want to do that. I think perhaps if we take a better look at it we might be able to come 
up with some amendments which will allow the Hon. Member to get what he wants. He wants to know 
individual personal contracts, well, I think what I'll have to do, Mr. Speaker, at this stage of the game is look 
at it, study it and see what we can do by way of amendment and I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino) moved third reading of Bill No. 04 — An Act to Incorporate 
Cenaiko Foundation. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I just want to make one comment with respect to this Bill in 
third reading. I am not sure whether I am technically in order but I will try and make my remarks as brief as I 
can and to be in order. 
 
This Bill incorporates a charitable foundation. Basically, it is a family controlled and operated charitable 
foundation. It has to do with a religious organization. The control of the foundation is in the hands of the 
sponsors of the Bill, who are the family, the Cenaiko family in and around Wakaw, I believe. 
 
I think the objectives of the foundation I would agree with. I am not of that particular religious persuasion 
but I think it does religion good and is well motivated and I would accept that. One concern that I voice, not 
in this particular case but I think sort of as a signal, if I may, to all others in the future, is the device which is 
used in this way, namely, an individual or individual family petitioning a public assembly for the 
establishment of a foundation with its charitable and taxable implications as a means of achieving the 
objective set out. I think that a much more desirable way is to proceed by way of The Societies Act 
provisions. We were, however, in this case caught. There was one precedent which was already established 
by the Legislature in the late 1950s or early 1960s. We could not deny this individual this right, the precedent 
having been set. But I do think that I voice the feeling of the Committee, the Private Bills Committee and 
certainly if I don't, my own views, that in future we as Members of the House should be very careful indeed 
before we permit the establishment of a foundation through public means which is basically controlled, 
owned and operated by one family in its appointment methods and 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2800 

so forth. Now as I say this is not to cast any aspersions on the motivations of the Cenaiko Foundation or on 
the motivations of Dr. Cenaiko and his family. I wish him and the Cenaiko Foundation well. I just simply say 
that it certainly would be my view that as Attorney General in future if we are petitioned with matters of this 
nature that this Bill and the subsequent one ought not to be treated as any precedent upon which to base a 
course of action. 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I understand the direction that the Attorney 
General proposes to turn us in this matter but I am not sure that we should prejudge any of these. There are 
apparently this one and one other foundation incorporated by the Legislature. The result of it will be, of 
course, that there will be some restriction on who might be involved in the foundation. I should not like to 
think that this Legislature having gone ahead today to pass a Bill would say that these people received today 
that which we would deny others and that is really what we are saying, that if anyone else were to do this 
now we would perhaps say no to their petition and their request. I would suggest, quite frankly, that each 
new application should be dealt with on its merits and that if we are doing the wrong thing here that we 
should say no, and if it is the right thing, then we should be prepared to observe with an open mind the next 
application that comes before us. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 - EQUAL PARTNERSHIP IN MARRIAGE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina 
Lakeview): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to forthwith introduce legislation 
to recognize the concept of equal partnership in marriage so that the contribution of each 
spouse to the marriage partnership may be acknowledged and that, upon the dissolution of 
the marriage, each will have a right to an equal share in the assets accumulated during 
marriage otherwise than by gift or inheritance received by either spouse from outside source. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Stand. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I wonder if the Attorney General instead of allowing this Resolution to stand off the 
Order Paper and not be dealt with that he would say so. If he intends on debating at a later time I would 
appreciate some advice .. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Actually it is not debatable when the Member has asked to stand it. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — On a Point of Order, I believe stand is only a courtesy measure and I believe that 
a Member has a right to speak on it if he so wishes. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2801 

MR. SPEAKER: — When a motion is stood by a Member the Member is in at the time and asks for it to 
stand in the House, if the majority gives permission, it stands. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON WELFARE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): That the 
Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to have the opportunity 
of making a few comments on the Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare. Let me say at the 
outset that our Government treats this Report very seriously and intends to give it every consideration both 
as we develop our own programs in the future, and in the present round of Federal-Provincial conferences 
which are attempting to chart a new direction in social security in Canada. You only have to read the report, 
Mr. Speaker, to recognize the vast amount of work, time and effort that has been put into the study by the 
members of the Committee. I, for one, wish to commend the members of the Committee for their diligence 
in this regard. 
 
I also want to say that I have heard from a number of individuals and groups who presented briefs and ideas 
to the Committee in their round of public meetings, and to add that these groups and individuals have 
indicated to me how pleased they were with the reception they received from all Committee members 
representing both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it hardly needs to be said that the subject of welfare is always a touchy issue. On the one hand, 
there are those who claim that the poor are not provided with enough in order to permit them to climb out of 
their circle of poverty. This was a position taken by the municipalities about a year ago at the Tri-Level 
Conference. On the other hand, there are those who believe that welfare payments are already too high since 
they provide unfair competition in the labor force. It is also relatively simple to confuse the public regarding 
the worthiness of any particular individual to receive public assistance. People may be aware of an individual 
receiving assistance and yet who looks physically fit and appears mentally alert. They may not be aware that 
he is suffering from a severe physical, mental or social problem that is undetectable by outward appearance. 
Because of this problem the person may indeed be a 'deserving recipient'. There is also no doubt, that there is 
some abuse in the welfare scheme. This I believe is to be expected. There was certainly abuse in the days of 
beggars. There was abuse of assistance in the days when it was handled by the churches, and there is abuse 
today. There is abuse today also of the income tax system and of the Guaranteed Income Supplement. There 
is abuse in almost every type of program. I want to suggest, however, that the amount of abuse is extremely 
small. The vast majority of people receiving public assistance are most deserving. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2802 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to point to some of the recommendations of the Committee which have already 
been acted on in whole or in part by our Government. Recommendation No. 2 calls for public discussion to 
be led and encouraged by advisory boards in each region. Some of our boards are already doing this on their 
own; others have invited myself and staff members from my Department to attend public meetings and lead 
discussion on these questions. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 asked our Government to attempt to have family size and age of children included in 
the criteria to determine the amount of Family Allowance paid by the Federal Government. I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have made every effort to do so but unfortunately have met with no success in this 
regard. 
 
The Intersessional Committee has also suggested that an income test should be adopted for the Assistance 
Plan. Again we have attempted to do this and have sought the approval of the Federal authorities to do an 
income test at least for those people who are living in institutions, such as homes for the retarded or senior 
citizens in nursing homes. Unfortunately again, we have not been able to secure such agreement with the 
Canada Assistance Plan. 
 
During the social security review now under way with the Federal Government we are attempting to follow 
recommendation No. 8 and gain a more extensive definition of need for services under the cost-sharing 
agreement. We should like, Mr. Speaker, to look beyond the straight financial need of services. 
 
My Department has already acted to tighten up the policy for granting assistance for those in the 16 and 17 
year age group. We intend to insist that a plan of self support or training be established before such 
assistance may be granted. We are also requiring parents to indicate a refusal of support. As recommended 
by the Committee food and clothing allowances have already been increased, as has the maximum board and 
room rate been increased to $90 per month as recommended by the Committee. 
 
The recommendation on pre-added budgets has already been implemented and has been well received by the 
majority of our clients. Also as recommended by the Intersessional Committee we have greatly expanded the 
amount of money available for job creation activities — from about $500,000 last year to $1,500,000 this 
year. Included in this figure is an amount which will permit a select number of jobs to be continued on a 12 
month basis for experimental purposes. 
 
Like the Intersessional Committee we believe as a Government that a first priority in social security must be 
an employment strategy. We have at various conferences with Federal and Provincial Ministers emphasized 
the need for this. We have called upon the Federal Government to cost share such jobs as they now cost 
share the Assistance Plan. So far, this cost sharing has been refused. This means, Mr. Speaker, that the 
$1,500,000 we will spend on the Employment Support Program this summer will be a net cost to the 
province which, if we had provided instead public assistance, would have cost us somewhere around 
$700,000. We believe this to be unfortunate and unnecessary. We recognize that government activity in the 
job creation field can indeed create competition for the private labor market. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2803 

However, we believe this to be essential. It is totally meaningless to say that everyone is expected to work in 
order to support himself if we are unwilling at the same time to ensure that there is a job for him to work at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in line with the Committee recommendations we have already acted to ensure that there are 
representatives from the client group on the Provincial-Municipal Advisory Board. This I might say has been 
of benefit not only to our clients, but also the Department in formulating policy. We are also attempting to 
move in the direction recommended of establishing suboffices in smaller centres of our province. We have, 
Mr. Speaker, effective April 1st of this year increased the foster home rates in line with the recommendations 
of the Committee. 
 
The new Day Care Program has been announced with increased subsidies available to parents. In line with 
further recommendations of the Committee we are negotiating with some Indian Bands to train local workers 
in the provision of Child Care Services. We intend to enter further into the field of Community Training 
Residences in the Correctional System, and we are attempting to devise a means whereby Fine Option 
people will not be incarcerated in Correctional Centres. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that I have just in the last few days signed an agreement with Chief Ahenekew 
of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians whereby we are requesting federal funding for parole and 
probation services on Indian reserves. These are all in line with the recommendations of the Intersessional 
Committee. 
 
There are many other actions which my Department has already taken with relate closely to the report of this 
Committee. We have, for example, been approaching the Federal Government with a request to reduce the 
age for old age security to 60; and we have been attempting in a small way to make our office more effective 
as Manpower Placement Centres. We do this I might say, hesitatingly, feeling that this is not really the role 
of Social Service offices. But we feel compelled to do so since the regular Manpower offices are failing our 
clients. 
 
Let me comment now briefly on some of the other actions which we are considering taking or which we 
have started. I am inclined to be in wholehearted agreement with the Committee recommendation regarding 
the dissemination of information. There are two areas in which information is badly needed. One is the 
public area as to what welfare is all about and who receives public assistance. This, I believe, would correct 
many of the mistaken ideas now held by a number of people. But it is just as important that information be 
provided to clients and potential clients. Unfortunately, as in many other situations, it has often been the 
squeaky wheel that got the grease. I believe that every client should be made fully aware of his or her rights. 
And more than this, that those who are not clients should be made aware of their right to apply for 
assistance. 
 
The Intersessional Committee also identified a major area of need in the field of social security, an area 
which has too long been ignored. That area is that of the working poor or the low income wage earner. This, 
as Members will recognize, is the person who is working at or near minimum wage with three, four, five or 
more children and finding it very difficult to 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2804 

make ends meet. I have already said a fair amount regarding this in an earlier debate in the House. I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the Family Income Plan is our attempt to meet this need. We believe that the Family 
Income Plan will provide an incentive for people to take jobs where they are available and to progress in the 
work force as their abilities enable them. The Plan will ensure that everyone who works is better off than he 
would be on public assistance. It will provide for some of the added expenses that accrue to a person because 
of work — expenses such as clothing, transportation etc. It will provide the low income working family with 
the income to take advantage of the many opportunities that before had simply passed him by. We do not 
suggest this to be the perfect answer. We do believe it to be a first step in finding a solution to this vexing 
problem. 
 
It is also our intention, Mr. Speaker, to move in the direction indicated by recommendation No. 41. This will 
involve the establishment of a strong financial unit within the Department of Social Services; we hope to 
accomplish this within the next few months. We have already embarked on a study with the Department of 
Public Health regarding the feasibility of coterminous boundaries for our departments. 
 
You will see from this, Mr. Speaker, that our Government does take seriously the work undertaken by 
various committees of the Legislature and their recommendations. We do not intend to let any of them sit on 
the shelf and gather dust. No government of course will commit itself to accept every recommendation, but 
the actions we have already taken must certainly assure the Committee members that their voices have been 
heard and that their time and effort has been well spent. 
 
I want to turn now for just a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to make a few comments on the Minority Report. I 
must say at the outset I was disappointed. In spite of the way in which the Committee seemed to work 
together throughout the study, it seemed abundantly clear to me that political, rather than social 
consideration prompted the Minority Report No. 2. The writers of this report strongly criticize the 
Committee for recommending a move towards a Guaranteed Annual Income on the basis that it did not 
consider adequately the costs involved. They pointed out that the Committee undertook no cost projections. I 
want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that my concept of the task of an Intersessional Committee is that it should 
point to the direction in which the province or country should be moving in terms of its social benefit. It is 
the government, with the expertise available to it, which must decide whether recommendations are 
financially practical at any given time. The Majority Report seems to agree with this concept. The Minority 
Report to which I referred emphasizes the stand frequently taken, unfortunately, by Members of the 
Opposition — a stand which would seem to suggest that those on welfare are there because they want to be 
there, and not because they have no alternatives. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the irresponsibility was 
not shown in the Majority Report, but by the Members of this Minority Report, who once again, emphasized 
their distaste for a public assistance program which would not be demeaning and which would indeed 
provide financial security for every citizen of our province. 
 
The Minority Report is further irresponsible in saying: 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2805 

We also take strong exception to the proposed removal of the extreme hardship clause, the 
removal of this clause would, in our view, provide access to welfare funds for anyone who 
merely does not want to work. 

 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the removal of the extreme hardship clause will permit us to grant 
assistance to those who are working. At the present time they must leave work and go on total assistance in 
order to gain the benefits. It is clear that this Minority Report was written with no research, or the members 
would surely have recognized this. The removal of this clause will not be a disincentive to work, but the 
reverse is true. The reverse is that it will be an incentive to work because one can receive additional benefits 
while working. 
 
The same Minority Report also says that the Provincial Government announced its acceptance of the Federal 
Government's Family Allowance program. This, Mr. Speaker, was never the case. We have said over and 
over again that the Family Allowance should have been tied to income so that the greatest benefits could 
have been provided to the lowest income groups. This we have insisted upon on various occasions in the last 
one to two years. 
 
Nor is it true to suggest, as this Minority Report does, that the change in Income Tax regulations will ensure 
that lower income families will benefit substantially more than those with higher incomes. Increased 
exemptions are only of benefit to those who are earning a sufficiently high income to pay income tax in the 
first place, and they are of absolutely no benefit to those whose incomes are low. The Minority Report is also 
irresponsible in that it claims the province should be guaranteeing employment rather than income. They do 
not, however, indicate how employment should be guaranteed; who should guarantee it, or who should bear 
the cost. There is no recognition that the cost of creating jobs or of maintaining persons in jobs created 
through Government programs is more costly than maintaining persons on public assistance. The position of 
our province and the Federal-Provincial Review on Social Security has been that the government's first line 
of attack on poverty should be guaranteed employment. We get cost sharing on income maintenance but not 
on employment programs. The Federal-Liberal Government does not appear interested in employment 
programs for anyone, but long-term unemployed welfare recipients and severely disabled persons. 
 
Our province, on the other hand, has already been providing employment to welfare recipients through the 
Employment Support Program. 
 
I can only conclude, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Members who wrote their Minority Report are once again 
attempting to ride two horses at the same time. On the one hand they do indicate support for increased 
allowances to those on assistance, but on the other, they intimate that they believe that if allowances are too 
high many people will choose that rather than work. This is not the record of Canadians. It is estimated at 
present, that about 500,000 Canadians are working for lower salaries than they would receive on public 
assistance. I believe in the integrity of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I do not believe that the 
poor are any more dishonest than are the rich. I believe that most of the people on assistance would prefer to 
work, and would do so, if capable of working and if employment were available for them and their skills, we 
intend, Mr. Speaker, 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2806 

believing this, to continue our efforts in the field of work creation for these clients. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Majority Report in effect, to be the responsible report of this 
Committee. I want to assure the members of the Committee that our Government will continue to give 
serious consideration to all their recommendations and to take such action as is necessary in the days ahead. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I believe there are one or two Members on one side 
who would still like to speak on this Report and I should like to make one or two comments as a result of 
what the Minister has been saying. He talked very glowingly of the accomplishments of the Government and 
how they are listening to some of the recommendations in the Report of the Committee on Welfare. There 
has been one recurring problem that has been brought to the attention of the Committee, and certainly also 
brought to the attention of the Minister recently, as I had occasion to bring a couple of cases to his attention 
myself. And these are instances where one of the couple gets the old age pension and supplement and the 
other is yet under age and perhaps getting some small amount of money from the Social Services 
Department. The reason I have brought this up, and I'm sure it was brought up to the Committee on Welfare, 
is because today again I received a letter in regard to this, and this happens to be a case that I brought to the 
Minister's attention a couple of weeks ago, where the husband was getting about $185 through the old age 
pension and supplement and the wife was getting some $7.75 (which is a pretty meagre amount) and as a 
result of the investigations of the Social Services Department, they refused to give these people any increase. 
However, I did get a letter from these people today, including again their cheque stubs, and I'm sure the 
Minister is aware of what we can expect from this. 
 
It seems that the Federal Government has given a small increase to the old age pensioners for a cost of living 
allowance. It only amounts to a very few dollars, but it is something. However, it appears also that the 
Department of Social Services is immediately sending out a form letter to the wife of all of these people in 
effect taking this small allowance. 
 
This lady whom I told you about is getting $7.75 and she is now getting $4.43 — the result of my bringing it 
to the Minister's attention and the fact that he is now taking the few dollars that they are getting as a cost of 
living bonus. So the Minister talks in glowing terms about all they are doing and still he is allowing this 
thing to happen. 
 
I will take responsibility for this letter, and it's a form letter from the Department of Social Services, a form 
letter where they simply put the name of the person at the top, and I'm sure that he has sent out hundreds 
from his Department in the last few days. This is dated April 23rd and it says: 
 

Dear Sir or Madam: 
 

You are aware the Federal Government's Old Age Security Guaranteed Income Supplement 
program now provides for 

 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2807 

quarterly adjustments in the allowances paid. As your Old Age Security Guaranteed Income 
Supplement will increase, it is necessary to adjust your allowance under the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan for the same amount. 

 
In other words, if you are getting $4 or $5, or $3 or $4 extra from the Federal Government, we are going to 
take off exactly that same amount. It says: 
 

If you have any questions regarding this matter please contact your social worker. 
 
It's signed so and so, the Regional Director, Qu'Appelle Region Office, Department of Social Services. 
 
Now I would think that with the money the Government has available to them today, with all of the glowing 
remarks of the Minister today about the things that he is doing in his Department, that they wouldn't be 
squeezing two or three dollars out of every old couple in this province who hopefully should benefit by this 
small raise that they are getting from the Federal Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — It appears that this is their policy. It says that there is a quarterly revision of the 
Federal program, and as a result they are going to take exactly the same amount off. So here we have a case 
of a lady who is getting $7 and some cents before and now they have reduced this to $4.43. They have taken 
this $2 or $3 that these people badly need because they are not going to allow them this money that was 
given to them by the Federal Government. I think it a shameful act by the Department of Social Services and 
that the Minister should be looking into this because he is obviously aware of what is going on. These are 
form letters that are sent out where they just type the person's name at the top and say Dear Sir or Madam, 
send this out, send them a cheque less this few dollars they got from the Federal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the Report, I'm sure there are some other Members who would like to make some comments 
and at this time I should like to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 26 - GUARANTEED MONTHLY INCOME FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Richards: 
 

That this Assembly calls for immediate government consideration of guaranteeing minimum 
monthly income levels for senior citizens of $350 per individual and $500 per couple, as 
recommended in the Report by the Senior Citizens' Commission. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Taylor: 
 

That all the words after word 'calls' in the first 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2808 

line be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

on the Federal Government to give consideration of guaranteeing minimum monthly income 
levels for senior citizens of $350 per individual and $500 per couple, as recommended in the 
Report by the Senior Citizens' Commission. 

 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I only have a word or two to add to this. I observe in 
the February 27th, 1974 edition of the Commonwealth, a newspaper which is circulated in western Canada, 
partly at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan, that the Province of Manitoba is now going to the $200 
monthly minimum for Manitoba pensioners. The Report states very briefly that Manitoba's old age 
pensioners will be guaranteed a minimum monthly payment income of $200 per month for single persons 
and about $383 for married couples, as of July 1st. Now that is estimated to cost the Province of Manitoba 
about $4 million, according to the Report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I wish to make is first of all that a part of any increased payment will be shared by the 
Federal Government. That has been made very clear by the Federal Government and there is absolutely no 
excuse for the Province of Saskatchewan not to go into this kind of a program, which will receive federal 
assistance. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan has done surface, or 
superficial things for the old age pensioners and they have done very little of substance for the old age 
pensioners and in fact, virtually the entire burden of taking care of our senior citizens is borne today by the 
Federal Government. That is not to say, however, that the Provincial Government does not take 100 per cent 
of the credit. 
 
I think that our purpose and my purpose in supporting this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, is to establish the 
principle that the province has a responsibility to our senior citizens. I wish that principle clearly and firmly 
established in the actions and the laws of the Province of Saskatchewan. The question as to detail is, of 
course, open. Whether $350 or $500 a month is an appropriate amount is something which I personally 
cannot say is the right amount, having regard to all circumstances, but what I am after is the establishment of 
a principle. 
 
I do say that I oppose the amendment simply because it is an attempt to shift the entire burden onto the 
Federal Government. That's the kind of thing that has now become part of the entire tactics and doctrine of 
the New Democratic Party and the New Democratic Government. No matter how much money you get from 
Ottawa, apparently there is no end to the demands of this Provincial Government and consequently a call 
solely on the Federal Government is inappropriate and it's a denial of the principle that the province itself has 
a severe and continuing responsibility. 
 
The Resolution, as it began in the first place, was more aptly worded. It called upon 'government' which I 
presume refers to two governments — the Federal Government and the Provincial Government. Those are 
the governments in Canada that can and must do something about old age pensioners. Consequently I oppose 
the amendment, but I will support the original Motion, with the reservation, as I mentioned, that I do not 
thereby 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2809 

presume to be supporting the precise figures set forth in the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I shall be brief in my concluding remarks. I 
regret that the Motion has been amended, as in fact the Government did amend it. I think that this Motion 
has brought forward some fairly undemeaning debate in this Assembly. It has produced the kind of buck-
passing which has created tremendous cynicism among senior citizens about the abilities of government to 
assess any of the major problems of senior citizens. 
 
Last Tuesday I attended a public hearing in Saskatoon concerned with the construction of a senior citizens' 
highrise in my constituency. The highrise building violated all good logic with respect to community 
planning, nonetheless, on the basis of a bird in the hand is better than two in the bush, the majority of senior 
citizens present at the hearings were undeniably in favor of the construction of that building. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the debate that we have had in which both sides of the House have tried to claim 
that the responsibility for the poverty of senior citizens lies in the ballpark of the other administration, is the 
cause of the cynicism which results in senior citizens grabbing at any straw or any lifeboat passing in the sea 
in order to try desperately to improve their position economically. I hope and I would have considered it a 
great deal more logical if the Government had sought to amend this Resolution by saying that the 
responsibility lay both on the federal and provincial governments as clearly the responsibility does lie with 
both these levels of administration. 
 
The Attorney General in comments upon this motion sometime ago, spoke about his feelings for Canadian 
unity and that we must not balkanize this country by one province proceeding to implement one particular 
program at the expense of other provinces. But surely the Attorney General must be aware that the pattern 
and progress of this country does not come from rational, central reform in the Liberals in Ottawa. 
 
What comes by progress in this country is that one province institutes a reform and kicking and screaming 
the rest of the country slowly drags itself along in the following decade. If one province were to commit 
itself in the major manner that is implied by this Resolution and by the figures as reported from the Senior 
Citizens' Commission Report, that would be the commitment that would end poverty among senior citizens. 
 
Let it be perfectly clear that is no facile commitment. I estimated, when I introduced this Resolution, that it 
would cost $75 million annually. Since then I have seen reports of more detailed studies of estimating the 
cost which put the cost to $82 million as the annual cost of implementing this particular proposal, ignoring 
any potential federal cost-sharing. Eighty two million dollars is undeniably a large amount of money, but the 
question has to be asked: Are we serious about ending the problem? If we are serious surely the expenditure 
of $82 million on this particular program will be one of the better ways that affluent Saskatchewan of 1974, 
which the Minister of Finance is so 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2810 

keen to talk abut, can spend some of the ill-begotten wealth in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few concluding remarks I shall take my seat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
MR. D.L. FARIS (Arm River) moved second reading of Bill No. 125 — An Act to amend The Liquor 
Licensing Act, (No. 2). 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of this Bill which will have the effect of raising the legal 
drinking age from the present 18 to 19. I don't have to remind the Members of the House that this age has 
been lowered right across Canada in the last five years, either to 18 or to 19. 
 
I shall be presenting in my speech some data which I think is pretty significant in indicating that this has 
been part of an increasing problem amongst young people with alcohol. Those who read Time Magazine will 
be aware that it had just recently a cover story on alcoholism and if you turn back in that article you find that 
one of the major thrusts of the article was that a great deal of this increase in the problem was among young 
people. 
 
There is no doubt there are a great many pressures, a great many factors in our society that lead to this 
increasing problem. I certainly would not hold that changing this one aspect of the law, or of government 
policy, would in fact solve the problem. That would not happen, that would be like just trying to contain a 
balloon by sticking your finger into it. It would simply pop out at another point. 
 
I think this is one of the factors which affects the behavior of young people, I think that it is a matter which 
deserves at the very least, the serious consideration of all the Members of this House. I certainly consider this 
a matter of individual conscience, a matter of free vote. If one is to study the policies of governments across 
Canada, all of the various provinces, all of the various parties, one could not distinguish between them in 
regard to the way in which they handle these matters. 
 
Now more directly in regard to the matter of raising the age to 19, there are, in fact, regrettably few studies of 
the effect of changes in the legal drinking age, but what studies have been done are turning up with what are 
in my opinion, alarming results. 
 
For example the study of Metro Toronto showed a 900 per cent increase in impaired driving charges laid 
against 18 to 20 year olds from 1970 to 1972, just two years. The important fact is that the legal drinking age 
in Ontario was 21 in 1970. It was lowered to 18 in the middle of 1971. It was 18 for all of 1972. Here are the 
figures for Metro Toronto, the 18 to 20 year old age group, impaired driving charges: 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2811 

In 1970 there were 48; in the second half of 1971 there were 259; in 1972 there were 457. 
 
Taking the same time period, the same ago group for personal injury accidents, in 1970 there were 179; in 
the second half of 1971 - 272; in 1972 it had increased 425. 
 
Another study among drivers killed in the age group 15 to 19 in Alberta and Ontario, one year before and 
one year after legislation of lowering the drinking age to 18, revealed the following increases: In Ontario in 
1970 there were 86 deaths; 38 of them on testing proved to be positive in regard to alcohol content in the 
blood; in 1972 the number of deaths had increased to 181, 85 of them showed a positive alcohol content. The 
absolute increase was 95 deaths and 110 per cent increase. The increases in regard to positive blood alcohol 
content was 47 deaths — 124 per cent increase. 
 
For Alberta, the figures in 1970 were 27 deaths, 13 of them showing a positive reading; in 1972 it had 
increased to 43 with 22 with a positive reading — the increase was 16 over that two-year period, a 60 per 
cent increase in deaths; nine additional positive deaths were found and that is a 70 per cent increase. 
 
Unfortunately, I have not been able to gather all the information that I would have liked to in regard to 
Saskatchewan. But all indications are that the same thing has happened in Saskatchewan as has happened in 
Alberta and Ontario. The only difference may lie in the fact that instead of lowering the drinking age from 21 
to 18 in one year, Saskatchewan did it in two stages, the age was lowered to 19 in 1971 and to 18 in 1972. 
The total number of convictions under drinking-driving sections of The Criminal Code, that is Sections 222, 
223 and 224, the .08 legislation, the refusal to take the breath test in the impaired driving section, increased 
as follows: from 1970 to 1973 for the 16 to 24 year old age group — in 1970 there were 925 convictions; in 
1971 there was 1,863; in 1972 there was some levelling off at 2,020; in 19723 it increased to 2,901. The 
increase is 214 per cent over three years. 
 
But one important point of interest is the increase of 1,000 convictions when the age was lowered to 19 and 
apparently levelled out the next year, at that same high level, but only to be matched by another increase of 
approximately 1,000 convictions in the year following the age being lowered to 18. It may be asked whether 
the increased convictions were not the result of increased enforcement. 
 
There has, indeed, been increased enforcement but there is no reason to believe that it has not been uniform 
across age levels. It is therefore significant that while the 16 to 24 year-old age group, who represented 25 
per cent of convictions in 1970, this group had 40 per cent of total convictions in 1973. This is a rate of 
increase in convictions three and a half times that of other age groups. 
 
Unfortunately, the information was not available, and is not yet available, to break this down into the 16 to 
18 year-old age group or those other classifications below 20, but I am sure that this material will break 
down exactly as it has in the other provinces, that is that those earlier age groups represent the larger 
increase. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2812 

These increased drinking-driving conviction figures are undoubtedly reflected in increased deaths in these 
younger age groups. For example, the 1972 Saskatchewan study reveals that over 70 per cent of 15 to 19 
year olds tested after being killed in traffic accidents had been drinking. This compares to some 40 per cent 
of older age groups, in fact, most of the older age groups, are somewhere around 33 per cent. 
 
These general statistics reflect the same situation that I observed in my constituency. Chief Gray, the Police 
Chief in Davidson provided me with information concerning drinking driving charges against people under 
the age of 21 for the past ten years in the town of Davidson. In the seven years from 1965 to 1971 there were 
only three convictions in this category. In the two years, 1972, 1973, there have been ten convictions. In 
1973 four of those convicted were sixteen years old. The first time in the last ten years that any sixteen year 
old was convicted in these charges. These examples bear out the truth that when you lower the legal drinking 
age you also lower apparently the illegal drinking age. This is most dramatically testified to by members of 
Alcoholics Anonymous and workers at alcohol rehabilitation centres who see the dramatic increase in the 
flow of young alcoholics. For example, the director of the Nova Scotia Alcoholism Commission reports only 
two under 20 years olds admitted to rehabilitation centres in 1970 when the legal age was 21. In 1971 the age 
went down to 19. By 1972 the number of under 20 year olds admitted was 20, an increase from 2 to 20 in 
two years. The same sort of thing is observed to be happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
My personal preference would be to take the legal drinking age back to 21 but these Bills would only take it 
back to 19. The problem is that in the last five years the legal drinking age has been lowered from 19 to 18 in 
every province in Canada and in most of the states in the United States. My position is that if it must be 18 or 
19, it would be better to be 19. We should then work for a national drinking age of at least 19, or in my 
opinion, even hopefully of 21. One of the problems which we would face, one of the influences I am sure in 
lowering it from 19 to 18 was that the bordering provinces of Alberta and Manitoba both have their ages at 
18. As long as this kind of problem exists there is going to be pressure on politicians to reach the lowest 
common denominator. 
 
If even an age level of 19 causes problems then what do I see to be the advantages of raising the age level 
from 18 to 19. I have spoken to a large number of parents, teachers and school principals and law 
enforcement officers about this. The vast majority of those to whom I have spoken support this one year age 
increase. They agree that while there are very few 19 year olds in high school, there are a great many 18 year 
olds. This means that in their experience, they have in this province had the unique experience of actually 
having both age levels and that they are having more problems controlling alcohol at school dances. This 
means that in the rural communities which I represent, in a good many of them the 18 year olds visit the 
beverage room at noon hour and then come back to school under the influence. It means that because 18 year 
olds, the Grade Twelves, associate and identify with those in younger grades that they are available to pull 
booze more easily for their younger friends. It is simply a fact that sociologically, certainly in the rural areas 
that I represent, that 19 year olds 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2813 

are very often not as numerously present in the community but if they are, they tend to associate more with 
university or with working people, while 18 year olds are part of the high school set. In fact they are a very 
important part of the high school set because as I recall when I went to high school that when we were in the 
earlier grades we looked up very much to what the Grade Twelves were doing and were very anxious to 
participate with them in their activities. 
 
Lowering the age to 18 has had the effect of greatly increasing, in my view, the amount of drinking among 
even thirteen or fourteen year olds. And I think that when the Members of the House, the most of them, look 
back to their own experience, certainly mine was that 20 years ago when I went to high school most of us 
were occasionally drinking at perhaps as early at thirteen or fourteen, certainly by the time we were in Grade 
Twelve, which would be 16 or 17 years of age. But what apparently is happening even with this age group 
when they have the legal drinking right is that they continue their illegal drinking customs and add on to 
them their legal drinking customs. This is what many parents observe to be happening, this is what parents 
and school teachers tell me, and what law enforcement officers tell me. 
 
Now I don't believe that raising the drinking age by this one year is going to bring about any magical 
solution. There may be people who hold that view but I think that they are in a position where they are 
unduly isolating this one element and blaming it for a great massive problem that exists throughout our 
society. I believe, as I have said before many times and many places that the general availability of cheap 
booze, the decline in our society of family and spiritual values, the lack of an honest drug education 
approach to alcohol, the poor example given young people by many adults, that they are all part of the 
increasing problem in our society. I believe that we through legislation and through government programs do 
in fact have a great deal of power to influence these trends. I do not believe that governments are not helpless 
at the hands of these influences or trends in our society. I think we have the power to reverse some of the 
increasing damage done to the youth of our society. We get very upset when flood waters endanger our 
homes but we seem to be willing to sit by when the increasing flood of alcohol endangers our children. It 
doesn't make any sense to me and I think while this is a rather small step I think it is a step in the right 
direction. 
 
Therefore, I am pleased to move this Bill for second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO BROWNIES 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to other Members of this House, 30 young ladies ages seven to ten years who are members of 
the Lakeview School Brownies. They are sitting in the Speaker's Gallery and they are led here today, I am 
advised, by Mrs. Gartner, Mrs. Humbert and Mrs. McNeill. I hope they will find their visit to the Legislature 
enjoyable and entertaining and I hope to see them before they leave. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2814 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 125. 
 
MR. A.W. ENGEL (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — I am pleased to take part in this debate today, in Bill 125 
that was moved by the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris). 
 
The reasons why this Member has moved and introduced this Bill are reasons that I agree with. I am 
disturbed, Mr. Speaker, by the alarming rate and the increase in the misuse of alcohol in our day and age. 
The Member mentioned an article in 'Time' of April 29th. This article outlines and talks about some of the 
reasons for the increase in abuse of alcohol, particularly United States. 
 
The key reason for this excessive abuse and increasing misuse of alcohol by young people basically stems 
from the reasons that the Member for Arm River mentioned, the decline of family and spiritual values, and 
the lack of a good education program on the abuse of drugs. 
 
Some of the figures he cited though, I would question, especially where there is an increase in the death rate. 
The percentage of the vehicle accidents where alcohol was involved has increased accordingly. In Ontario 
for example there were 85 deaths where alcohol was involved out of 181. Eighty-five fatalities out of 181 
were positively identified as being under the influence which is less than half. Actually in Saskatchewan here 
I found that the death rate was much more than half. This article on alcoholism cites two examples and I just 
want to read from it. The writer says: 
 

Yet today as has been throughout history, alcohol is troubling mankind for almost in every 
society there are those who cannot enjoy alcohol without becoming enslaved. 

 
I'd like to underline that aspect of it. 
 

Excessive drinking is taking a disturbing new turn and affecting new kinds of victims. 
 
Then it goes on: 
 

On a New York subway a 15 year old was holding his books in one hand and a brown paper 
bag containing a bottle of beer in the other. He takes a swig and then passes bag and bottle to 
a classmate. 

 
Then the writer talks about San Francisco: 
 

Several high school freshmen show up for a class drunk every morning, while others sneak 
off for a nip or two of whisky during the lunch recess. 

 
The problem, as the Member for Arm River outlined, I agree with, but I'm not so sure if he's nailed down the 
solution. This article goes on to talk about other areas that I wanted to refer to. The National Institute of 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism gathered some facts about alcohol abuse. The writer says they are depressing 
as well as impressive. After heart disease and cancer, alcoholism is the country's biggest health problem. I 
don't think that one year's difference in the age group related to the biggest health problem would have much 
effect if it were 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2815 

just that we raised it by one year. 
 
In half of all the murders in the United States, it was established that the aggressors or victims had been 
drinking. A fourth of all suicides can be related to drinking. People who abuse alcohol are seven times more 
likely to be separated or divorced among the general population. At least half of each year's automobile 
deaths and half of the million major injuries suffering in automobile accidents can be traced directly to 
drivers or pedestrians under the influence and there they rate the influence as .1 per cent rather than like we 
do here, .08. 
 
And here comes the serious part of it, Mr. Speaker. Parents are seemingly relatively unconcerned about their 
children drinking. In fact, children who drink are often simply following the example set by their fathers and 
mothers. And I think that here's where we as parents really have a responsibility. When we lowered the age 
to 18 I stood in my place here and indicated that for my family's sake we could have taken the age limit right 
off and it wouldn't have made any difference, I have that kind of confidence in the training that I give my 
own family, that they will properly know how to use alcohol. 
 
Many parents are really concerned and I run into this so often with relatives I have in California, in southern 
California. If they hear of a young person involved in hard drugs or marijuana they really create a scene, but 
when this same young person comes home drunk they'll simply put him to bed. I think this is a very serious 
problem and this is the reason why we need some alcohol education and need some concern and control. 
 
Another reason I would like to develop, Mr. Speaker, is the social custom in our society. In our crazy value 
system that we have established, it's a matter of determining how masculine a person is by how much alcohol 
that young person can hold. They somehow assume this to be a sign of strength. In other countries, in Italy or 
Israel for example, drinking is a social custom and why is there so little alcoholism involved as far as Israel 
or Italy are concerned? I think there that the use of an alcoholic beverage is compared to a happy occasion 
rather than being the occasion itself, like we have developed here in Saskatchewan and North America in 
particular. 
 
I believe we need to combat the use of alcohol and if I'd want to crown my term as a Member of this 
Legislature with any thing that would be a number one accomplishment it would be that of reducing the 
number of young people who are involved in excessive use of alcohol. We can do this through research, 
through education and through funding of local programs. 
 
There is one more mention made in this article in 'Time' as far as alcoholism is concerned and that refers to a 
man I met last year when I was at the Prayer Breakfast in Washington, Senator Hughes. Senator Hughes 
himself is a person who is a rehabilitated alcoholic and he more than anyone else, I believe, is responsible for 
this turn about of the attitude that they have in Washington towards alcoholism. He said he is pleased with 
the tax dollars that are used in the fight against alcoholism and that the public is finally becoming aware that 
alcoholism is a treatable condition, and that two-thirds of those victims who are dedicated to help themselves 
can recover from this condition. But he says the problem is growing on us. 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2816 

I could sum it up, Mr. Speaker, by saying there are seven basic assumptions. 
 
1. It is always difficult to place an objective standard on maturity. Age is a poor criterion. But unfortunately 
it is the only suitable one we have available for this purpose. 
 
2. Government cannot legislate morality. But at the same time this does not absolve us of a responsibility to 
set regulations and guidelines. And it does not absolve us of the responsibility as far as making a moral 
excuse is concerned. 
 
3. We have to respect the rights of individuals, and how these rights should be exercised. We should also 
stipulate what these rights are and under what conditions we exercise these rights. 
 
4. Not all 18 year olds are abusing their privilege as far as excessive consumption of alcohol is concerned. I 
was privileged to be at two different graduations this past weekend, Mr. Speaker. At the one graduation 
prom and at the banquet I was at, I would wager that only two of those grads weren't completely inebriated 
by alcohol, two out of a class of 23. The second graduation I was at was of 100 grads. This was at the 
Briercrest Bible Institute. I would wager that there wasn't one who touched any alcohol after that graduation. 
This is the difference education can make in purpose and personal commitments. 
 
5. The education system has not accepted the challenge to create an awareness of the problem related to 
alcohol and alcoholism. 
 
6. The age of majority — 18 — if we maintain this age of majority it's going to be very difficult to make an 
exception for the use of alcohol. We tell an 18 year old, you are old enough to choose a life partner. You are 
old enough to make a commitment for life or to sign contracts that can be held against you. You are old 
enough for criminal decisions of all kinds and yet you are not old enough to take a drink. I don't think that 
this kind of an assumption can be overlooked. 
 
7. I have already referred to this one a little bit and that is a verse from Scripture: 
 

You train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old (or if you translate that word 
from the original Greek — when he is grown) he will not depart from it. 
 

I contacted some individuals regarding the stand I should take as far as this Bill is concerned. I felt that if 
there is any chance at all that we would be doing some good it would be worth supporting. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, I can properly say that I would support any program that I feel would be one that would be of 
benefit to our young people. 
 
A former pastor of mine who is a counsellor in education today, a well accepted person and spokesman in 
Mennonite circles told me, "Al, there is no point in going against the stream when you are working with 
young people." He says, "You might enhance your popularity but you are not going to stop young people as 
far as consuming alcohol is concerned by applying coercion." 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2817 

An RCMP Staff Sergeant is a good friend of mine, he told me that there were more offences when the age 
was 19 than there are now as far as young people being charged with liquor in cars is concerned. He cited 
two examples of two locations he was at. He argued that the 18 and 19 year olds are a natural group that 
group themselves together. When the 19 year olds were allowed to go into licensed beverage rooms and the 
18 year olds weren't, the 18 year olds tried to sneak in and they were caught and the charges were much more 
prominent then, than they are today. He argues that the enforcement is less of a problem today than it was 
when the age was at 19 because of this natural grouping. 
 
A high school principal who is very highly respected in my constituency told me that the problem in the last 
two years in his school is much less with alcohol being brought to school than it was before. He argues that 
if you tell an 18 year old he can't do a certain thing, that is when he is going to prove to you he can. I think 
this is one of the reasons why I can't support raising it just one year. 
 
If it would help to raise it for one year, then I would be ready to add quite a few years there and say that, 
maybe we should raise this to the retirement age of 65. If it is going to help for one it would surely help 
them, because then we would get at the root of the cause and as far as the parents are concerned. 
 
I think besides the education program that I suggested and besides the restraints we can place on our young 
people, I think one of the key solutions would be that if we change, I would like to see this Act amended to 
change the regulations that every bar and place that sells liquor for consumption, should have a breathalizer 
installed in that bar. Then I would like to see it made illegal to sell liquor to anyone who exceeds .06 alcohol 
content. This would be getting at the real problems. I think if somebody wants to drown his sorrows and get 
away from it all with a good drunk, he should do it at home, where he isn't a nuisance to society. There are 
many other things that could be suggested, Mr. Speaker. But I cannot support this idea of just raising it one 
year. I don't think backing our young people to the wall and telling them we have no confidence in them is 
the answer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. BOLDT (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say few words on this Bill. 
 
I am at a loss as to the Member who just sat down, I thought he said at the beginning that he supported the 
Bill and when he sat down he did not support the Bill. I think I understood him right. When I listened to the 
speaker who just sat down, several years ago, I remember him saying and in Committee I debated with him 
and I told him at that time that I wasn't worried about his family and that he need not be worried about mine. 
I am worried about the families where the parents don't care. There are far more families where parents don't 
care than those that do care. 
 
I support the principle of the Bill, I don't support the age. It was wrong and I said so in 1969, to reduce the 
age 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2818 

from 21 to 19 and it was wrong to reduce from 19 to 18. 
 
We at that time — I am not quite sure whether we had a free vote at that time but usually those votes are free 
votes — and I remember I chastised speakers on both sides of the House. I remember two years ago how 
speaker after speaker, Government and Opposition stood up and said, oh, we have confidence in the young 
people. They have the education. We now fly the Boeing 747, and we fly to the moon. But now they sing a 
different tune. I told them at that time, and experience tells them that it was wrong to reduce the age to 18. 
There is no argument that any politician can use that the legal age for drinking should be 18. To argue that 
we can go and fight or sign a contract is no argument whatsoever. I said in the debate in 1970, that if Nixon 
conscripted or Johnson or Kennedy whoever the President of the United States was at that time, if he would 
have conscripted the 45 year olds, there would have been no war in Viet Nam because they just wouldn't be 
foolish enough to go. But the 18 year olds are very easy fodder. They can be picked up, they have no 
responsibility, you pick them out of the schools, they just graduate out of high school, you can put them in 
the army, he is the easiest individual to pick up. Nobody has proven to me that an 18 year old is old enough 
to fight. I say he isn't. If wars were based on 45 year olds, I don't think there would be any wars. That is the 
argument. 
 
Now the Highway Traffic Safety Committee has heard many briefs and most of them have been confronted 
with liquor. I remember the former fire chief of Saskatoon, Chief Lennan. He brought in an oral brief, and I 
am quite sure he wouldn't mind me stating this. He recommended that the Government rescind the Bill and 
bring the age back to 18. I congratulated him. He was the only supporter that I ever ran across who would 
agree with me that we should not have reduced the age to 18. He made this statement: 
 

If I was a Member of a political party and we brought in legislation that would reduce the age 
from 19 to 18 I would resign from that political party. 

 
I remember the Chairman of our Committee, Mr. Thibault, he asked us to comment on it and I wasn't to be 
quiet on that one. I told Mr. Lennan, I know that he is a Member of the Conservative Party, that there would 
be no party in Canada for him to support if he didn't believe in 18 year olds drinking. Because the 
Conservatives in Ontario have it at the 18 year old level, the Tories in Alberta at that time, this was last 
summer, Lougheed said that he was going to review all the liquor laws and make them freer. 
 
What surprises me most of all is, in Alberta where you had the Premier, being a member of the clergy for 
many years, 30 years at least, the liquor laws were much more liberal than in CCF Saskatchewan. I know that 
the NDP and the Liberal Government in 1965 or 1964, were confronted with our young people, saying, 
"Well, we've got it from Manning, in Alberta, why shouldn't we have it here?" I took this up with Premier 
Strom in Australia when I had dinner with him and I said that I couldn't for the love of money see why you 
have a member of the clergy, the head of the government, throwing the liquor laws wide open to the 18 year 
olds. 
 
You know, you can't preach salvation on one side and give 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 

 
2819 

them liquor on the other side. I was young, and if my parents hadn't taken me to church, I would never have 
darkened the door of a church. I am sure everyone in this Assembly here would say the same thing. 
 
The real responsibility must be the home. I have always said this. When the Highway Safety Committee was 
in Arizona, we had a fellow there from the Committee, he was a Reverend, I forget the name, he was being 
interviewed by the Committee, a Reverend from Detroit, he was then in a hospital rehabilitating the 
alcoholics. He gave us a really good message on alcoholic rehabilitation. I asked him, do you believe in 
liquor — do you drink? Oh, yes, he said, I think liquor is a tremendous thing in society. It is a real booster 
for society. Well, I want to tell my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Faris) that you convert the clergy first, 
get them straightened out first because you are not going to have the home, the church and the government 
convinced that liquor should be done away with when we don't set the example. Number one is the home. I 
think if you should go around and poll all the clergy, both Protestant and Catholic, I jut wonder how many 
are sipping away at beer and liquor today. How often have the clergy today talked about the alcohol problem. 
Oh, they just glance over it, it is none of their business, it is a social thing. If you talk about it the pews will 
be empty. So they don't talk about it. I don't have to talk about your church or somebody else's, I can talk 
about mine. Years and years ago many of our homes in my Conference wouldn't have liquor in their homes. 
Today, I can't estimate, but if somebody said to me 75 per cent of them have, I wouldn't argue against it. 
 
The more affluent we are, the more we are going along with the things of the world. Liquor has never done 
anybody any good. At least I don't think so. 
 
It has wrecked many, many homes, it has killed many an individual. We, as the government, have to admit 
that the homes have failed, the schools have failed, the churches have failed. So now the Government has to 
act. Why should we be the last ones to act? But we are forced to act. If we don't act we are going to be in real 
trouble. 
 
The Member for Notukeu-Willow Bunch (Mr. Engel) who just sat down — when we debated to lower the 
legal age — the Coming of Age Act from 19 to 18, I remember a meeting in Saskatoon at an MCC sale, a 
good number of the Mennonite people from that area came to me and the first thing they said, we want to 
congratulate you on the stand you took. I said don't congratulate me, you go and have a talk with your 
Member and try to get him convinced, he sits on that side of the House, he is with the Government. 
 
Apparently they have gotten through to him. We need more Members in this Legislature who take it more 
seriously. But I have said it privately and I have said it in the House, if you associate alcohol with the vote, 
you will never solve it. If you identify the Indian problem with the vote, how it is going to affect the turnout 
at the election, you will never solve the Indian problem. If you identify the welfare problem with how these 
people are going to vote, you are never going to solve the welfare problem in this province. 
 
I have been in the government and I know these considerations 
 



 
April 30, 1974 

 
2820 

were given by the Liberal Government, these considerations are given by your Government, and it is wrong, 
absolutely wrong. You will not solve the alcohol problem if you are going to look at votes. 
 
Don't think about how the 16 year olds are going to vote. I told former Fire Chief Lennan that if a 
government is really going to be in trouble and if it happened to be the Liberal government, now it happened 
to be the NDP, if you would be in real trouble, if you consider yourself in real trouble at the next election, 
which could be a year or two years from now, you might consider lowering it to 17 or 16. That is wrong, 
absolutely wrong. It was wrong in 1970, I took that stand and I am not ashamed of it. It was wrong when you 
formed the Government and reduced it to 18. I can guarantee you that all the consideration it was given, in 
both instances it was mainly the vote. That is wrong. 
 
I am sure there are other Members on this side of the House who would like to speak on it. I should like to 
have more time to look at the remarks made by the Member for Arm River. 
 
I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:32 o’clock p.m. 
 


