






















































Hansard: April 25, 1974


2657 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

58th Day 
Thursday, April 25, 1974. 

 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

NEW PAGE 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before I call Orders of the Day I would just like to advise the Members of the 
Legislative Assembly that Dorothy Funk will be a Page during the remainder of the present Session. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

DELTA HOLDINGS 
 
MR. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Housing and Housing Authority. Reports are now out that Delta Holdings are in serious 
financial difficulty. There are liens of some $280,000, there is a lien even by one of the partners against his 
own company and it appears that there is a $675,000 loan from the Prince Albert Credit Union which was 
guaranteed by the Government, by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation as well as $145,000 directly from 
the Housing Corporation. I would like to ask the Minister what action is he going to take in view of these 
unforseen or very difficult circumstances? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Co-operatives): — Well, Mr. Speaker, at this time I have not been advised 
by Delta Holdings that they have gone broke as the Member indicates. There is one erroneous point made in 
the article in which I think you are referring to and that is the guarantee by the Government of Saskatchewan 
on the loan which the Prince Albert Credit Union made for $675,000. That is inaccurate, we do not have any 
guarantee whatsoever. We did however approve a loan to them for 30 houses for $145,000 for which we 
have advanced $107,000. That we have by way of a second mortgage on the houses. We also have a second 
mortgage placed on the blocks. With regard to the apartments we have absolutely no control over those 
apartments, we have no money invested and we have no guarantees. 
 
MR. GUY: — Don't you think, Mr. Minister, that in view of the fact that it was a contract with one of the 
Government agencies that you had better look into the situation and take some action before it gets too late? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just don't think there is any real necessity of looking into it because of 
the fact that we do have our money well secured by way of mortgage on 30 houses, of which we only have 
$107,000 invested. We also have a second 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2658 

mortgage on the apartments. Certainly there is no possible way of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
particularly the Housing Corporation getting into any problems financially. So really I don't see any point in 
me going out and harassing these people for what may or may not be the truth. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to make a few comments — I had a 
question this morning but once again the Minister is not in the House. But I should like to point out to the 
Members and ask the deputy leader if he would like to pass on to his colleagues that if he wants this House 
to proceed that it is important that some of the issues of the day are asked at Question Period and that an 
effort by the Government, the front benches that they attempt to attend the Question Period in this House in 
the morning. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, let me just make a response to this question. I 
believe that the attendance, whether it has been good or bad, is about as normal as it has been when the 
House was starting at 2:30. All that I can say is that certainly my colleagues, as the Member will appreciate 
himself as the former Minister, that this is the first priority of the House but there are many demands on their 
time, floods, all sorts of problems of that nature. For example there is an External Affairs delegation in from 
the Federal Government and the Premier and two or three Ministers are speaking to them. These are the 
types of things for which we all have responsibilities, including those to the Members of the Opposition. So, 
as I say, we intend to be here as best as we can and as we have in the past. 
 

MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits further estimates of certain sums required for the 
services for the 12 months ending March 31st, 1975 and recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance): — I move, seconded by my colleague, the Hon. Mr. Cody: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly His Honour's Message and the further Estimates be referred to 
the Committee of Finance. 

 
MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Before leave is granted, may I be permitted a question of the Minister? Is 
this a fourth, third of the appropriation that we are seeking . . . 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No. 
 
MR. McISAAC: — Could you give us some explanation of what the supplementaries are again? 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2659 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the further Estimate is required for the April and July period payments 
estimated at $5,970,000 and $3,740,000 respectively under the nine month interim program designed to 
stabilize returns to hog producers. I don't know whether you want any further information in respect to that. 
 
There is a second item, supplemental compensation re the aircraft accident near Cumberland House. An 
amount of $90,000 is required for the widows of Lyle Deschambeault and Clifford Stanley to increase the 
compensation in each instance to $50,000. There might be a word of explanation there. Under the 
unscheduled aircraft regulations the other people killed in that accident were entitled under the regulations to 
$50,000 compensation in each case except the widows of Clifford Stanley and Lyle Deschambeault, who 
were not employees of the Government. They were entitled to $5,000 under those regulations and the 
Government decided to make a special payment of $45,000 in each of those cases to make them all equal. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 120 — An Act to 
establish The Saskatchewan Educational Communications Corporation. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Educational Communications Corporation is a major step forward 
for this province. It is an attempt to develop modern communications technology for the benefit of 
education. 
 
The impact, Mr. Speaker, of the Saskatchewan Education Communications Corporation or SaskMedia as we 
will call it, will be felt in the regular school system and it will be felt in the growing field of adult education. 
 
Canadians use communications more than any other nation this size — no doubt because of our very 
scattered population. Communications networks are vital to business, government, to recreation and, of 
course, to culture. But up to the present, we have not used communications extensively for the benefit of 
education. 
 
Saskatchewan's population, Mr. Speaker, is scattered and this poses a very serious problem in operating 
schools. A strong communications back-up is vital, and this is essentially what SaskMedia is designed to do. 
 
As an integrated educational communications vehicle, SaskMedia will use all the media, from print to film 
video-tape, radio and television. It will engage in the acquisition or production of educational material in all 
these media, and it will operate and co-ordinate distribution. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the first and most obvious question is: Why create a new corporation to do this? Could it 
not be done by a branch of the Department of Education or by the Department of Continuing Education. The 
answer has three parts. 
 
The single most important reason for creating this SaskMedia 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2660 

Corporation is to enable Saskatchewan to use the broadcast media — radio and television — for educational 
purposes, without incurring enormous costs. Until two years ago, educational communication on the 
airwaves were held up by the split in constitutional responsibilities between Ottawa and the provinces. 
Ottawa had control of communications; the provinces were responsible for education. It was not possible for 
a province to hold a federal broadcasting licence. 
 
In July 1972 the Federal Cabinet issued an Order-in-Council to permit independent provincial corporations 
to hold broadcasting licences. Now SaskMedia, as an independent provincial corporation, is the only agency 
which will be eligible to hold a broadcast licence. Under the Federal Cabinet's rules, we have no choice but 
to establish a separate agency if we want to make use of the airwaves, that is radio and television, for 
education. 
 
There is, of course, one other alternative. The province could buy time on existing private radio and 
television stations to broadcast school and adult education programs. But this would be enormously 
expensive. And, in addition, it would be inflexible and it would be clumsy because listeners would have to 
adapt their schedules to the broadcast, rather than the broadcast acting as an aid to individual learning. For 
these reasons, this alternative has been rejected. 
 
A second important reason for the corporation is the need to extend the scope of adult education. Adult 
education falls under the Department of Continuing Education but it also involves other agencies, and the 
only workable way of co-ordinating efforts in communications is under a structure designed to do the job. 
 
SaskMedia will play a basic and vital role in adult education and most important in the community college 
programs. The electronic media can serve to bring educational material direct to the user, and this will be 
especially important in serving our small communities and in serving our rural areas. Back-up and extension 
of college programs is a prime reason for establishing this corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a third reason for creating SaskMedia is to rationalize and co-ordinate provincial government 
work in education in the broadest sense. Various departments are involved in public education. For example, 
the Department of Health is currently carrying out an education program on venereal disease, it is planning 
another program in the area of alcohol. The Department of Social Services is involved in day care 
development. The Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development has various educational 
needs. All of these could be served by SaskMedia's capacity to bring together production resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskMedia will eventually encompass many of the functions of the Provincial Library, in 
particular, those aspects dealing with distribution. At the same time, we recognize that not all aspects of 
library service are educational, so incorporation of the Library into a department would simply not be 
suitable. 
 
In summary, then, an independent corporation, rather than a new branch of the Department of Education or 
Continuing Education is necessary to meet Federal Cabinet requirements. It is 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2661 

desirable to help co-ordinate provincial government efforts in adult education, to help expand education 
services to the population over 21, to accommodate the various agencies that will deal with SaskMedia for 
their communications' needs. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of these are technical reasons, these are administrative matters. There is a much more 
compelling argument for SaskMedia and that is the need to serve small schools in small centres and provide 
a base they need to survive. Mr. Speaker, in this province we have many small schools with relatively low 
enrolments per grade. I want to assure this Assembly and I want to assure the people of this province that 
small schools will continue to play a major role in delivering education in the future in Saskatchewan. Our 
Government has taken several steps in fact to make this possible. 
 
The first thing I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is to remind the Members in this House what we had to do when 
we came into office with respect to education. It is always difficult to remind the Members opposite because 
they are so anxious to forget. The first thing we had to do upon coming into office was rid Saskatchewan of 
the Liberal attitude to education. When the Liberal Party was in office, Mr. Speaker, education was talked of 
in terms of 'frills'. It was regarded as an area of extravagance. The Liberal approach to education treated it as 
an expense, a drain on the resources of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have changed that attitude. No longer do public officials in the Government attack 
education. New Democrats regard education as an investment, yes, a very good investment. In three years the 
New Democratic Government has raised provincial grants over 55 per cent. We have abolished provincial 
control of school board expenditures. Most important, Mr. Speaker, we have abolished the pupil-teacher 
ratio and given school boards their grants on a per pupil basis, with no strings attached. 
 
These steps, Mr. Speaker, were necessary to clean up what was left after seven years of Liberal Government. 
But this year, Mr. Speaker, we have gone further, with two new factors built into the grants to help small 
schools in areas where the population is scattered, or where the enrolment has dropped sharply, for 1974 an 
extra $2.6 million will be paid to help keep our small schools in the province operating. 
 
Money is not the only problem for education in small communities, Mr. Speaker. School programs are 
becoming more complex and they often demand specialists to teach them. A small school with a small 
enrolment cannot specialize; it must employ general teachers, teachers who can cover a variety of subject. 
The extra learning resources must be provided some way rather than through a large staff component. We 
believe, Mr. Speaker, SaskMedia can fill the gap and help the small school fill the gap and help the small 
schools to provide high quality education by organizing modern technology to deliver at least some added 
resources. 
 
Now the mention of educational communications often brings on visions of electronic gadgets and wired 
cities and space age miracles. I had an opportunity last summer to visit Ontario, and the Ontario experience 
with its educational communications authority should teach us not to be hypnotized by the complexity of it 
all. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2662 

Mr. Speaker, educators must control the technology they use and not vice versa. Our objective in SaskMedia 
is to make it a shirt sleeve corporation with practical objectives. Its goal will be to put more learning 
resources at the finger tips of the classroom teacher. 
 
The initial job of SaskMedia will be to strengthen basic resources in the basic media. Print is the largest 
medium in education and let's be honest, it will continue to be the largest. SaskMedia will be heavily 
involved in beefing our material in print. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, the Government invested over $600,000 in special grants to pay for video-tape 
machines in the schools. This equipment is now in place, and SaskMedia will begin the task of acquiring, of 
producing cassette material for those machines. 
 
Film resources also need strengthening, and SaskMedia will be empowered to commission production of 
films and film strips. We hope to use Saskatchewan producers. We hope to use local people under contract 
in the film area. The establishment of the corporation should provide a stimulus to the provincial film 
industry. It will help develop our own talent here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskMedia will not be solely a producer of new resource material. In fact, it is intended that 
useful material available elsewhere will be brought to Saskatchewan by the corporation, which would act as 
a clearing house. Only where existing materials are deficient or where unique locally-oriented material is 
needed will production be undertaken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cable television offers a large potential for adult education since it reaches into every home, 
and because, in addition to carrying television channels, it can also carry FM radio signals. SaskMedia may 
involve itself, and I say may involve itself, in FM radio. We need to research this FM cable carried by the 
airwaves and via cable, providing educational input, probably in association with local school authorities and 
of course, with community colleges. 
 
The corporation's structure is modelled on the Alberta Educational Communications Corporation, which was 
established in 1973. Policy guidelines will be set by an Educational Communications Authority, with 
probably the Minister responsible for communications, the Minister of Education and the Minister of 
Continuing Education. The SaskMedia Corporation will be the operational agency, responsible for acquiring, 
producing and distributing educational materials. 
 
As an independent corporation within the Federal Cabinet regulations, SaskMedia will have a board of 
directors, with minority government representation. Other directors will be named to include educational 
agencies and interests. The board's job will be to run SaskMedia in accordance with policy set by the 
Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this facet of SaskMedia stands in sharp contrast to a proposal made in 1970, and I repeat 1970, 
to set up a network of 15 educational television broadcast stations. Mr. Speaker, this proposal would have 
cost $18 million just to set up, plus millions of dollars more every year thereafter to 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2663 

operate. And what is significant, Mr. Speaker, it would have served the cities first and the rural areas last. It 
would have been inflexible and rigid and unable to adapt to new needs. 
 
This plan, Mr. Speaker, was prepared by the Liberal Government. Fortunately, and I say fortunately, they did 
not proceed with it, and for that small mercy we should be truly grateful, but as I mentioned a short time ago, 
the only reasons for not proceeding, was their tight-fisted attitude toward education. But from what I can 
gather, the Liberals were dazzled and they were seduced by technology; if they had not been led by anyone 
except Ross Thatcher, Saskatchewan today would have been down the road with a white elephant in 
educational television. 
 
When our Government took office in 1971 we scrapped the Liberal plans for a broadcast network, just as we 
scrapped the Liberal plans to start expensive new community colleges in the cities and ignoring the needs of 
the rural people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Opposition has attacked this approach. They say it is going to be creating a 
government propaganda agency. I want to remind the Members opposite that the Liberal Government in 
Quebec has its own communications system, and it operates a radio station — Radio Quebec — and it has 
done so for several years. I want to remind the Members opposite the Conservative Government in Ontario 
for ten years has run a full-scale television station in Toronto, and they are right now planning to expand to 
other cities, that Ontario has the same system that the Liberal Government was planning to implement here 
in Saskatchewan — a system which would have been much more expensive than anything that can be 
envisaged by SaskMedia. 
 
That SaskMedia Corporation is, in fact, modelled on an educational communications corporation set up in 
Alberta one year ago. The organizational structure is almost identical to Alberta's. Mr. Speaker, if this is a 
propaganda agency, if this is an NDP plot, then it is also a Conservative plot, and it is also a Liberal plot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in making these charges, the Liberals are neglecting their duty to provide responsible 
opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — These charges do not reflect any needs of the people of Saskatchewan, they are to 
me, nothing more than an exhibition of the petty political fears of the Liberal Party. The same kind of blind, 
mindless, negative approach, kept the Members in Opposition for 20 years after 1944 and I say in this House 
to the Members of this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, unless they show a little more realism 
and a little more leadership, the same thing is going to happen all over again, and I say that the Opposition 
critic in education, the Member for Milestone knows that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow Saskatchewan to become the fifth province to enter educational 
communications. We are the first small province to do so. I urge all Members to support this legislation. I 
urge them to do so because it will enable our schools and community colleges to use existing facilities in all 
the media; it will organize the resources and talents of Saskatchewan to harness communications technology 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2664 

for the benefit of education; it will supply a new outlet for creative talent in this province; it will deliver new 
variety in educational resources to our small communities and to our rural areas; and most important, Mr. 
Speaker, it will help in our fight to keep small schools open and provide quality education; and lastly, it will 
bolster the resources available through our public libraries to all citizens of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill 120 be now read a second time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments to make on this Bill this 
morning, then I should like to take the opportunity of adjourning the debate and coming back and discussing 
it with the Minister. 
 
First of all, I want to say what the Minister is really asking in this Bill, is a blank cheque, a blank cheque for 
the Department of Education and the Minister of Education to spend, I would suggest, millions and millions 
of dollars now and in the future of Saskatchewan money, which in most cases will be completely 
unnecessary. The Canadian people have had some experience in a public broadcasting corporation, called the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Millions and millions of dollars have been spent and wasted in some 
cases in that corporation. Now if anybody would look at clause No. 10 of this Bill, and recognize the 
complete and absolute powers, given to the Minister of Education and to SaskMedia under this authority to 
operate one or more broadcasting undertakings, primarily devoted to the field of educational broadcasting, 
within the policy guidelines established by provincial authority, produce, acquire, sell, lease, distribute, 
exhibit or otherwise deal in programs and materials of an educational nature, whether for use in broadcasting 
or otherwise. Mr. Speaker, this is completely a blank cheque. When we start talking about the costs of 
television production, of acquiring a production staff, of acquiring the camera and the facilities and so forth, 
the Minister of Education knows that we are talking about millions of dollars for SaskMedia in this 
particular Bill. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, I question the need to establish another corporation and another sphere of 
bureaucracy in the Province of Saskatchewan. A year ago the Minister brought in a new department. A 
department for advanced education or continuing education. It has as its specific role, to take over and 
manage and administer the university community in Saskatchewan. In order to set up the Act of the 
legislation to administer that community he brought in Bill 90. Under Bill 90 the Deputy Minister of 
Continuing Education was to be the secretary of the Board of Regents. The resource people in the 
Department of Continuing Education were to be the resource people of the Board of Regents to administer 
the university. Now this is no longer so. Yet he has still established this bureaucracy. What is it doing today? 
It is running the technical schools in the Province of Saskatchewan, in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon, which 
were run by a very small branch, in the Department of Education, a very small branch, Mr. Speaker. On top 
of that now, the community colleges are involved. They are now just getting off the ground. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2665 

But now here, in two years we have set up a third department of education, we have now set up SaskMedia, 
we have now entered once again into the bureaucracy and empire building, that the Minister of Education 
and whole NDP seem to enter into. 
 
The third thing I do question about this Bill, is the NDP use of communications. And the Minister of 
Education says, you know it's terrible that those Liberals should challenge the concept of what the NDP will 
use the communications media for in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, I would try to say that I tried to estimate and I calculate roughly, that the NDP are using ten million 
dollars of this Budget. Ten million, in information officers, in advertising, in personnel, to disseminate 
political propaganda for the NDP. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Talk about the Bill. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I am talking about the Bill. This Bill now establishes the right of the NDP, not only 
to publicly advertise on the radio and the television to the adult community, but to promote within the school 
system, ideas of socialism, their own ideas of any other type of so-called moral understanding that they so 
desire. They can turn around and talk about ownership of land and resources, they can advertise programs. 
We had an excellent example, Mr. Speaker. They invited the Members of the Legislature to watch a film on 
tourism in the North. In that film the Minister appeared nine time. Nine times, now that's an educational 
communication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, don't ever worry that the people of Saskatchewan will not worry about the NDP producing and 
distributing and channelling into the schools, philosophy and propaganda of their desire and their orientation. 
 
The fourth thing I want to talk about is the whole concept, that the Minister talks about co-ordinating 
educational communication among all various departments. To turn around and tell me that he has to 
establish his own FM radio station, establish his own TV network in order to co-ordinate the 
communications or the educational programs of various departments is ridiculous. Co-ordination is 
necessary, but certainly it is not necessary to establish SaskMedia and a brand new corporation, another body 
of the bureaucracy and another empire under the Minister of Education. 
 
The most ridiculous aspect of his speech was, he used the SaskMedia to defend the promotion of rural 
education in the Province of Saskatchewan. And certainly I'm sure that the communications media will play 
a part in rural education and in the education in both urban and rural areas in the future. Certainly technology 
is going to be used in the classroom more and more in the future. But to suggest that he has to have his own 
TV corporation, his own FM radio station is nonsense. 
 
I suggest to the Minister, he had better look at his per-pupil grant, because if anything is strangling rural 
education in Saskatchewan today, it's the per-pupil grant, it has no program content in it. That's what is 
strangling rural education. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2666 

Look at the number of rural schools that are closing and centralizing. Look at the expansion of bus routes, 
look at the number of schools that are being forced to centralize, because of a per-pupil grant. And if he 
wants to promote and protect and save our rural schools let's look at a program grant and stop this per-pupil 
business. And the biggest recognition the Minister has that he is strangling rural education is that of this 
sparsity adjustment. He recognized now, that as long as he keeps continuing to give per-pupil grants, and 
rural depopulation continues, and particularly the birth rate keeps dropping, he knows that there will be no 
rural education in the Province of Saskatchewan. And anybody who attended one of his conferences this fall, 
knew it had one specific idea and role, to promote further centralization and the closure of rural schools in 
Saskatchewan. That was his specific purpose. Don't try to tell me you used that as an excuse to establish 
SaskMedia and a new television corporation and so forth. 
 
So let me summarize, Mr. Speaker, very briefly. I think it's a blank cheque for the Minister of Education to 
once again establish another bureaucracy, to expand his empire, to spend millions of dollars of the taxpayers' 
money in one of the most expensive areas that government can enter into. And the second thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is I question the wisdom of the NDP in going into another area of mass communication that they 
produce, that they distribute, that they control to the children of the Province of Saskatchewan. And I don't 
want my children, watching something that is produced by the NDP, I'll tell you. 
 
The third thing, Mr. Speaker, I think it's a costly duplication, I think most of this material, Mr. Speaker, we 
could turn around and make an arrangement with the Province of Alberta, with the Province of Ontario and 
the Province of Quebec, we could work co-operatively with them, to get the programs that they produce, to 
work co-operatively with them, to share, without establishing the kind of expensive production machinery 
that the Minister is envisioning in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few words to say on this Bill at a later date, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 118 — An Act respecting the 
provision of Police Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce Bill No. 118 — An Act respecting the 
provision of Police Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is introduced for the purposes of ensuring a high standard of policing for the present 
and future in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As Member will all agree, the quality of policing has been of considerable concern to the Department, and to 
all of us. We have been most fortunate that at the present time, and in the past, the boards of police 
commissioners and councils of cities and towns in the province have recognized the importance of providing 
good policing service, and have done so, by and large, through municipal police forces of utilization of the 
services of the 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2667 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
The pressure on police personnel in today's society is far greater than it ever has been before. We have seen 
the development of a somewhat permissive society in which many people are more concerned with their own 
rights while disregarding their corresponding duties and obligations. Some segments of society are 
demanding rights and even resort to demonstrations and sometimes, unfortunately, acts of violence to 
publicize their positions. The dramatic increase in offences involving drugs suggests more people are turning 
to drugs as a relief from what they view to be pressures. Trends in crime have indicated more prominence on 
so-called 'white collared crime' such as, for example, well organized fraudulent business manipulations, 
which for the most part were overlooked in the past, but which resulted in returns to those involved far 
greater than the proceeds from any bank robbery or an offence that used to be prevalent in this province a 
few years ago, such as safebreakings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these aspects emphasize, I believe, the need for well trained police personnel, who are 
capable of conducting complicated investigations involving business frauds, have the training and 
understanding to cope with psychotics involved in drugs or depressed by personal or domestic problems, and 
have the ability to communicate with the dissidents in our society. 
 
It was because of our concern in this area, that in 1972, I requested that the views of representatives of police 
forces on a province-wide police training program that would be available to all municipal police recruits. 
Through the efforts of that committee, which included personnel from the police forces of Moose Jaw, 
Prince Albert, Regina and Saskatoon, and a representative from my own Department, we were able to 
sponsor the first municipal police training program which concluded the first of this month. Under this 
program, 47 recruits from the police forces of the cities of Estevan, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Regina, 
Saskatoon and Weyburn and even the town of Waldheim, underwent a 13-week intensive, basic police 
training course which was held at the Regina Campus of the University of Saskatchewan. The program was 
implemented with the assistance of an administrator and a co-ordinator from the Regina City Police and 
personnel from the Extension Department of the University of Saskatchewan. Lecturers included University 
personnel, police people from all city police forces in the province, R.C.M.P. personnel and professional 
people from various occupations and services. All of the recruits attending were accommodated at the 
University Campus in Regina and became a part of it during that basic 13 weeks. I am sure the men and 
women who had the opportunity to attend this course, and the boards of police commissioners and councils 
of the cities and towns from which the personnel came, will agree with me that the program was a first-rate 
success. 
 
Until the implementation of this basic training course for the province, each police force, regardless of size 
and the number of new personnel, assumed responsibility for training their own people. The extent and 
quality of training was dependent and varied, dependent on the local resources for the most part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide for a continuing training program developed and implemented by a 
provincial police 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2668 

commission (which will consist of three persons appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council) in 
consultation with boards, councils, chiefs of police and representatives of police personnel. The training 
course will include not only raw recruits but hopefully will expand to give training to more experienced and 
senior personnel in municipal police forces and municipal policing laws in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Minimum standards for the selection of police personnel is very important and uniformity will be established 
in this area by the commission as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, disciplinary matters have had a considerable effect on the morale of members of the police 
force and in recognition of this, the commission will be responsible for establishing a uniform disciplinary 
code, in consultation with the local boards, for all municipal police forces. This will include procedures for 
conducting disciplinary proceedings, including appeals to the local board of police commissioners or 
council, and even appeals to the proposed new provincial commission. 
 
Responsibility for providing police services will continue to be that as it is in the present law. Municipalities 
having a population in excess of 500 persons, and as is the case now, responsibility for the provision of 
police services will be on the boards of police commissioners in cities, councils in towns and villages. Cities 
having a population in excess of 5,000 persons will have a board of police commissioners which will be 
appointed by council and consist of the mayor, one other member of council and a third person who does not 
have to be a member of council. This third person can be appointed by the city council. Municipalities 
having a population under 5,000, if they desire, may either appoint a board of police commissioners locally, 
or they may leave the responsibility for provision of policing service to the council as a whole, which is 
presently being done in most cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities having a population under 20,000 persons may establish their own police force, 
or they may enter into agreements with the Government of Canada (in the case of cities and towns having 
population between 1,500 and 20,000) or the province in cases where towns and villages have a population 
under 1,500 persons. The present figure in the Bill is 15,000. This is to say that the present law says if your 
population is 15,000 or under you can enter into a contract with the R.C.M.P. for municipal policing, or you 
can get your own municipal police force. Because of the population increases in communities it was felt by 
the Department we would raise this to 20,000. This does not add any new communities to be given the right 
to enter into R.C.M.P. contracts for municipal policing. In effect, the situation remains unchanged, and if in 
cases there should be a reverse the other way we would consider, of course, lowering it back to the figure 
that it's presently at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the increasing costs for policing, provision is made in the Bill to authorize 
grants to municipalities for policing services. As Members will know, this year saw the implementation of an 
excellent police support program in funding by the provincial government. For example, in the city of 
Saskatoon, my home town, it will be roughly about $6 per capita for policing costs in one form or another. 
This 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2669 

is a tremendous improvement from the $1.50 per capita. This provision in the Bill, however, will still allow 
the authorization of grants to municipalities for policing services as they are deemed necessary. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I might add that much of this Bill is a reprint of existing urban law which exists in the 
urban municipalities law consolidated in this particular Bill. I believe the details of the clause by clause 
sections can be more profitably discussed by the Members in Committee on the detailed review of the 
legislation at that time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, may I saw this. Prior to compiling the contents of the Bill, personnel from the 
Department of the Attorney General, and myself, consulted reconsulted and reconsulted again with boards of 
police commissioners and chiefs of police themselves from all six cities having their own police forces, 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Federation of Peace Officers — which is the province-wide union of 
policemen — the executive of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. When I say consulted, 
and reconsulted, I literally mean that. We have had an excellent exchange of views with these groups and 
incorporated in the Bill are a number of their suggestions and recommendations for change, such as, for 
example, the right of boards or councils to make representation to the provincial police commission in 
respect to and prior to any regulations being passed by that body; the right of the board or council to make 
representation to the commission before any orders are made; and to appeal to myself any matter with which 
they did not agree in respect to any inquiry relating to policing that may be conducted by the commission. 
The number and composition of a board of police commissioners, review of disciplinary proceedings by the 
chief, the right of a member of a police force subject to disciplinary proceedings to have counsel and a 
member of a union or federation to which he belongs to attend such proceedings as an observer, are all 
suggestions made by these groups since the Bill was tabled as a White Paper, which have been included in 
the Bill. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated already, this Bill was preceded by a White Paper in 
December, a good device certainly as it has worked out in this particular case. There has been excellent 
consultation and co-operation with our local authorities. 
 
With the establishment of a provincial police commission, this province will, for the first time, have a body 
whose primary responsibility will be to ensure that we will have well trained, the best trained police forces 
given our circumstances, providing for a high quality of police service to every community in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that everyone will agree with this principle and with this objective. This Bill is of 
tremendous importance to every citizen of this province and will meet a need that has been recognized for 
years, but about which very little has been done to date. I urge the Members of the House to support the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I close by simply saying, apart from my prepared notes, the role of the police officer in 
today's society is one that has not been properly recognized. In this age of dissent and freedom of expression 
we have heard 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2670 

criticism of policemen, we have heard suggestions for improvement, we have heard sometimes the negative 
aspect of policing. I can tell the Members of the House that in my involvements, both as Attorney General 
and as a private practitioner, that the vast majority, overwhelming majority of policemen and policewomen 
in this province provide first-rate dedicated, honest service to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — They work hard, they work loyally and all of society, I say, should commend their 
efforts maintaining the rule of law and making sure that the principles of democracy and law are maintained 
in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is being welcomed by the policemen and policewomen. I believe it will be welcomed 
by the local communities. I believe it's a positive step for all of us as legislators to assist them in that 
objective of making sure we have a strong, responsive and intelligent, police force for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading of Bill 118, 
The Police Act for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — A couple of comments, Mr. Speaker, and I'll stick to that part of the 
Minister's speech that dealt with the Act, the rather short part of the speech. Just a few points — there is no 
doubt but that the Bill is a patchwork approach to the problem of policing in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
We are unable to determine unfortunately from the legislation what the Government's true intent is, because 
we take some responsibility away from the municipalities and give it to the Cabinet in effect, which will 
have the final say on the matter, the police commission, they appoint the police commission and a great deal 
is going to hinge on what type of personnel are appointed to the police commission. 
 
If the Government, if the Attorney General is sincere in what he says about the problem of drugs and of 
'white collar' crime and the matter of dissidents in society — I think were his words, — and if the problems 
are not being dealt with adequately under our present system, then why don't we have a provincial police 
force? We are going here, with this piece of legislation, we are taking a halfway approach on it, and I'm not 
so sure that it's adequate at all. We are taking more and more powers away from the municipalities, we are 
going to put very onerous burdens on municipal governments with this piece of legislation. Now I think 
there should be a guarantee in the legislation that where the financial burdens are increased on municipal 
governments, that the compensation be 100 per cent paid by the provincial government. I don't think that this 
Bill should be used as an effort or a weapon to destroy local police forces in the Province of Saskatchewan, 
and yet we can do it under this Bill with the economic powers that are given to the police commission. The 
police commission can set a high 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2671 

standard across the province that it would be totally impossible for municipal governments to meet. Yet, 
what are they faced with? They are faced with some grants that will not meet the financial burdens placed 
upon them. 
 
We are disappointed that the police commission will have no formal input from municipal governments in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There was some talk about justice and ensuring justice today, and it's unfortunate that Section 18 is put in the 
Bill. This Bill removes the right to review by the courts of any decision of the police commission in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Surely if we are concerned about justice, and surely if we are concerned about the 
rights of police officers, and surely if we are concerned about the rights of the individuals before the police 
commission, and surely if we are concerned about the effective police administration in the Province of 
Saskatchewan, Section 18 should be repealed and there should be an automatic right of review, not a 
removal of a right of review by the courts. 
 
We fail to see the necessity for having a right of review of disciplinary actions by the local police forces. 
Again, if they are bad police forces and if the disciplinary practices are not correct, and if the disciplinary 
practices are unfair or improper then why don't we solve the problem by having a provincial police force. If 
they are adequate, why do you want to take the right of review of the actions of the local police forces and 
their administration, give it to the police commission and then have no review of the police commission's 
actions? I think the Bill shows that the Government doesn't know where it's going to go in the matter of 
police administration. It's possibly placing an extremely high burden, financial burden and economic burden 
on local governments without guaranteeing to them the resources to handle the burden. It's setting, not a 
precedent, because we've had the precedent many, many times but it's rather schizophrenic when we talk 
about justice and then refuse to have justice decided in the matter of the police commission when there is no 
right of review. 
 
I will have further comments and beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment) moved second reading of Bill No. 119 — An Act to amend 
The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act, 1969. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to offer a few comments on the proposed amendments to The Water 
Pollution Control Assistance Act. 
 
The development of the water carriage system of handling human and industrial wastes has been both a 
blessing and a bane to mankind. A blessing because it enabled man to dispose of wastes in a relatively easy 
fashion and permitted the development of modern urban communities. However, it brought with it the bane 
of water pollution and the degradation of a vital resource. But faced with this problem, man showed his 
resourcefulness by developing facilities to treat waste water, thereby 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2672 

protecting his water resource from undue pollution. But there is a cost associated with this accomplishment. 
The larger the urban community and the larger the industry, the more costly and complex the solution. 
 
In terms of the number of urban centres having sewage treatment facilities, Saskatchewan does not have to 
take a back seat to any province in Canada. However, this has not been accomplished without a cost to the 
local taxpayer and that, within reasonable limits, is the way that it should be, for it is the taxpayer who 
generates the waste water which must be treated, if our receiving waters are to be protected against pollution. 
 
However, the benefits derived from protecting water quality accrue to more than just the residents of an 
individual community. And governments have recognized this fact by providing various levels of financial 
assistance. 
 
Since 1960 the towns and villages have received non-repayable grants towards the cost of providing sewage 
treatment under The Municipal Water Assistance Act. It should be noted that cities are not included in this 
program. Many of the cities in Saskatchewan have had modern sewage treatment facilities in operation for a 
good number of years. Such works were financed without assistance from the senior levels of government 
except that provided through the Central Mortgage and Housing program. 
 
Industrial developments, together with the increasing necessity of higher levels of sewage treatment, and the 
growth of these centres, dictated that city residents would be faced with increased costs to ensure the 
preservation of water quality in provincial streams. 
 
The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act, 1969, was enacted to provide a measure of financial assistance 
to enable cities to meet their responsibilities at a reasonable cost to the taxpayers. Under this Act 
non-repayable grants were made available to the cities, equal to 10 per cent of the capital cost, to a maximum 
of $500,000. Under this program grants totally $806,021.83 have been made to Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, Prince Albert, North Battleford, Yorkton and Lloydminster. Only Saskatoon has received the maximum 
grant of $500,000 for its primary sewage treatment plant. 
 
With the signing of the Agricultural Services Centre Agreement between Canada, represented by the 
Department of Regional Economic Expansion, and Saskatchewan, in July 1972, twenty-five cities and towns 
in Saskatchewan became eligible for special federal financial assistance towards the cost of constructing 
capital water and sewage works. The cities of Lloydminster, Saskatoon and Regina were excluded from this 
agreement as was the town of Meadow Lake. 
 
Meadow Lake was excluded because a separate agreement provided DREE assistance to that centre. 
Lloydminster was temporarily excluded pending the signing of an agreement between Canada and Alberta. It 
is now included in the program. 
 
The Agricultural Services Centre Program provides for federal grants equal to 50 per cent of the cost of 
capital cost of water works and 50 per cent of the one-third of the capital cost of sewage, which is not 
financed through the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2673 

With this increased level of federal assistance for the nine cities and 17 of the major towns, the Government 
decided that provincial funds should be distributed to urban communities excluded from the Agricultural 
Service Centre Program. Therefore, The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act was amended in 1972 to 
exclude those cities participating in the Agricultural Service Centre Program. 
 
This amendment left only Saskatoon and Regina eligible to receive grants under The Water Pollution 
Control Assistance Act, with Saskatoon having received the maximum grant. The Qu'Appelle Basin Study 
undertaken jointly by Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Canada, revealed that approximately 70 per cent of the 
nutrients which cause algae growth in the lakes of the basin are derived from the effluents discharged by the 
cities of Moose Jaw and Regina. This Government is committed to the implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the Qu'Appelle Basin Study Report. 
 
One of the recommendations calls for the removal of the phosphorus from the Moose Jaw and the Regina 
effluents. The Government recognizes that such a requirement is unique to only a few urban centres in the 
Valley. In fact, it will only be required of a very limited number of communities in the province and, indeed, 
in the whole of Canada. 
 
Limited phosphorus removal is obtained during the course of conventional secondary treatment. It requires 
special treatment which may be designated as advanced waste treatment. To provide facilities for phosphorus 
removal, or to provide facilities capable of producing effluent quality meeting ever-increasing standards is 
expensive. 
 
My Government, Mr. Speaker, recognizes the need for Moose Jaw and Regina to provide a much higher 
level of sewage treatment than presently exists in those centres in order adequately to protect water quality in 
the Qu'Appelle Lakes. It also recognizes that achieving the required level of treatment imposes a heavy 
burden of cost on these two cities and, indeed, other cities that may ultimately face the same situation. 
 
Therefore, in order to ease the burden to the taxpayers of Moose Jaw, Regina and other cities, faced with 
advanced waste treatment costs, it is proposed to amend The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act. 
 
A number of changes are proposed in Section 2. 
 
1. A definition of "advanced waste treatment" is provided in order that a special level of assistance be 
provided in those cases where a city is required to move beyond secondary treatment. 
 
2. "Effluent irrigation" is defined since this is recognized as a very suitable method of eliminating 
phosphorus discharge to our streams. 
 
3. "Secondary treatment works" are defined in order that we distinguish between levels of financial 
assistance. 
 
4. The land required for irrigation is recognized as part of the capital cost of providing waste treatment. 
 
The proposed amendment to Section 4 of this Act are as 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2674 

follows: 
 
1. We have deleted the maximum grant that can be paid to a city. Saskatoon has used up the present 
$500,000 limit and will probably qualify for an additional $500,000 over the next few years when it installs 
secondary treatment. 
 
2. In subsection (2) of Section 4, we have added the words "Respecting designated Agricultural Service 
Centres", since we hope the city of Regina will be covered in the Qu'Appelle Implementation Agreement 
with DREE. 
 
3. The new subsection (3) provides that in addition to the grants now available for primary and secondary 
works under this Act or from other governments, the Government of Saskatchewan will pay an additional 15 
per cent grant to any city installing advanced treatment works. 
 
I am informed that Saskatchewan is probably the first province to recognize advanced treatment as worthy of 
extra financial assistance and that our program compares favorably with that available to other cities in 
western Canada. 
 
Just to summarize, the assistance that will be available to the cities of Saskatchewan for waste treatment. 
They really fall into three categories — those covered by the Agricultural Service Centre Agreement and 
secondly, Regina and thirdly, Saskatoon. 
 
First. For cities under the Agricultural Service Centres Agreement, the federal grants — CMHC and DREE 
— equal to 33 1/3 per cent of capital cost of any works, plus 15 per cent provincial grant for advanced waste 
treatment, or a total of 48 1/3 per cent of the capital cost. 
 
Second. For Regina a federal grant of 16 2/3 per cent from CMHC a probable minimum of 16 2/3 per cent 
from DREE, plus 15 per cent provincial grant for advanced waste treatment. In addition the city would be 
eligible for a grant of 10 per cent of the cost of any improvements to the secondary treatment system. 
 
Third. Saskatoon would qualify for a 16 2/3 per cent grant from CMHC and a 10 per cent grant from the 
province for secondary treatment. Should the city install advanced waste treatment at some future date, they 
would qualify for the 16 2/3 per cent from CMHC and 15 per cent from the province. 
 
Over the next 10 to 20 years, sewage treatment grants to cities of the Province of Saskatchewan are 
estimated between $4 million and $5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks I would move second reading of Bill No. 119. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, much of the program that the Minister has been 
talking about at length, a substantial amount of funds was put in under the previous Liberal administration, 
particularly in the city of Saskatoon. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2675 

I think what is of significance here, and I hope that the province is giving them due credit which they deserve 
and that certainly is the Federal Government. From the Minister's own figures he has indicated very, very 
substantial input of money into the 25 centres plus Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, as far as water and 
sewage treatment facilities are concerned. In this respect, certainly the Federal Government is apparently 
living up to more than its obligation. This we are certainly pleased to see. 
 
As far as the legislation is concerned, I think that it is largely involving much of what is already being done. 
It is just more or less putting into legislation allowing grants which previously they were not allowed. This 
we welcome and I think at this time — we had previously suggested to the Minister and his Department — 
that this was most certainly an appropriate time for the Government of Saskatchewan to commit more funds 
to the cleanup of the water and sewage treatment facilities. I might say that at that particular time we felt that 
the Government opposite was not living up to its obligation and quite possibly, in some sense, is still not, 
when one considers the financial resources at their disposal now. 
 
We failed to be able to come up with a statement of policy that the Government itself would commit itself to 
the total cleanup on many of the waterways in the Province of Saskatchewan, some of which are polluted by 
the city of Regina and Moose Jaw. So any increased assistance now which is forthcoming is most certainly 
welcome. 
 
I would suggest however, that in the months ahead, that if these cities do encounter further financial 
problems in bringing about what is a satisfactory cleanup of these waterways, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are expecting and are quite committed to the cleanup of these water systems, I would suggest 
to the Minister and the Government that certainly in a time of affluence like we are having at present when 
the Government has sources of money beyond what is really a normal amount in any particular time, that this 
is certainly an ideal time for the Government to commit funds to projects such as this. Because the 
Government revenue is riding high, to invest money in the infrastructure of the province now is certainly an 
ideal time and it should be carried out. I would only suggest that if the cities involved and the waterways 
involved, are not able financially to go ahead, if there is still some financial roadblock, I do not think that 
there would be an objection by anyone in the province at this particular point in time to commit further funds 
to the cleaning up of this water. 
 
Certainly our province is in a very buoyant condition at the moment. It may well be that at some point in the 
future we can't commit funds on such a scale as we could at present, but it is an ideal time for the Province 
of Saskatchewan because of the buoyancy of the economy to put money into capital intensive projects like 
the cleaning up of our waterways. For this reason we would most certainly support any increased financial 
assistance they are going to get with full recognition and full amount of credit going to the Federal 
Government which obviously in this regard I would believe has recognized their financial obligations in an 
admirable way. 
 
With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to further study the Bill to some extent because it has 
only been 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2676 

presented on second reading this morning. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The 
Election Act, 1971. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in moving Bill 97, An Act to amend The Election Act, 1971. The 
electoral laws and procedures established by this legislation represent a new departure from the existing 
rules. We believe that this Bill will be regarded as a major turning point in political history of our province. 
Election financing is a problem which does not admit of simple answers. If voters are to make intelligent 
choices they must be well informed. This requires printed literature, signs, posters, radio and television time. 
Parties must have some source of funding if they are to place their platforms before the public. The answer I 
think lies in fairly controlling election financing of political parties. This is not an easy task as Hon. 
Members will appreciate. This can be hard to define, much less to control. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to discuss some of the major elements of the proposed Bill. 
 
First of all, election expenses. Election expenses are defined to include all expenses or liabilities incurred by 
a candidate or a party during an election or before an election where ultimately for use during the election 
period. 
 
Certain expenditures are deemed not to be election expenses. These include: 
 
1. The costs for publishing in a newspaper or periodical, editorials, news reports or letters to the editor, and 
the costs of broadcasting on radio and television, news comments, where such publications and broadcasts 
are made in the same manner as those outside of the election period and where there is no payment to be 
made for them. 
 
2. The reasonable costs of holding a nominating convention in a constituency excluding any costs of 
convention publicity. 
 
3. The reasonable expenses incurred for the operation of a permanent office, for a recognized political party 
in the province. 
 
4. Sums of money which are paid or agreed to be paid by a candidate or by a constituency organization 
through a provincially recognized political party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to discuss the limitation aspects of the Bill with respect to expenditures by a 
candidate and by a recognized political party. 
 
Under the Bill, every candidate in an election is limited in the amount of moneys that he may directly or 
indirectly expend upon his campaign. For all constituencies, with the exception of the two northern seats, a 
candidate is limited to the expenditure of a total of 80 cents for each of the first 5,000 names on the voters' 
list of the constituency, and 60 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2677 

cents for each name in excess of 5,000 names. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be proposing a House amendment with respect to the two northern constituencies. We 
will be proposing a House amendment to increase the expenditure ceilings by imposing a flat rate of $1.50 
for each name of a voter on the list as set out as the maximum. This will elevate the ceiling somewhat. 
 
This provision embodies the principle of realistically limiting the amount of money that any candidate may 
spend during an election. The figures allow each candidate to put fairly himself and his proposals before his 
constituents, while at the same time ensuring that financial disparity between candidates does not become a 
significant election factor. 
 
Any potential candidate is to a very real degree of certainty, now aware of the maximum amount of money 
which that candidate will require and will be allowed to spend in order to participate in the election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a word about the ceilings for the provincial party as opposed to the individual candidates. 
In the printed Bill, the ceiling is $75,000 for the provincial party. I will be proposing a House amendment 
that a recognized political party is limited during an election to the maximum expenditure of $125,000 as 
opposed to the $75,000 in the printed Bill. I believe this is necessary and reasonable to increase it. I think 
that this limitation is necessary under the principle of democratic election. The reasonable costs or expenses 
of operating a central office in the province, including its staff and clerical assistance and normal overhead 
are not included in the figure of $125,000. Just to repeat that, that the reasonable costs or expenses of 
operating a central office including staff and clerical assistance is not included in the figure of $125,000. 
This is over and above. 
 
The limitation upon the central office expense is that it must be a reasonable cost of operating the central 
office and the onus of showing that election costs and expenses are reasonable is upon the candidate or party 
incurring them. 
 
On reflection, it was thought that the ceiling of $75,000 in the printed Bill was simply just not enough. 
 
Now another principle of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is revelation of campaign expenses and contributions. 
Operating concurrently with the provisions setting limitations or ceilings on election expenses are provisions 
requiring every candidate and every chief official agent of a recognized political party by filed returns, to 
certify all election expenses or liabilities incurred and to list the names and addresses of all contributors, 
either a candidate or a political party and the amounts of their contributions. Expenses and contributions, 
before, during and after an election must be disclosed. 
 
A significant exemption to this principle of revelation, is to provide for individuals purchasing membership 
cards in a political party. The law, as proposed, states, that where a membership card in a political party not 
exceeding $5 per card, restricted to one card per person, or family memberships not exceeding $15 per 
family shall not have to report the names and addresses. Contributions by persons not exceeding $100 total 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2678 

per person shall also not have to be reported. These items, the memberships and the contributions of less 
than $100, may be disclosed by simply listing the total number of memberships sold and the total amounts 
received from the sales, as well as the total number of contributions in the amount of less than $100 and the 
amount of these contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that these new provisions as to reporting election expenses and contributions in detail 
will result in more accurate disclosure of the cost of elections, the purposes for which election expenses are 
incurred and the source of money for those to pay these election expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a word about the corporations and others. Corporations and organizations or associations that 
are formed for the purposes of soliciting and obtaining moneys for political parties must maintain a record of 
the names and addresses of each person making a contribution and the amount thereof. Before any such body 
may make a contribution of any major amount to a political party, that party must reveal the names and 
addresses of each person making the contribution to the body and the amount thereof. No contributions may 
be solicited or received from any individual or corporation, association or trade union outside of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, reimbursement in respect of candidates' election expenses. This is a fourth major 
principle which is introduced in the Bill. 
 
Recognizing under the democratic process that there is a responsibility upon the public at large for the 
conduct of elections, the Bill provides for the reimbursement from public funds of a portion of the 
candidates' election expenses. This principle further recognizes that lack of funds should not be a deterrent to 
an interested person seeking public office. Partial reimbursement should also serve to discourage solicitation 
of large contributions. 
 
Where a candidate obtains not less than 15 per cent of the votes cast in the constituency of which he is a 
candidate, and by the way, the printed Bill says 20 per cent and it should have been 15 per cent. We'll be 
introducing a House amendment to lower it to 15 per cent. Where a candidate receives 15 per cent of the 
votes cast in the constituency, that candidate is entitled upon the preparation and filing of proper 
certification, to reimbursement of a portion of his election expenses. The candidate files a certificate setting 
out the maximum amount of election expenses that may be lawfully incurred by him. The total amount of all 
election expenses which were incurred by him and the maximum expenses in respect to which the candidate 
is entitled to receive reimbursement. The formula for reimbursement is fairly simple. It follows the federal 
formula, the federal election law. It's this. Reimbursement is the lesser amount obtained by multiplying the 
number of names on the voters list by 15 cents. That figure, or an amount equal to 50 per cent of the actual 
election expenses of the candidate, which ever is the lesser. That will be the amount of reimbursement. That 
is almost a direct take from the federal election law with respect to reimbursement. 
 
The principle of partial reimbursement of election expenses has I believe, been accepted by the public 
generally, I certainly hope it will be, the inclusion of the provisions is an 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2679 

acceptance and a recognition of the principle that the public as a whole has a duty to take a direct interest in 
this matter. It remains for the Assembly, hopefully, to adopt this Bill in this form. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have touched on the three major principles of the Bill. Limitation of campaign 
expenses, putting a ceiling on individual candidates and on the provincial party with the House amendments 
that I have outlined. 
 
Secondly, I have talked of the principle of revelation of campaign funds both for the provincial party and the 
individual candidates with the House amendments that I have outlined, and the provisions of the Bill with 
respect to donations of $100 or less and so forth. 
 
Thirdly, I have talked of the principle of partial reimbursement which is on the formula of either 15 cents 
times the number of voters on a voters list or 50 per cent of the actual amount spent, whichever is the lesser 
which follows the federal provision. 
 
Three major principles, limitation, revelation and partial reimbursement. 
 
Now, a word or two about other general provisions in the Bill. Under present provincial laws, political 
parties as such have little prominence so far as election laws are concerned. In effect, they are non-entities. 
They have raised the money for election purposes from sources and have obtained moneys and expended 
such money for whatever purposes they have seen fit. The Bill now before the House, for the first time, in a 
sense, brings political parties within the operation of the law. And that is done this way. 
 
The political parties that wish to become involved in election by way of supporting candidates of their own 
party or opposing other parties in the form of money or effort, must register with the Chief Electoral Office. 
The registration will be very simply done, in a form which simply discloses the name of the political party, 
the address of the political party, the names of its officers, the addresses of the central office of the party, the 
name of the leader. This form is filed with the Chief Electoral Officer. The Chief Electoral Officer will then 
check the form filed and he will advise the leader of the party that thereafter the party shall become 
"recognized", a political party recognized for the purposes of this Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I might say that I have some concern about this provision of registering political parties 
but I think there is no other way this can be done, because there can be no audit or control. An individual 
might run, for example, in the constituency of Milestone and call himself a Liberal and not really be a 
Liberal and break the expenditures of the ceilings of the provisions of the Bill and thereby put the party, the 
leader of the party, the individual candidate, in jeopardy with respect to the election. We have to be able to 
have some form of audit control and this would allow the leader of the party, the party registered and the 
leader of the party to say, I recognize the Member for Milestone to be the Liberal candidate and thus audit 
provisions and thus the control which would be fair to all parties. I think there is no other way around it. The 
federal legislation has an almost identical provision in it as well. So 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2680 

that we are following the provisions in that regard as well. 
 
No election expenses may be incurred by a political party and no contributions may be received by it, until it 
has been advised by the Chief Electoral Officer that the registration has been accepted, which will be a 
formality. 
 
If after official nomination day, a recognized political party fails to nominate ten or more candidates, comes 
to ten or less, then it ceases to be a recognized political party and the recording of the recognized political 
party ends with the filing of the election return of successful candidates by the Chief Electoral office. Why 
do we draw the line at 10 or 15 or why shouldn't everybody be recognized? Again, the answer is simply this: 
that the purpose of the Bill is to limit the expenses and the Government doesn't think that anybody who runs 
ten or less candidates will be able appreciably to affect by a mass of expenditures or otherwise, or 
appreciably affect the operations of the democratic process, even if it did have unlimited funds, of the 
election results. 
 
Penalty provisions are provided in the Act. And where any person contravenes or is a party to in any way a 
breach of any of the provisions of the Bill, that person is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a 
fine or not more than $5,000 and/or imprisonment for a period of up to six months. If the Bill is to be made 
workable there must be of necessity penalty provisions for breaches. This section reflects the substantial 
penalties which may be imposed for these infractions. 
 
It is my belief that these provisions will act to prevent infractions and offences under this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the time has come when members of the public are entitled to be informed fully as to 
the amounts of money which is spent by candidates and political parties in elections. The public interest 
demands that their election dollars be spent on the issues of the day and not on the purchasing power of the 
election dollar, if I can term it in that phrase. It must be accepted as a fact that the provisions of The 
Elections Act, 1971 are inadequate in this regard. I submit that this Bill embodies the principles that I have 
outlined to ensure a fair and responsible election process, fair to all candidates, fair to all political parties and 
most important of all, fair to all the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a word or two about House amendments. I have made some comments about them already. 
There may be others that I just have not outlined here but I don't expect that they will be of any major 
consequence. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I wish to direct your attention to an amendment to Section 201B, subsection (3). 
This is the amendment that I have already talked about which deals with northern constituencies. We will be 
increasing the ceiling to $1.50 for every name on the voters' list for northern ceilings so that the amount will 
be increased. The explanation that I offer is that the amount of money that may be expended, that is needed 
to wage an election campaign in the North is admittedly a little more expensive. This increase realistically 
meets this requirement. 
 
A second House amendment will be to Section 201D, 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2681 

subsection (1). I have already outlined this one. That is, there will be a substitution for the 20 per cent of the 
reimbursement threshold to 15 per cent. It was always intended to be 15 per cent. I just don't know why it 
appeared in the printed Bill the way it did. 
 
Third, Section 202K, subsection (3). I have already indicated that we will be bringing in a House amendment 
there to the provincial party ceiling. The provincial party ceiling is $75,000. On reflection, I think that we 
should increase it to $125,000 and we will be proposing a House amendment to that effect. The proposed 
House amendment change reflects the realistic conditions in the province with large geographic areas to be 
considered and covered during an election period. With the rising costs of all facets of an election campaign, 
advertising costs (this media cost business I am sure all political parties and politicians will agree is just 
unreal), transportation, etc. This increase allows each party more thoroughly to present its platform to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another House amendment will be to Section 202K and 203. These are simply miscellaneous amendments. 
They will bring 202K under the provisions of the penalty section. 
 
Another House amendment which will be of substance will be with respect to government advertising during 
the election period, Section 203D. Members will know that in the printed Bill there is a strict provision 203D 
which says that: 
 

during the election period there shall be no government advertising, whatsoever, except in 
the case of an emergency (or words to that effect — I don't have the exact wording of that 
part of the Bill). 

 
I am going to be proposing a House amendment that will read something along these lines, that we will add 
to subsection (1) at the end after the words "particulars", quote: 
 

or where the publication relates solely to employment opportunities within the Department, 
Board, Commission, Crown corporation or other agencies of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and is in a form usually used for the advertising of employment opportunities. 

 
If I can stop there, we can allow the employment opportunities to go one way or the other. I don't think that 
will disadvantage any party in this regard. 
 

Or where, in the public interest the publication involves material of a nature of a news release 
of normal daily matters of a Department, Board, Commission, Crown corporation, or other 
agency of the Government, and where such news releases are not associated in any way with 
the name of any person who is a candidate in the election, or with the name of a political 
party or a recognized political party. 

 
These are the Press releases that come out on an institutional basis. We are proposing to introduce a House 
amendment that will say that these can go out but there cannot be any release which in any way links it with 
a candidate in the election or a political party or a recognized political party. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2682 

I hope the Members opposite, who objected to this before, will understand that it is an attempt to reach a 
compromise with their position. That is to say the worry that a government may be taking an unfair 
advantage through its press media, etc., during election period. We say no to that, but strictly institutional 
press releases, there are hundreds of them that come out every day, really have to be . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Right! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Right, well okay, the boys laugh. They did during your regime just as much as they 
do during ours. 
 
MR. LANE: — No, no. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, I say this whether the Members opposite want to accept it or not. That's a fact. 
We are all trying to control this and I think this is a legitimate way in which to do it. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I simply say that the members of the public do have a right to be informed of the 
activities of the Government even if an election is in progress, normal press releases on ordinary programs or 
day to day matters of concern. I believe that these amendments will take these factors into consideration, will 
offer to all Members a valid, workable compromise in this area. That is the only comment I would like to 
make with respect to the House amendments, Section 203D. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, if we as the elected Members of this House seek to improve the workings 
of a democratic government, we must have legislation that will suppress any elements which might destroy 
the strength of that democracy. I believe that elections are obviously the basis, the foundation of that strength 
of a democracy. I say to all Members of the House and to the people of Saskatchewan that while there may 
be some difficulties with this Bill, while it is not perfect it is a positive election reform ensuring that the 
people of Saskatchewan can have continued faith in political parties and politicians. Bill 97 will serve to 
make sure that there is a greater degree of openness in the public affairs and the public conduct of affairs of 
the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Members will know that the question of controlling and limiting election expenses has been a subject of 
debate in this House in the past. I say the subject of debate probably has not been of very high quality and I 
am probably as guilty as anyone in that regard, as anybody in this House. There have been some good 
suggestions made in the course of those debates. I recall in 1969 when we looked at The Elections Act on a 
special committee, a committee then chaired by the Hon. Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie), this matter was 
discussed. The Member for Canora, the Member for Regina North West and myself were on the Committee. 
We represented the Opposition. I think it was a fairly good working committee. One of the objections that I 
had to the Committee was the minority report which suggested that there has to be a practical means for 
enforcing limits to expenditures to election campaigns. I think the Committee wrestled with the problem but 
slid around it and made no judgement on it. I hope that these amendments will to some extent, at least, go a 
long way to improving the recommendations of the Committee. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2683 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also say that colleagues of this House on the Opposition side, I think and I hope will 
recognize the importance of this Bill. In June of 1973 the Federal Liberal Party through the Federal Liberal 
Government proposed an elections law in the House of Commons. I might add that our Bill very closely 
follows the major provisions with changes, of course, for the provincial scene, of that Federal Liberal Bill. 
The Liberal House Leader, the Hon. Allan McEachen at that time when he introduced the Bill, said "It would 
remove the possibility of an election being won by the candidate with the most money to spend", he said this 
in support of the introduction of the Bill. I support that objective. I support the Hon. Allan McEachen and the 
Members in the House of Commons who introduced that Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have before us the privilege of being responsible for introducing election reform to this 
province which improves the basic concepts of democracy. I say to all Saskatchewan and to all Members of 
this House, let's not fail to accept that privilege and meet the challenge that is being presented to us with this 
Bill. Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to respond to the Attorney General on the 
introduction of this Bill to control election expenses, I am going to start off by saying that I think that I and 
Members of the Liberal Opposition in this Legislature, certainly agree that it is time that the Province of 
Saskatchewan or the Government of Saskatchewan moved in the direction of controlling election expenses, 
not only of individual candidates but of political parties. I think that we can all say that the history of Canada 
and the history of political elections not only in the Province of Saskatchewan but in all provinces in Canada 
generally and most of the States of the United States, the record in the past has not always been the brightest 
and one that would be of the kind that the public of Canada or the public of Saskatchewan would think was 
in the highest level of political activity. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill does two or three things and I should like to talk about each individual 
principle if I might very briefly. 
 
First of all it attempts to control expenses or the general expenditures of political parties and it does it in two 
ways. First it places controls or limits the amount of money an individual candidate can spend at the 
constituency level. I think that the amount that has been assigned to the individual candidate at the 
constituency level is a reasonable one and I think it is unfortunate that the same reasonableness was not 
provided in the second portion for control. I think for an individual candidate the amount of money 
suggested or recommended in the Bill on the constituency level in the Province of Saskatchewan is relatively 
close to what most individual candidates have been spending in the past. I would think that sometimes 
perhaps individual city Members who have to use television to a greater extent than rural Members might 
find it more difficult to live within the bounds of the limits placed here on individual candidates. I think that 
perhaps some consideration should have been given to urban Members in this regard whose only alternative 
or only source of communication in reality today, is the 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2684 

television medium. And they, in some cases, have almost the same responsibilities as the provincial party. 
An individual candidate in Maple Creek or Meadow Lake who will try to communicate through the radio or 
television media in Swift Current, doesn't have the market, he doesn't have to pay for the market that the 
individual candidate does in Regina. But I do think the individual candidate limitation is a reasonable one 
and I think perhaps from time to time these amounts will have to be adjusted. 
 
However, when it comes to the controlling of election expenses for the provincial party, there is one very, 
very grave danger than any Bill to control election expenses must take into consideration. Number one, that 
the Bill does not prevent the Opposition of the Government of the day from doing the kind of job that is 
required of an Opposition. In other words, that the Bill in itself by its structure and its limitations does not 
protect the government of the day. And this is the danger of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the power of the 
Government and the power of this Bill to control election expenses of a provincial party and maintaining that 
limit at $125,000 when an individual government department provides information services and an 
advertising budget of a half a million dollars, in comparison with an opposition provincial party in an 
election campaign that has grave and serious responsibilities. Let me enumerate some of those 
responsibilities. First of all perhaps to question a budget of today of $900 million with a thousand different 
programs. The second thing they must do is criticize the Government programs and policies of the past. The 
third thing is to provide an alternative and project their own programs. And yet, Mr. Speaker, there is 
absolutely nothing in this Bill to control the power of the Government to advertise and publicize themselves. 
The Minister says we are going to do it during the election period, but the Government party has the 
advantage of knowing when the election is to be called. 
 
I just would like to give the Attorney General — and I am not picking on him as an individual Minister — as 
an example. He brought in the charge of 3 cents a gallon and transferred it to subsidize the Automobile 
Accident Insurance Fund. He then went on a three-week advertising program. So I did some investigation 
about one small program in one Crown corporation which has a variety of programs. I phoned all the 
television and radio stations in Saskatchewan to find out the costs of the production and so forth of that 
particular program. And I was astounded. For example, one program on CKCK, one advertisement, cost the 
SGIO $550. One program! Mr. Speaker, I said this morning earlier that I estimate that the NDP Government 
is spending something in the neighborhood of $10 million in advertising and that's as close as I can estimate. 
 
MR. GUY: — That's pretty low. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — It may well be low. On information services, on personnel, on advertising, 
exclusive media, teletype, photography and so forth — $10 million. Mr. Speaker, can you visualize a month 
before the Premier decides that he is going to call an election on July 1st. So on May 1st he decides he is 
going to spend a half million dollars on the public advertising media. Then on June 1st he calls the election 
and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that I don't even think that the Attorney General or the Government of 
Saskatchewan have gone to the media and 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2685 

questioned the cost of production. Just imagine a party in an election being restricted to $125,000. I would 
suggest they might be able to put a substantial amount just to develop the cost of production alone. I know 
that our particular party is in the process now of doing an evaluation of the development of one ad. Just the 
production costs are $5,000. I was trying to search for a cheaper method of doing it — $5,000 just for 
production costs. It has nothing to do with putting it on the television medium. Unfortunately in 1974 the 
one avenue where we can really communicate to the people in 1975 is the television medium. But on top of 
that, that $125,000 also you've got to include your transportation, staffing, the officing, the printing, the 
radio, every aspect. In other words, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is taking the Opposition and strangling the 
democratic responsibilities of an opposition to criticize and evaluate and present an alternative to the 
government of the day. I seriously object to the limitation of $125,000. I suggest to the Government if they 
want to get together with a Legislative committee on a voluntary basis, both sides of the House, they go to 
the media in the Province of Saskatchewan, get an accurate appraisal of just how much $125,000 could do in 
time on all the radio stations and the TV throughout the province, on cost of production and the distribution 
and the production of it. They go to the radio stations, the newspapers, they go and give an evaluation of the 
staffing requirements, the office requirements, the printing requirements, the postal requirements, and do an 
honest evaluation of the cost of an election, then come back and give a reasonable package as to the cost, 
then, Mr. Speaker, I think I could accept it. 
 
I honestly believe and I think the public of Saskatchewan will believe that here the Government of 
Saskatchewan is using this Bill to strangle the democratic responsibility of the Opposition of this Legislature 
and of this particular province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, that is the primary weakness of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that there is another very serious weakness of this Bill, not what it contains 
but what it does not contain. It is rather interesting that the Federal legislation provides a control on the 
expenditure on the services of people but this Bill doesn't. This Bill strangely omits it. In other words the 
international unions can send every union organizer in the Dominion of Canada to the Province of 
Saskatchewan during an election campaign and that is not considered an election expense as long as the 
union pays for them. In addition the Government of Saskatchewan can give a leave of absence to 150 civil 
servants or 1,500 and they are not considered an election expense. In other words the services of people is 
completely omitted and, Mr. Speaker, strangely enough it is the one aspect of the Federal Bill that is 
completely whitewashed and eliminated by this Bill. Why, Mr. Speaker, I ask you why? Already, for 
example, in the Province of Manitoba the biggest political fight in this current session in the Province of 
Manitoba was the fight between the civil servants of Manitoba and the Opposition in Manitoba about the 
failure of the NDP Government in Manitoba to restrict the civil servants' participation in political 
campaigning. It was the Manitoba civil servants who joined with the Members of the Opposition and 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2686 

demanded that the Government of Manitoba control civil servant participation in election campaigns. Get 
them out from under the rug, the hidden organizer, the secret expenditure, this is the danger of this Bill. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier should be willing to recognize that I am not talking about the right 
of a civil servant to stand as a candidate. No one is questioning that. That is a right that is his because it is 
the heritage of a democratic country and a democratic province. We are not talking about the right of a civil 
servant when he stands as a candidate to get a leave of absence to campaign. We are talking about the 
opportunity of the Government and particularly the NDP opening the front doors of this building the day the 
election is called and flooding every constituency in Saskatchewan with civil servants who have been paid 
and protected by the taxpayers' dollars and then being free to campaign. This Bill in no way suggests that 
they can't bring in the highest paid union organizers from Toronto and Montreal and Vancouver and 
Winnipeg, bring them to the Province of Saskatchewan and let them cost $2,000, $3,000, $4,000, $5,000 and 
that is not an election expense. Unless something is done to control that I won't support this Bill to control 
election expenses. I cannot support a Bill that in no way provides, controls in the services of people which 
every other Election Expenses Bill does. And it is something which the Federal Bill does. And the reason it 
doesn't is because it is there to protect the NDP organization which is made up primarily in Saskatchewan of 
civil servants and union organizers. And, Mr. Speaker, I cannot condone that. 
 
The second thing that this Bill doesn't contain is provision to protect against the squandering of money. And 
I know that this is a difficult one. I don't know how, but do you know what my concern is, my concern is that 
this is going to promote abuses and dishonesty. I'm not blaming the Attorney General or the Government. I 
think both parties will recognize this, that this is a very difficult thing. Squandering money through any kind 
of an organization is completely legitimate within this Bill. How you would control it, I do not know. I am 
sure that the Attorney General has considered this, that this is a weakness of the Bill. The second thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I want to know and I am going to ask the Attorney General when he closes debate to discuss 
and point out to me the category and the position of Service Printing, a separate corporation. I am going to 
ask him to specify and elaborate on the position of The Commonwealth and the Saskatchewan Liberal. I am 
going to ask him if the people working in The Commonwealth office are members of the political party and 
are considered as controlled under this Bill. I am going to ask him whether or not the people who work in 
Service Printing are considered as people under the control of The Election Expenses Act or can a separate 
corporation be established like Service Printing and all of a sudden because of an enhancing of the business 
of that particular corporation during an election campaign, can they all of a sudden hire five or six, seven or 
eight, or ten more people. I want to know whether or not people can make a contribution to the corporation 
like The Commonwealth? Whether that is considered controlled under this Bill? I am wondering whether or 
not contributions made to The Commonwealth, or to Service Printing or any other corporation set up by the 
NDP must be disclosed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think these are things that this Bill does not contain, and that the people of Saskatchewan will 
want to 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2687 

know just what is that position. Maybe the Attorney General can give me the assurance that they are 
controlled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the limits of $100. Now I'm not sure whether the limit should be $100 or 
$500, but I think the purpose of disclosure is to prevent any individual or any corporation through the power 
of the dollar, from having an undue influence on the government of the day, or the political party that has a 
potential for being the government. I think with that objective in mind, most Members and most of the 
people of Saskatchewan would agree. But I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, that the $100 is adequate because the 
minute we do that we immediately invade the privacy of my right to make a contribution to a political party. 
I'm not sure that $100 is going to infringe or going to have any power to exert an undue influence on the 
Government of Saskatchewan, or the Liberal Party or any Opposition Party. I would suggest that sometimes 
the NDP once again has an unfair advantage because they have a forced contribution by the unions. I know 
that my son and my daughter, yes that's right, my son and daughter worked in the Province of Saskatchewan 
in the summer holidays. They had to join a union, a portion of their union dues goes to the NDP whether 
they like it or believe in it. Sure you say — 'you can opt out', but I'm not sure that somebody wants to go up 
and identify themselves as opting out any more than they want to opt in. So there is an unfair advantage. I 
would suggest that perhaps $200 - $300 might be a more reasonable limit, rather than $100, even though I 
know that $100 is on the Federal level and I'm not sure but I would challenge the $100. I do suggest that I 
question this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other thing I want to comment on before I adjourn the debate, and I know that other of my 
colleagues would want to speak on the Bill. The Minister said that he was going to bring in an amendment 
regarding institutional releases. I hope he would reconsider this, because I think he is sincerely attempting to 
find an avenue to project or to provide legitimate government information during an election campaign. First 
of all, I don't even think you should advertise for the public service. The minute you go to the newspaper in 
Wakaw (and I use Wakaw particularly), or you go to the newspaper in some other community, and all of a 
sudden you say, 'look we are going to send you $300 worth of advertising this week', and at the same time 
that you send them that $300 worth of advertising you send them four Government releases, put out by Ad 
Sask, there is a strong tendency of that little newspaper in rural Saskatchewan to place those four 
Government news releases from Ad Sask with a $300 advertisement. Let's not kid ourselves, in fact I know 
for a fact, that the advertising medium or what do we call them, McLarens, Dunsky, those agencies, I know 
for a fact when discussing it with the Government they advised the Government when sending out news 
releases to send them at the same time as the paid advertisements. And that's a concern. Institutional releases 
that don't mention the political candidate or the political party, I think that gives an awful lot of latitude. 
When I talk about latitude all of a sudden we can say, "Oh, the Government of Saskatchewan is doing this, or 
the Government of Saskatchewan is doing that", and you could have a very subtle advertisement, advertising 
of Government programs. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Attorney General should reconsider. I'm sure the Public Service can 
get by for 30 days, 28 days without advertising for employees. Most of them have a waiting list, most of 
them have a six-week period 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2688 

before the final selection is made at any rate. I don't think it's absolutely essential, I don't think institutional 
advertising should be permitted either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've just made a few comments. The Leader of the Opposition originally intended to speak on 
this Bill. He wasn't here this morning, so I've expressed some of my own concerns. I know that the Leader of 
the Opposition and other Members of the House will want now to respond and I hope we have a good 
debate. I hope that both sides of the House will express the opinions of people from all political faiths, about 
controlling, legitimate controls of political parties in election campaigns. I hope also that there is a careful 
analysis of this Bill by the back benchers because some day you may be sitting on this side of the House and 
that you should make sure that in no way this strangles the responsibilities of the Opposition in the 
democratic process of presenting a legitimate alternative to the government of the day, and that this Bill in 
no way should provide an unfair advantage to the government of the day or protect the government of the 
day by controlling and strangling and limiting the amount of money that can be spent on very expensive 
media, on the communications in 1975 to $125,000. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cody that Bill No. 
108 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance to Certain Persons for Construction of 
or Structural Alterations to An Eligible Residence be now read a second time. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill touches on a point very dear to my heart. 
 
MR. LANE: — Money! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, I realize you think in terms of money at all times, but not all other people do. 
 
Because this Bill will increase grants to Saskatchewan citizens who will be buying or renovating houses, it is 
in reality another way this Government is helping citizens to attack inflation. For this reason, I welcome the 
proposed grant increases. However, Mr. Speaker, I do want to make some suggestions on how a real and 
concentrated effort may be made by all three levels of government in really making decent housing at decent 
cost available to the citizens of this or any other province. I say this because the cost of housing in Canada 
today is just absolutely scandalous. It is absolutely scandalous because as time goes on more and more 
people find themselves paying a higher percentage of their earnings for housing. Many people now pay 
nearly 50 per cent of their incomes for housing. 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2689 

Mr. Speaker, authorities claim it should not be over 25 per cent of the family's net income, or else the family 
must be deprived of other necessities of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may wonder why the cost of housing has risen so drastically over the past few years. There 
are some reasons for this. One such reason, and by far the most important one, is the huge slice now taken by 
money lenders through mortgages at a high interest rate. If one considers a $27,000 house today with 
monthly mortgage payments for a 25 year period at a rate of 10 per cent on $25,000, the monthly payment 
comes close to $225 for a total of roughly $77,000 for the 25 year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is nothing short of highway robbery, and it's being performed legally, subtly and 
handsomely by the money lenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to remind you that for many people in a situation such as I have just described, the 
$225 monthly represents at least one-half of a particular family's total monthly income. But this is not to say 
that only homeowners are caught in this vicious cycle. Far from it, because in many cases renters find 
themselves paying dearly, too, because their rents are related to the high cost of houses and apartments which 
are usually financed for construction by the same money lenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the situation could be made more tolerable for homeowners and renters if both senior 
governments, Federal and Provincial were to make money available to home and apartment owners at a 
humane rate of interest. I do not know what this rate should be exactly, but I do know it should be 
considerably lower than the present rate which is asked for and got. 
 
Even though I call on both senior governments for such help I want to make it plain that I think the lead 
should be taken by the Federal Government because it has the ability, unlike the provincial governments, to 
borrow money at rates that come close to being reasonable. Whereas, a provincial government might well 
have to pay an interest rate of 10 per cent on money which it might want to make available for housing 
mortgages, the Federal Government could borrow this same money at a rate of approximately 7 or 8 per cent. 
Now if the Federal Government were to borrow this money at 7 or 8 per cent, there is no reason why it, and 
any provincial government, could not make up the difference between this rate and a rate what I call humane, 
a mortgage rate of approximately 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more assistance could be given homeowners through other means. One such way could very 
well be a standard house warranty program common throughout the country and transferable for a certain 
number of years. I know the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is working on this, 
along with housing construction companies. I hope we shall have some concrete results soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another way homeowners could be more fully assisted could be in the creation of a body of 
interested citizens and jurisdictions relative to housing. Such a body could well contain representatives from 
each of the three levels of government, from housebuilding construction companies, from the public at large. 
Such a body could well investigate, not specific complaints, but in a general sort of way, such things as the 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2690 

honoring of warranties, workmanship involved, standards followed or not followed, and general complaints 
on housing. Such a body could very well formulate recommendations to be considered either on a national or 
provincial level. It just could be that such a body could very well enlighten the public in regard to its various 
housing concerns. Mr. Speaker, such a body could very well be advantageous to homeowners and house 
construction companies alike because I know very well both would welcome more public information on 
things related to housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned just a few points on this important concern because I believe the cost of 
housing in Canada is out of reach for some and soon will be for many more if something is not done soon by 
our two senior governments, which must work together to help solve this grave problem. Therefore, as I 
mentioned initially, I favor this Bill because it will help many citizens in their desire to own or renovate their 
homes. I will be supporting it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill 
No. 86 — An Act establishing The Saskatchewan Multicultural Advisory Council and providing for 
Assistance to Individuals and Groups be now read a second time. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, you are in for a second treat, as well as Members 
opposite. 
 
MR. GUY: — I'm leaving right now. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — You're going to leave, well that means you'll be treating me then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan enjoys a cultural heritage that is unique in the world. In probably no other place 
can we find so many people of varying racial and cultural origins living together in reasonable harmony. 
Having been born and brought up in this province I can say we are all richer for having the rich racial and 
cultural diversities of Saskatchewan people. Therefore, I welcome this Bill's effect which will promote more 
fully the preservation of these diversities. Not only do I welcome this Bill, but many others do too, as well, 
as numerous organizations with which I have had the pleasure of coming into contact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I mention an effort made by the people of one community near Saskatoon — in 
Saskatoon-Hanley constituency. Last year, this community put on an ethnic program one Sunday afternoon. 
It included Anglo-Saxon, German, Ukrainian and other displays. It was a smashing success, Mr. Speaker. 
But what surprised me was the reaction by the younger generation. They loved every minute of it and were 
eagerly looking and asking various questions. Surely this is proof that Saskatchewan people are interested in 
their varied cultural heritage and want to preserve it. Surely this indicates that this interest will be carried 
over into the future because as I mentioned, it was the younger generation who were particularly interested 
that 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2691 

particular afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome moves on the part of any government to preserve our various cultural heritages. I 
favor this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Premier) 
that Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Liquor Licensing Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. D. BOLDT (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words. I was more prepared to say 
something the other day when the Premier spoke on the Bill. I made a few notes and I am particularly 
concerned about the advertising in the province of liquor. 
 
Although we have stated repeatedly and the Federal Government has stated repeatedly that there is no 
advertising of liquor and tobacco in the province or in the country and yet by implementing this kind of 
regulation, the industries have found a very unique way of getting free advertising. When you look at sports 
activities you can see all the liquor being advertised on the bill boards, the cameras will focus on the player 
and you see this all the time. When you have horse races, you see liquor ads. I watched one television show 
where they indicated how they were able to manoeuvre around this advertising legislation. Every trailer that 
brought in horses had great big ads on it. For example, Canadian Scotch Whiskey or beer or all kinds, was all 
advertised free, you saw this on television continuously. Don't get the idea that there is no advertising of 
liquor on our television sets, there is a lot of it. 
 
I would hope that the Bill would have dealt with this kind of advertising. They get advertising free and yet 
the laws in Saskatchewan are that there is not supposed to be any advertising. 
 
I disagree with the Bill that in certain areas, particularly in the North, there should be more readily accessible 
liquor outlets. When the communities in the North have repeatedly asked particularly in the far North, they 
have asked the Federal Government to keep the liquor trucks out of their community, local people have 
taken the initiative and yet the liquor boards, the government have provided these people with outlets. 
 
I also disagree with the Bill permitting outlets to remain open after 12:00 o'clock at night. The Minister had 
to come in with a separate amendment indicating that if someone was evicted from a drinking outlet that it 
meant for the duration of that day, and after 12:00 o'clock midnight, even if it went into the second day. 
 
So my main concern is, and I should like to make the Government aware of the advertising that does take 
place and the benefits that the liquor industry is getting out of free advertising. Before they spent piles and 
piles of money on advertising when it was legal, or where it is legal, today it's free and you see it on every 
occasion. 
 
Those are the only concerns that I have about this Bill, and I would hope that at some future time the 
Government would 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2692 

take a look at the free advertising the industry is enjoying today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Just a short comment dealing with my constituency — with regard to the 
matter of golf courses, I'm sure that the Minister responsible for the Liquor Licensing Commission has had 
an application from the Kinookima Resort project and their application for a liquor licence. If the legislation 
is such that they are prohibited by legislation I would hope that we would get a House amendment to allow 
this. It's an extremely worthwhile project as many Members opposite know and I'm sure the Minister of 
Renewable Resources and Tourism (Mr. Kowalchuk) can attest to their putting in a pretty major 
development at Regina Beach. It's a project of, I believe, seven Indian bands and one part of it is the golf 
course which they are in the process of completing. They have the clubhouse completed and there has been 
some considerable delay as to the matter of getting the liquor licence, and I would hope that the Minister 
responsible would bring in the necessary House amendment if he feels (and I realize there is some doubt) 
that they would be prohibited by legislation from having the licence. I hope he would give consideration to 
that particular matter. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you a group of 
some 80 students from the Imperial School, located in the Regina North East constituency. They are all 
Grade Eight students and are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Thordarson and Messrs. Brown, Mayer 
and Sotropa. They are seated in the west gallery and in the Speaker's Gallery. 
 
I do hope that their visit with us this afternoon will be an educational experience and will assist them 
particularly in their social studies. 
 
I do propose to meet the students later on outside the House. As the Deputy Premier has indicated we will be 
in Committee of the Whole this afternoon. I note that the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) is going 
to be dealing with his Bills in Committee, and this might be of particular interest to them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

FLOOD WATERS IN QU'APPELLE RIVER 
 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of Personal Privilege I 
was . . . 
 
DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I'm wondering, is it a point of Personal Privilege? 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2693 

MR. BYERS: — Yes. 
 
DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Would Committee agree to receiving a point of Personal Privilege at this time? 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly think the House warrants listening to the Minister's 
statement, but I think it's by leave of the House, I don't think it's a matter of Privilege is it? 
 
DEPUTY SPEAKER: — By leave of the House, right. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Yesterday I was not in the House and I believe before the Orders of the Day the Hon. 
Member for Lumsden asked the Government what it was doing to warn the Fishing Lakes cottage owners 
about the unprecedented floodwaters coming down the Qu'Appelle River and what it was prepared to do to 
assist cottage owners to take preventive action. May I just outline briefly some of the steps that we have and 
are taking. 
 
1. This morning an Emergency Operating Centre was established in Fort Qu'Appelle. This centre will 
co-ordinate information and assistance to municipalities, communities and individuals in the Fishing Lakes 
area. Information about moving assistance and availability of sandbags is available through the Fort 
Qu'Appelle office. I would remind cottage owners that while sandbags and moving assistance is available, 
costs incurred will be assessed against the cottage owner. 
 
2. Staff from the Departments of Agriculture, Highways, Environment and Municipal Affairs, are at this 
moment placing stakes at all major beaches and at intervals all along the Fishing Lakes. The stakes are being 
placed two feet above the projected peak-water levels. This is being done to provide cottage owners with a 
reference point so they can decide the extent of precautions they should take to protect their property. The 
two-foot leeway is being provided because of the added danger from high winds and ice breakup. The survey 
crews will be moving to Last Mountain Lake on the weekend. 
 
3. Advertisements warning cottage owners of the danger have been placed in newspapers and on radio 
stations throughout the basin, and at this time I would like to make special mention of the role that the media 
has played to this point in making Saskatchewan citizens aware of the flood situation. We have been 
impressed and appreciative of the co-operation that they have provided in getting this information to the 
public. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — Individuals can get up-to-date information about lake levels from the Provincial Inquiry 
Centre and special arrangements are being made to extend the hours of the centre to handle the information 
requests. I urge all cottage owners to take immediate steps to protect their property in the Fishing Lakes. We 
have provided the forecasts, we have made assistance available, and we will, of course, count on the 
co-operation of the cottage owners in an attempt to protect their own property in the valley. 
 
MR. GRANT: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2694 

could direct a question since I am pretty interested in this. I probably have the most exposed cottage in the 
Fishing Lakes. 
 
That two-foot stake that you mentioned, it's about the level of my kitchen stove, so I can imagine what's 
going to happen. I'm right out on the tip of the point there at B-Say-Tah. You raised the question about help 
for moving. Are these people available from the Centre set up in Fort Qu'Appelle? 
 
MR. BYERS: — I don't have all of those particulars. This was the reason for establishing this Emergency 
Operating Centre in conjunction with the local government. I don't have that many details as to whether 
trucks and that sort of thing are available. If you want information about assistance that is available, may I 
suggest that you contact this particular Centre that's set up in Fort Qu'Appelle. 
 
MR. GRANT: — Where is it? 
 
MR. BYERS: — I understand that it's on the Main Street someplace in Fort Qu'Appelle. I can't tell you the 
exact building, I'm sorry. But it is right in Fort Qu'Appelle. 
 
MR. GRANT: — Would any of the Members volunteer to come out and help me sandbag on Saturday and 
Sunday? 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Just a matter of reply. The Minister is considerably more subdued than 
prior to the Moose Jaw flood when he announced that everything was under control and what great shape 
we're in. We emphasized yesterday, and it was a concern of your Department, that cottage owners should act 
now because the dangers are that great. I'm happy that an office was opened in Fort Qu'Appelle, and it is 
certainly going to be necessary and it's going to be welcomed. 
 
I would hope that the matter of compensation or assessment which the Minister has raised will be made very, 
very clear, very shortly to the people affected and I hope we would get more information than was given this 
afternoon. If the cottage owners and the owners affected in Fort Qu'Appelle are going to have to pay the 
costs of potential dyking with the highway crews and what not, or their share of the costs of damage 
prevention, the costs will be astronomical and I'm sure that the Government does not intend to put these 
costs against the individual cottage owners. It certainly would be prohibitive if they did; again the matter is 
urgent and certainly again should be taken seriously. I'm glad the Minister is taking it seriously this time. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Just in brief reply to that, Mr. Chairman, the whole question of a formula for 
compensation is being looked at very carefully. The federal regulations are not all that precise with respect to 
dwellings such as summer cottages. We have our people in contact with the Federal people in an effort to get 
these matters clarified and it is our hope to have some very precise guidelines with respect to compensation 
worked out, hopefully early next week. 
 
MR. LANE: — You won't absorb all the 
 



 
April 25, 1974 

 
2695 

costs of compensation like you are in Lumsden? 
 
MR. BYERS: — The statement that I am making is that the guidelines for compensation are being worked 
out at this time. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Just a minute please, I know that this is a subject and I recognize the 
Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) who I do believe is rising to ask a question on flooding as well. But I 
think that this can't go on. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the Minister wanting to make 
a statement, and we granted him leave, but I don't think we should throw the House open to debate and I 
think that's not in the Orders. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — We have before us Bill 64 . . . 
 
MR. K. MacLEOD: — I'm not proposing to debate it, I just had one question to ask the Minister in relation 
to that particular matter. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I really think we should come to order. I agree with the Hon. Member for 
Milestone that really we had questions . . . 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — I wondered if I could just ask one question though. Surely that's not unreasonable 
because others have had a chance. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, if I can speak on this. We've got ourselves in a real problem. If the 
Hon. Member for Albert Park has a right . . . 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — It's a simple question. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Right, then the Hon. Member for Melfort-Kinistino has a right. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I saw the Hon. Member for Kinistino before I saw you. I think we must just 
go on with the Bill. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:34 o’clock p.m. 
 


