
























































Hansard: December 03, 1974


 
 
 

69 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

4th Day 
 

Tuesday, December 3, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all Members of the Assembly 12 adult students in the Speaker’s Gallery attending the 
Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Science at Christ Lutheran Church in Regina North West. Their 
teacher, Stan Metcalf, is with them. 
 
Also from my constituency are 53 Grade Eight students from Benson School. They are seated in the 
west gallery with their teachers, Mr. Huebner and Mr. Bouchard. 
 
I am sure all Members welcome them and express to them best wishes for a pleasant and educational 
visit to the Legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Prince Albert West): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to join with the Hon. 
Member for Regina North West in welcoming the students but especially Mr. Dave Bouchard, who after 
the next election will be sitting here on that side of the House with the Liberal Government. Welcome to 
the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: —  Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

BUYING OF OIL AND PETROLEUM PROPERTIES IN ALBERTA 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I have a 
question for the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley). I see he is not in his seat this afternoon so 
perhaps the Premier could answer it. I should like to know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not SaskOil in the 
past has or intends in the future to buy oil and petroleum properties, meaning properties in its largest 
sense, in the Province of Alberta other than natural gas; and as well why SaskOil is buying natural gas in 
the Province of Alberta when this in the past has always been done by SPC and whether SPC and 
SaskOil are in competition for these properties? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure I can fully answer the question 
asked by the Hon. Member. The reason for purchasing natural gas properties in Alberta is, I think, to 
ensure to the people in Saskatchewan a supply of natural gas whether it comes from Alberta or from 
Saskatchewan. I can assure the 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

70 
 

Hon. Member that SaskOil and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation are not in competition in the sense 
that they do consult with each other before they enter into transactions. 
 
Thirdly, I cannot answer the Hon. Member’s question am to whether or not SaskOil has purchased any 
properties in Alberta which might have oil potential as well as natural gas potential. I think it is not 
always easy to know for certain what is under the ground and accordingly it may be that in the purchase 
of property which has gas potential it might also have oil potential. But I concede the force of the Hon. 
Member’s question that generally speaking one is purchasing either the oil potential or the gas potential 
as is usually known, I cannot help him further. I suggest that he either put a question on the Order Paper 
or ask the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I assume from the Premier’s answer that it 
is certainly conceivable that SaskOil is buying oil properties in Alberta either in conjunction with 
bidding for natural gas rights or buying oil in itself. Now I ask the Premier how he can justify this 
investment of the taxpayers’ money of Saskatchewan to develop an Alberta industry and what his 
feeling would be if the Province of Alberta decided to reinvest some of their millions of petrodollars in 
Saskatchewan by buying agricultural land which in effect would be the same thing as we are doing in 
Alberta? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It will be known, I think, that the Province of Alberta has branched forth in 
purchasing airlines which have holdings outside the Province of Alberta so it wouldn’t be a new 
departure for the Province of Alberta. 
 
I believe the purpose of SaskOil is to carry on the operations of an integrated oil company. Perhaps I had 
better clarify that - an integrated oil exploration company. Under those circumstances people who are 
familiar with the oil industry will know there are many dealings and trade-offs which might involve the 
acquisition of rights in Alberta. I am not able to state definitely whether or not this has taken place but if 
in the efforts of building an integrated oil exploration company it appeared prudent on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan to purchase interests in Alberta, I would see nothing in principle to suggest that 
shouldn’t be done. 
 

PLAINS HOSPITAL 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Health 
(Mr. Smishek). Is the Minister of Health aware that renovations are still going on in the Plains Hospital? 
I had occasion to visit the family medical unit here last week and this is not a question of equipment, it is 
not a question of long awaited supplies, it is a question of simple renovations by electricians and 
plumbers. We all know that there was a cornerstone laying one year ago. I am aware that there are a few 
patients in this very expensive building that has now been sitting idle for some three years or two and 
one half years. Can the Minister inform Members of the House when the Plains Hospital will be open on 
a full time basis? The amount of electric lights and energy used there every night is almost a scandal. 
Could the Minister also tell me if a portion of the 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

71 

Plains Hospital is being used as office space for personnel from the Department of Health? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the Hon. Member 
the Plains Hospital is open and is in operation. 
 
MR. STEUART: — How many patients? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — I don’t know how many patients there are exactly today. The Plains Hospital was 
opened the beginning of June on an outpatient basis. As of September the Plains Hospital has been 
taking patients in for minor surgery and later on for a one-day stay. As of November 4th, the first 36 
beds were open on a full-time basis. The Hon. Member may be interested in knowing that you can’t 
open a hospital of that size with all the beds being open at one time. The truth is that the Liberals never 
had any experience in opening hospitals they only had experience in closing them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, before I ask my supplementary question, could I ask the Minister 
to answer the second portion of my question. Is it being used for office space f or personnel from the 
Department of Health? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — The answer is, yes, there is some space that is rented out to some of the 
Government agencies at the present time. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, now my supplementary. You know when he talks about opening 
34 beds out of I don’t know how many in a city where there are thousands of people on waiting lists, I 
think it is a scandal. 
 
It is also true, Mr. Speaker, that that must be the most expensive office space in the Dominion of 
Canada. It is true that you can’t buy office space for the civil servants downtown. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the Member please state his question. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Can the Minister tell me what the cost and what rental that personnel or those 
branches of the Government of Saskatchewan are paying to the Plains Hospital for that office space that 
they are using in the Plains Hospital? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Perhaps the Hon. Member might write to the Board of the South Saskatchewan 
Hospital to inquire about that. It is the Board’s responsibility to administer the hospital, just as it is the 
responsibility of the Union Hospital Board to administer the affairs of the Union Hospital. The space is 
not rented out by the Government of Saskatchewan, it is rented out by the South Saskatchewan Board. 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

72 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Does the Minister . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, we can have some questions but we can’t have debate. 
 

CHURCHILL RIVER STUDY 
 
MR. J. C. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to 
the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers). The question is, when will the Minister be tabling before 
the house the annual report of the Churchill River Study? I have a copy of this report but I understand 
from your ruling yesterday, Mr. Speaker, you prefer I not table it. So my question is to the Minister, 
when is he prepared to table the report in this house? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, for the Churchill River Study, that 
information will be available to the public when the entire report is completed. The timetable for the 
completion of that study is July 1, 1974. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the Minister I have a copy of the annual report 
for the year ending March 1st, 1974. According to the agreement between three levels of governments, 
Manitoba, the Federal Government and Saskatchewan, it is required to report annually. 
 
The supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. There have been considerable problems between the SFI, the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and the study group. Can the Minister elaborate on whether these 
have been satisfactorily resolved and what is the position of the Provincial Government on the problems 
which have arisen? 
 
MR. BYERS: — If the Hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, will identify the particular problems that he is 
referring to that he alleges are the cause of the hostility and the frustration which we do not regard as all 
that real, we would be able to provide him with a specific answer. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Health 
(Mr. Smishek). 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think we have had the traditional three questions. We have had one from the 
Member for Lakeview, one from the Member for Milestone, one from the Member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 
MR. MALONE: — My question . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! It isn’t a matter of who represents whom, it is a matter of all these people, 
other than Cabinet Ministers, 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

73 

as Members of this Assembly. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — On a Point of Order, I think the understanding always been that the official 
Opposition was allowed three questions. I want to use the example now, if you want to use your current 
ruling applied equally to the Government benches, the back bench Members over there have a right to 
ask questions. They, theoretically could use up all three questions of the question period. Therefore, the 
ruling of three questions as applied to the official Opposition, the Member for Saskatoon (Mr. Richards) 
is an Independent. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I should like to make it quite plain that the ruling has been not a written ruling, it 
has been a thing carried on and it is usually recognized that it is the official Opposition that asks the 
questions and it is very seldom that the Chair recognizes a Government backbencher. There have been 
occasions; when I have asked the house if they will agree to an extra question which the House, I think, 
has always agreed to. So it is immaterial to the Chair, because the house goes on, is the House prepared 
to allow an extra question. 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — I might suggest that the matter of questions and the 
debate thereon be left to a later time today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Is it my understanding that I am going to be allowed my question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I’ll ask the question tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think if Members would understand that they can ask questions, but can’t express 
opinions, we could get more questions in in a given time. But you just put the Chair under pressure 
when we know that there are Members waiting to speak. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J.K. Comer (Nipawin) for 
an Address-in-Reply. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am very interested to hear the 
Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) talking about his experience in opening hospitals. He has been the 
Minister now for three-and-one-half years and I opened more hospitals the first six months I was a 
Minister than he has opened in three years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

74 
 

MR. STEUART: — The best experience that that Government has over there might be opening 
something about the size of Climax Hospital, but when it comes to opening a base hospital in Regina, it 
is as the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) said, a disgrace the way they are carrying on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Speech from the Throne fully expecting to hear the unfolding of 
Government plans to face the responsibilities and meet the challenges facing Saskatchewan in 1975 and 
beyond. To be frank, while I expected to agree with most of their goals, I was convinced I would 
disagree with the method the NDP chose to attain those goals. I was sure they would continue to force 
out the private sector of the economy and depend on Government financing and management to develop 
our economy and to utilize our resources. But, Mr. Speaker, there was nothing, no plans to take 
advantage of our great oil, coal and uranium resources to make Saskatchewan an energy rich province. 
 
We should be developing a power plant fueled by nuclear energy, or at least experimenting and 
researching this type of power development. We are one of the few areas in the world where uranium 
reserves exist and the NDP sit idly by and watch it shipped all over the world to create new energy and 
new wealth. We have massive coal reserves but not enough natural gas. Why was there nothing in the 
Throne Speech to indicate a research program into the feasibility of the gasification of our coal? The low 
price of natural gas ruled this out up until now but with natural gas going up in price almost daily it 
should soon be practical. 
 
We have been blessed with the largest, most accessible and finest potash resources in the world, the 
Throne Speech should have indicated bold new initiatives to make our province wealthy on this product 
alone. But, again nothing, and the tragedy is that we are being by-passed by this industry and thus losing 
the opportunity of a lifetime. 
 
We are locked in a stupid fight with the Federal Government over the taxation of oil, gas and other 
natural resources. The Federal Government gave a little in this fight in their recent Budget, not enough, 
but some; our Government counters by name calling in the Throne Speech. Instead of showing 
leadership, Mr. Blakeney would sooner carry on the fight. 
 
The resource industry is leaving our province and our country but the Premier thinks he will gain 
politically by fighting with Ottawa so he lets the investment and the jobs go elsewhere. 
 
The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is a sad, weak document, barren of ideas and imagination, reflecting 
Mr. Blakeney’s overriding desire to hang on to office at whatever cost to our own people or those 
depending on our resources in other parts of the world. 
 
To the farmer the NDP promise more land grabbed up by the Government, none sold to the farmers. The 
promise of legislation to co-operate with the Federal Government’s planned farm income stabilization 
program is welcome news. 
 
To residents of the North, the promise is for more 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

75 

bureaucratic control, no new industries but telephones. No jobs for our northerners, just more social aid. 
But soon they will be able to phone south to find out how the free people are really doing. 
 
For the old, age pensioners, a real letdown, not more money, just more committees and a half-baked 
Government agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides almost breaking their arm putting themselves on the back, the Government through 
the Throne Speech spent most of their time crying about the Federal Government and I will deal with 
their most blatant misrepresentations later in my speech. However, I say now that the reason for this is 
obvious. Mr. Blakeney does not want to fight the next provincial election on his own record. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — He feels if he can divert the public’s attention from his power grab, his 
inefficiency, his waste of public funds and shady dealings, his Government may hang on to power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a short look at some of the NDP record will indicate why Mr. Blakeney wants so badly to 
stay away from provincial issues. Since this will probably be their last Session before a general election, 
I shall review the NDP Government’s record of failure and of lost opportunities. I will also point out to 
the people of Saskatchewan the serious erosion of their freedom and independence under the Blakeney 
NDP administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of any moral or ethical standards of the NDP will be exposed along with their plan 
to control every sector of our economy and every section of our society. Mr. Blakeney and the NDP, in 
only three and one half years, have literally robbed the people of Saskatchewan of more freedom, more 
opportunities and more money than any other government, including the old CCF in the history of our 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I say to the thousands of sincere people who supported the old CCF Government 
that this New Democratic Party is a very different group of people with far different ideas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The CCF began in rural Saskatchewan, they drew their power from Saskatchewan 
people and they answered to them. The NDP began in eastern Canada, they get their power and money 
from big labour unions and they answer to them. 
 
I challenge the people of this province to take a hard look at the NDP, I guarantee they won’t like what 
they see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people from every corner of Saskatchewan and from every walk of life are taking this look 
and they are becoming worried, concerned and even frightened by the growing power and arrogance of 
this NDP Government. That is the basic reason why they are turning to the Liberal Party in ever 
increasing numbers. Three, four and even six good candidates 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

76 
 

fighting for Liberal nominations, huge crowds of 600, 800 and as high as 900 people turning out to our 
conventions. Over 1,100 people from every part of the province jammed into the Centre of the Arts at 
our $100 a plate fund raising banquet. The greatest single fund raising event over put on by a political 
party in the province’s history. 
 
Liberal Party memberships up 5,000 over last year and early indications are for a record 35,000 Liberal 
memberships in 1975. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, this great year of Liberal activity will culminate this week, December 
5th, 6th and 7th when over 1,200 Liberals will gather to complete a positive plan of action that will spell 
out our program of confidence in the people and the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Compare this growing enthusiasm for Liberalism with the lacklustre performance of the New 
Democratic Party. NDP memberships down almost 4,000, dismal crowds, the same tired old candidates 
and less than 750 delegates attended their pre-election provincial convention, fewer than we have had at, 
at least three constituency conventions. 
 
There is a growing conviction among Saskatchewan people that they should not, that they dare not, give 
the Blakeney NDP Government another four years of power. 
 
There are, of course, many reasons why more people every day grow to fear this NDP Government but 
the most serious is their power grab. The Blakeney NDP Government has consistently attacked and 
reduced our freedoms and our rights. Freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of association 
and freedom of enterprise have all been diminished by Premier Blakeney and his Government. 
 
The right of our people to own land, to market their produce, the right to privacy, the right to govern 
themselves as they see fit at the local level and even the right to independent political action have all 
been threatened and reduced by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are serious charges and I will give this Assembly “chapter and verse” to prove every 
statement that I have made. For example in 1972 amendments to The Trade Union Act provided for a 
shift of power from the hands of union members to their executive and paid staff. This legislation 
removed the guarantee that 40 per cent of employees could vote to determine what union would 
represent them, it also gave the union the power to expel union members whom they consider a threat 
for speaking out against any union decisions or policies. The same Act then requires that these union 
members thus expelled, for exercising freedom of speech, be fired from their jobs within 50 days. This 
law put on the books by the present NDP Government denies working people the right to speak against 
their present union or in favour of another union under threat of losing their very livelihood. 
 
The news media and its freedom to use confidential documents has been threatened by The Privacy Act 
introduced in 1973 by the Blakeney Government. 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

77 

The terms of this legislation are so vague and wide ranging as adversely to affect every man, woman and 
child in Saskatchewan and make every one of them subject to legal prosecution for even the most 
ordinary everyday actions. 
 
A Star-Phoenix editorial of December 12, 1973 stated, and I quote: 
 

The proposed legislation restrictive of the freedom of the individual and punitive, is unnecessary, ill—
advised and, as Federal Justice Minister Otto Lang has already observed, is a dangerous way to make 
law. 

 
In the future this Act could be used to control the free press by the NDP Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the one freedom that has really been attacked and diminished by the 
Blakeney Government has been the freedom of enterprise. Let’s be clear about freedom of enterprise. 
This means a person’s right or freedom to own a farm, a corner grocery store, it also means a group of 
people’s freedom to start a co-op or an oil company or a potash mine. 
 
Thanks to the so-called Land Bank, for example, the NDP have made it more difficult to own a farm in 
Saskatchewan, and I predict if they are re-elected it will soon be impossible to own your own farm in 
this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Any farmer wanting to start a hog operation in our province has lost that freedom 
under Mr. Blakeney. He must have permission from the Government operated Hog Commission. Even 
the hogs aren’t free in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the NDP are re-elected, cattlemen are next. That is both an NDP promise and a threat. 
 
Under The NDP Consumers Affairs Act the freedom of action of every individual or group who owns 
any business in Saskatchewan has been seriously restricted. The constant threat of closure at the whim 
of an NDP Cabinet Minister hangs over their heads. 
 
No individual or group of people can even begin a lumber operation, a potash or a hard rock mineral 
mine in Saskatchewan unless they hand over control to the NDP Government. 
 
Let me remind the people that as the Government takes over farming and mining and lumbering and 
soon other businesses, more and more of you will be forced to work for them and then what happens to 
your other freedoms? They, too, will soon disappear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to remind the people about the Human Resources Development Agency. The 
NDP set up this agency, hired a great many people, told them to go out and work for the disadvantaged 
people in Saskatchewan. The NDP told HRDA employees to speak out against, injustice wherever they 
found it. When these Government employees found injustice within the 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

78 
 

Government and exercised their freedom of speech Mr. Blakeney turned them over to his hatchet man, 
Mr. MacMurchy, who fired them all. 
 
Imagine everyone in this province living under the threat of MacMurchy, Bowerman, Snyder and 
Kramer. ‘That quartet sitting over there, usually glowering at this side of the House, don’t know the 
meaning of compassion or the word justice. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — And then, Mr. Speaker, when that gang were finished with you, imagine depending 
on Mr. Blakeney to come courageously to your rescue. Our Premier hasn’t had a courageous thought, 
never mind an act, since he came to power because it might spoil his image or cost him a vote. 
 
Now let’s look at what these New Democrats have done to the rights of Saskatchewan people in just 
over three years. 
 
The right to own land has been restricted by the NDP Foreign Ownership of Land Act. This Act makes 
foreigners of most Canadians and denies them the basic right to own land anywhere in our own 
province. 
 
The right of farmers to market their own produce, cancelled and trampled on by the Blakeney machine, 
under The Natural Products Marketing Act. 
 
The right of Saskatchewan people to run and manage their own local government, stamped on by Mr. 
Blakeney’s strong arm government by the imposition of the ward system and amendments to The City 
and Hospital Standards Act. 
 
And finally the right of political freedom threatened by an arrogant NDP Government through The 
Election Act and the threats issued by Mr. Blakeney against the Metis Society when he didn’t know a 
reporter was present. 
 
Mr. Blakeney says to all political parties who dare oppose him, “I will tell you what you can spend in an 
election.” In the meantime he spends millions of the taxpayers’ money in blatant political propaganda. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, he threatened the Metis Society to cut off their legitimate grants if 
they dared to field candidates in the next provincial election. How is that for political freedom in the 
new Saskatchewan as ruled by the NDP? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pledge that a Liberal Government will strike these restrictive and dictatorial laws from 
the statute books. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Trade Union Act will be amended to return freedom of speech and action to 
the individual union members. 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

79 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Privacy Act will be changed to protect the privacy of the individual, while 
leaving alone his freedom as well as that of our free press. 
 
Business men and women will be treated with equity; if they break the law they will be brought before 
the courts. But the right of a Cabinet Minister to be judge and jury will be removed. 
 
The right of farmers to own their own land and to market their produce as they see fit will be restored by 
a Liberal Government. 
 
Freedom of enterprise does not, nor should it mean the right of businesses large or small to take 
advantage of people, to defraud their customers, to poison our air, land or water. In other words to do 
anything and everything in pursuit of a fast buck or a quick profit. There are unscrupulous people in 
business. It is the job of the government to find these people and control them or put them out of 
business. 
 
If our present laws aren’t tough enough a Liberal Government will make them tougher. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — However, because we have some rotten people in business it is unfair to condemn 
them all just as a few bad lawyers or plumbers or doctors should not cloud our judgment concerning the 
99 per cent who are excellent people. 
 
Nevertheless, that is what the NDP do. Because we have some dishonest people in business they have 
waged war on the whole business community. The Blakeney Government through its laws, words and 
actions have harassed, crippled and driven out of our province good honest, energetic people because 
they happen to be engaged in private business. The NDP hate private business and if left in power long 
enough will take over or control every business in our province. 
 
Take a look at the list they have attacked in only three-and-one-half years: — hog producers, farmers, 
hearing aid dealers, implement dealers and wholesalers, meat packing plants, lumber and timber 
industry, oil industry large and small, potash industry, hard rock mining, tourist camp operators, 
druggists. 
 
A Liberal Government will demand that business in Saskatchewan operate as good citizens, pay good 
wages, treat people fairly, protect our environment and pay their fair share of taxes. At the same time we 
will treat the business community fairly and with justice removing those NDP laws that deny them a fair 
deal and equal treatment with other groups in our society. 
 
Some kind of a high or low in the invasion of rights has to be found in a model bylaw on any city 
council before they may qualify for a grant under the Neighbourhood Improvement Program. 
 
I will now quote from an article in the Star-Phoenix of 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

80 
 

November 5th, 1974: 
 

The minimum requirements for bedrooms in houses within the Neighbourhood Improvement Program 
district say a father and mother should have one room. 
 
If the family contains only one child under the age of four years, the child may share the parent’s 
room. But if there are two or more children under four, a room should be provided for each group of 
two, according to the bylaw which was suggested by the NDP Government. And children under six 
could be put two to a room without regard to sex. For persons over six, however, one room should be 
provided for every two persons. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Other parents, 
 
I always thought we only had two. 
 

or relations could be put two to a room subject to the same rules as children with respect to age and 
sex. 

 
According to the NIP guidelines, council would have to adopt a similar bylaw to ensure the 
neighbourhood is kept up to a minimum standard after the project is completed. In other words if you 
live in a poor neighbourhood and the NDP are going to give you any kind of help, Big Brother Blakeney 
is going to -be watching what is going on in your home. 
 
This was designed to assist in improvements in living conditions in seriously deteriorated 
neighbourhoods. The Riversdale area in Saskatoon has been earmarked for over $413,000 under this 
program. This sounds as if it is in Roy Romanow’s district. Lord help some family if one of their 
six-year-olds of the wrong sex happens to wander into their parents’ bedroom. Our fearless Attorney 
General or one of his law enforcers could be on them like a hawk. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
ME. STEUART: — The Big Brother NDP will keep your neighbourhood clean, even if they have to 
jail every six-year-old in the area, placing them in jail cells according to sex, of course. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as unbelievable as this sounds it was put forward by the NDP Government in 
1974 and reflects the kind of controls they are prepared to put on the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides frightening our people and making them apprehensive about the future, there have 
been other unfortunate effects of the Blakeney NDP power grab. 
 
The first has been the “Blakeney Option.” 
 
The Premier calls it the “Saskatchewan Option,” it’s a term one of his high priced public relations men 
coined to put a good face on failure. Mr. Blakeney is telling the people of Saskatchewan that they should 
be satisfied with fresh air, open space, great wilderness and dwindling population. He says these 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

81 

things are a blessing and implies that somehow they really came as a result of NDP planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that most Saskatchewan people don’t want to live in smog, over-crowded streets, 
traffic jams and crime-ridden cities. If they did they would move to Toronto, Chicago or Los Angeles. 
But that is not the choice we are faced with. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have only 907,000 people, down 8,000 since Mr. Blakeney came to office on the 
promise that he would stop our population drain. The prediction of the so-called experts in Regina and 
Ottawa is that our population in Saskatchewan will continue to decline until we reach 600,000 or 
700,000 people. 
 
Mr. Blakeney evidently accepts this projection of our province as a second-rate place to live and urges 
us to be content with our lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should all understand what is at stake in regard to our population. With only 907,000 
people we can’t even afford the services we now enjoy. If it wasn’t for Federal Government hand-outs 
Saskatchewan at this time couldn’t afford our present school system, health plan, highway network or 
any other of the many government programs we presently depend upon. In spite of our present 
prosperity the Federal Government gives Mr. Blakeney $4 out of every $10 he spends. With our 
population of only 907,000 people we are actually living off the welfare of the rest of Canada. If our 
population continues to decline we will soon see the end of good entertainment, top sports attractions, 
like the Saskatchewan Roughriders, along with any hope of standing on our own two feet as an 
independent province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need two million people in Saskatchewan. Then and only then will we be a 
self-sufficient independent province able to deal with Ottawa or any one else as an equal. 
 
Alberta, for example, has all the fresh air, the wilderness and the open spaces anyone could dream of. 
Yet they have two-and-one-half times as many people as Saskatchewan has and they are independent. 
When their Premier says something the rest of Canada listens with respect. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — What? 
 
MR. STEUART: — I said, for the benefit of the Premier, that the Province of Alberta is independent, 
they stand on their own two feet and when their Premier speaks, unlike ours, people in this country listen 
with respect. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I don’t expect you to like it, I just wish you would try and do something sensible 
about it. 
 
We, in Saskatchewan, actually have more resources than Alberta but we continue to be a have-not 
province depending for 40 per cent of our budget on the hand-outs of eastern Canada. 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

82 
 

What is the difference between Alberta and Saskatchewan? Well the answer is simple. We have had a 
CCF or NDP Government for 23 out of the last 50 years but Alberta has enjoyed two kinds of 
government, both of which encouraged private initiative. Our governments, both CCF and NDP, have 
driven business and industry out of this province along with hundreds of thousands of energetic people 
we could ill afford to lose. That is the real and basic reason we are a have-not province, always in a 
depression or on the verge of one. 
 
We have had some prosperity these last three years, thanks to high world prices, demand for our grain, 
lumber, pulp and other commodities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP should have used this time to encourage more development and to strengthen the 
base of our economy. Instead industries have been driven out or kept out and we are still tied to 
agriculture, still living off the back of our farmers. 
 
Look at what has happened to business under the NDP. Try and measure the cost in jobs and tax 
revenue. During their first year in office the NDP cancelled the Athabasca Pulp Mill. Now they are 
talking about trying to get one. Fifteen hundred jobs, $6 million cost; Choiceland iron mine cancelled by 
Mr. Blakeney. Now they are trying to get one. Lost 1,000 jobs. Also during the same first year 
Con-Force Limited - 40 jobs; Quaker Oats - 125 jobs; West-Core Steel - 55 jobs; Saskatoon Iron Works 
- 50 jobs; McGavin’s Bakery (Saskatoon), 18 jobs; Anglo Rouyn Mine - 145 jobs; Country Table 
Frozen Foods - 25 jobs; Smith-Roles Limited - 70 jobs. Also lost was a $15 million vegetable oil 
processing plant which logically should have come to Saskatchewan but ended up in Manitoba partly 
because our Premier decided to boycott the Kraft Company who intended to build it. 
 
Then there was the abortive plan for a Romanian tractor plant. Another NDP failure, after creating great 
hope for new employment in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Regina, the Burns Packing Plant was closed and plans for a new plant were shelved partly because of 
the uncertainties created by the Hog Marketing Commission and the major reason was the hostile 
attitude of the Blakeney Government. Lost in the process another 140 jobs. Also in the packing plant 
business, a small Moosomin packing plant was forced to close after the reluctance of the Minister of 
Industry (Mr. Thorson) to permit SEDCO to refinance the company. The only industrial projects of any 
note being launched in Saskatchewan have been under the financing and the arranging of DREE and the 
Federal Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, expansion in the steel and food processing industries have been 
solely due to federal arrangements, minimal participation by the Blakeney Government. 
 
The most tragic results of the Blakeney power grab have come about in the oil and the potash industries. 
 
Now, initially the problem of oil came about with the Arab embargo on oil from the Middle East and the 
raising of prices. By causing shortages, the price of oil was driven higher and higher. In Canada, the 
Federal Liberal Government froze oil 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

83 

prices and imposed an export tax. Throughout the fall of 1973 this export tax was gradually increased as 
the world oil price continued to rise. The Blakeney NDP supported this export tax and demanded a large 
share of the revenue. 
 
The NDP used the oil crisis as an excuse for the introduction of Bill 42 in December 1973. What 
happened? Immediately cutbacks in plans took place throughout the province due to Bill 42. Drilling 
applications in June, 1974 totalled only 68, compared to 229 one year earlier. From January to March 
1974, there was a loss of 194 of the 760 oil workers in the Estevan area and a drop from 108 to 57 
employees of drilling contractors. 
 
There has been a similar loss and 50 small companies in the oil business have gone in the Swift Current 
area and Lloydminster has been hit equally hard. Risk capital has been completely cut off due to this 
hostile government attitude. 
 
It was the small oil companies, not the giants like Gulf, Shell or Esso, which were really hurt by Bill 42. 
The large oil companies have been affected by Bill 42, but the real victims are the farmers whose 
mineral rights have been confiscated, the small oil business contractors and their employees whose 
livelihood was cut off by this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the potash industry has been hit just as hard or harder by the NDP. But in this case the 
results must be measured not just in lost jobs and revenue but in untold human misery as well. We, in 
Saskatchewan, have the greatest potash reserves in the world. Experts tell us we have enough to supply 
the needs of the entire world for four or five hundred years and maybe twice that long. Potash is one of 
the three ingredients necessary for all plant life. Our potash is used for fertilizer, we don’t need it in 
Canada, but it is vital for crops in the United States, the Orient, India, parts of Africa and South 
America. 
 
In a hungry world the possession of these huge potash or fertilizer reserves gives Saskatchewan great 
opportunities and even greater responsibilities. We’ve got nine potash mines, three years ago they were 
all in trouble because of an oversupply situation of their product. The then Liberal Government put in 
pro-rationing and a suggested floor price that saved these mines from closure causing serious 
unemployment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — That move was recognized throughout the world as having saved Saskatchewan’s 
potash industry. It was our intention to remove the pro-rationing as soon as world demand picked up and 
then to encourage the development of more mines in our province. It is a well-known fact that given any 
kind of encouragement Saskatchewan’s potash would soon dominate world trade in this vital 
commodity. This would eventually mean double the number of potash mines we now have, double the 
employment and tax revenue. It was, in fact, Saskatchewan’s great chance to diversify its economy and 
to obtain a stable and prosperous future. Instead, Mr. Speaker, of living off the backs of our farmers we 
could give them the help they need to ensure a good cash return for their hard work year in and year out. 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

84 
 

Two years ago it became apparent to anyone who would look at the situation clearly that the world 
demand for potash was growing much faster than had been anticipated. This is when the provincial 
government should not only have been encouraging but insisting that our nine potash mines begin an 
expansion program. Two years ago Mr. Blakeney should have been inviting new mines to come into 
Saskatchewan and start sinking shafts. There is a list of at least 10 companies on file in the Department 
of Mineral Resources who showed an interest in our potash and who are capable of financing and 
operating successful potash mines. 
 
We, in the Liberal Party, called on the NDP to look into potash expansion over a year ago. As a matter 
of fact the starving people of the world have been crying for our potash for well over a year now, Mr. 
Blakeney refused to take positive action, in fact he did the opposite. He clamped an iron fist on the 
potash industry, literally stopped any expansion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — This great industry has been harassed, attacked, frustrated by new laws, new 
regulations, by huge tax increases, bureaucratic red tape in a calculated plan by the NDP eventually to 
take it over. 
 
A year ago the NDP Government passed an Act giving themselves the power to engage in the potash 
business in any capacity, mining or marketing. ‘This is important to remember in the face of their refusal 
even to debate the need to get our potash to areas of the world where people are starving every day for 
want of fertilizer to grow their own food. 
 
The NDP Government has the power to have every ton of potash delivered wherever they demand, they 
can sell it or give it; away to anyone they want, anywhere in the world, If Mr. Blakeney and his 
followers really believed the words about brotherly love they so often mouth, potash could be sent to 
any country in the world at any price, any day in the week. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — But instead the Premier makes it almost impossible for our present mines to 
expand and last month he made it absolutely impossible for any new mines to be started unless they are 
government owned or controlled. 
 
So here we have the picture of this self-proclaimed humanitarian Allen Blakeney and his 43 MLAs 
acting like the dog in the manger. They won’t dig a ton of potash themselves, nor will they let anyone 
else. 
 
Let’s look at the facts. I’ll read a headline from the Toronto Globe and Mail newspaper, November 14, 
1974: — “Hudson Bay Mining to cut Expansion Spending Sharply.” That is the headline, the story goes 
on to quote Mr. Harold McKenzie, President of the company as saying that a $40 million expansion at 
his potash mine in Rocanville, Saskatchewan, has been cancelled because of the policies of the NDP 
Government. A similar announcement was made some time ago by the IMC potash company who 
operate a mine at Esterhazy. Every other potash mine is 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

85 

saying privately what these two mines have said publicly. 
 
I think the most shocking news is that the Noranda mine, a wholly owned Canadian company which has 
one potash mine now in Saskatchewan, is developing another one in New Mexico, USA. This Canadian 
firm is turning its back on Saskatchewan, investing its money in the United States in an inferior potash 
area because of the Blakeney NPP Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, this is the answer to those who say Mr. Blakeney is just keeping out 
foreign investment, in fact he is driving out everyone. 
 
We have lost at least $200 millions worth of expansion investment in our existing potash industry, On 
top of this, present world demand could mean at least two new mines at $100 million each. A total of 
$400 million of new investment lost to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Who is being hurt by this failure to bring in this development to Saskatchewan? Our young people are 
being hurt because this expansion would provide thousands of good paying jobs as miners, foremen, 
engineers, carpenters, plumbers, secretaries and electricians. The added population would make room 
for more teachers, doctors, clerks, mechanics, as well as every other profession or vocation. 
 
I’ll tell you something else. The NDP failure to take advantage of this opportunity will actually cost our 
farmers dearly. We live off our farmers, the farmer pays the bulk of our taxes, he provides most of our 
economic activity. When the farmers’ incomes go down, almost everyone in Saskatchewan suffers. 
More industry would help share the tax load and ease the burden on agriculture and as well, most of the 
young people denied these good jobs are actually from farm families. In fact, everyone in Saskatchewan 
would benefit from the thousands of new jobs created by a $400 million expansion in the potash 
industry and from the millions of dollars in added taxes that would flow to every level of government. In 
short, we are all the losers by the shortsighted, unbelievably stupid failure of the Blakeney Government 
to bring this necessary development to our province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Now, is our potash like oil? Will we soon run out? The answer is, no. I will remind 
you again, we’ve got enough potash for four, five or six hundred years. 
 
Some people say Mr. Blakeney is on the right track, the Government will go into the potash business 
and he will make all the profit. Well the NDP have been here for three and a half years, they haven’t dug 
up a shovelful of potash yet. They have no company ready to go, even if they started now it would take 
them three or four years to be marketing potash and they would eventually fail against tough world 
competition. 
 
In the meantime there is the greatest search for new potash reserves going on all over the world, except 
Saskatchewan. Old 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

86 
 

mines are being reactivated in New Mexico and any day now a fresh source may well be discovered 
somewhere else in the world. The point in, Saskatchewan is not the only place potash can he mined. 
We’ve got the most accessible source at the present time but this situation will not last. The tragedy is 
we are being bypassed and when these new sources are developed our potash, left 2,500 feet 
underground, will help no one. This is the greatest opportunity we have ever had in Saskatchewan to 
become a rich province, an independent and self-sufficient province. We are losing because Mr. 
Blakeney and his Government are little, greedy men, content to snap at the heels of our present potash 
industry, too bound up in their narrow socialist philosophy to welcome other people to come in and help 
us grow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, there are other losers, in this unfortunate failure of the NDP to face 
their responsibility as a government. I refer to the people in India, Bangladesh, Africa and South 
America. 
 
We are told that thousands of men, women and children are starving every day. Ten thousand people die 
every week in Africa alone, thousands more in India and South America. Mr. Blakeney refused to even 
talk about this human tragedy last Friday, because he didn’t think it was serious enough. Probably five 
or ten thousand people have died because they had nothing to eat. Why do I point the finger of blame at 
the Blakeney Government for failing to help these poor people? Because they desperately need our 
potash as fertilizer to grow their own food. 
 
It was stated clearly at the World Conference in Rome that both the shortage and the high cost of 
fertilizer was one of the major causes of the world food shortage and thus of starvation. Each ton of 
fertilizer added to an underdeveloped country’s grain crop could increase the harvest by ten tons. In 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we produce ten million tons of potash for fertilizer every year. We could 
easily double our production, the money and the know-how are being offered to us. This new ten million 
tons of potash could translate into an extra 100 million tons of food, a significant addition to the world’s 
food supply. I recognize that there is a shortage of nitrogen and phosphates but this is no excuse for us to 
shirk our responsibility. 
 
I say the Blakeney Government should stand condemned by every decent person in this country  . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . for their refusal to help our own people and his callous attitude of indifference 
to people in other lands who are starving right now, because he won’t help them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, who cares? Sometimes I wonder! The Premier and the NDP don’t care, in fact they 
are proud of themselves. They are saying, we will teach those dirty capitalistic Canadians, the 
Americans, the Frenchmen and the Germans to come into Saskatchewan and invest their money and 
provide our people with good jobs. You know, three years ago the same NDP 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

87 

was saying how stupid the potash industry wan for over-investing and it served them right if they lost 
money. Now they are grabbing every cent they can and if they are re-elected they will take over this 
industry completely and run them out of the province just as they have done with the oil men and the 
lumber operators. 
 
If in the process eight or ten thousand people have to leave our province and a few hundred thousand 
men, women and children starve to death, the NDP seem to believe that’s a small price to pay for the 
NDP master plan to socialize this country. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder who cares? Does the Press care? I don’t think so, the Leader-Post 
hasn’t bothered to do much, if any, research on the subject or even take an editorial stand. 
 
Potash is the second largest industry in Saskatchewan, it could be twice as big and our so-called leading 
newspaper doesn’t rate it important enough to give the public the whole story. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Much of the potash industry itself hasn’t even had the courage to fight back. With 
the exception of Noranda the rest have been strangely silent as the NDP emasculate them. IMC are the 
strangest of all, they have decided to make love to the NDP. I suppose on the theory that even an NDP 
won’t kick a puppy who is wagging his tail at you. 
 
The International Mineral and Chemical Company are running a series of advertisements in the paper, 
on the radio and the television. It is an interesting switch to see the big international cartels in bed with 
the NDP. They even have a song and it and the advertisements tell you how nice it is in Saskatchewan, 
how wonderful the Government is and how you can make it here at home. Mind you the farmers and the 
hog producers, the hearing aid dealers and the small businessmen, the oil men and the lumber men and 
the rest of the potash industry, they don’t believe that you can make it here in NDP Saskatchewan, but 
good old IMC, bleeding from every wound inflicted by Mr. Blakeney’s Government are bravely singing 
his praises as he slowly strangles them to death. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell them and everyone else who thinks that if you appease the 
NDP they will leave you alone, they are dead wrong. One more election victory and this Government 
will finish the takeover of all our resource industries. 
 
The truth is the NDP must be stopped before they ruin this and every other important industry we all 
depend on for jobs and for tax revenue. 
 
A Liberal Government will encourage the sensible development of our resources for the benefit of all 
our people. We will collect fair taxes from these industries, high taxes when they are prosperous, more 
reasonable when they are experiencing difficult times. We will set tough rules regarding good wages, 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

88 
 

working conditions, protection of the environment and proper resource conservation. Mr. Speaker, we 
can afford to be tougher because the world needs our resources. But there is a difference between 
conservation and confiscation. The NDP believe in the latter. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — These resources belong to the people. Let’s put them to work to make a better life 
here at home in Saskatchewan and provide life itself in other parts of the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, there are other reasons why more people every day are becoming 
disillusioned with the NDP. Two of these are: — (1) their lack of moral standards and (2) the 
unbusinesslike way they operate the government. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. The NDP run a sleazy. government and they are the most inefficient 
administration ever to sit as the Government of Saskatchewan. What I mean by ‘sleazy’ is best 
illustrated by the on-going Service Printers scandal. 
 
This Government continues to hand over thousands of dollars worth of government printing to a printing 
company which is wholly owned by the NDP, without even making them submit competitive bids. This 
is exactly the same as if Mr. Blakeney put his hand in the public purse and took out thousands of dollars 
and handed the money to his own political party in order to try and ensure his re-election. Tie this in 
with the new Elections Act, brought in by the NDP, which sets stringent rules on how political parties 
may collect donations and absolute limits on how much they can spend and you have political trickery at 
its worst. 
 
The NDP are doing this with their usual hypocrisy, claiming to protect the public from political parties 
who collect huge sums of money from big business and then buy their way into government. 
 
It is interesting to note that it has been their Party, the NDP, who has been in power 25 years out of the 
last 50 years in this province. If any party has bought their way into power it is the NDP. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — What are the NDP really doing with this Election Act? It is to scream “thief, thief,” 
while pointing at us and the Conservatives and while the public is watching us the NDP have their hands 
in the public purse up to their elbows. They do it another way, by spending millions of the taxpayers’ 
dollars in government advertising. Some of this advertising is genuine and necessary. Most of it, 
however, is straight political propaganda favouring the NDP at public expense. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

89 

MR. STEUART: — They put in a law that limits the amounts the Liberals, Conservatives and 
theoretically themselves can spend trying to get elected. 
 
It never ceases to amaze me that these sanctimonious hypocrites, Mr. Blakeney and his NDP followers, 
get away with this big lie year after year with some people, many of whom consider themselves very 
honest and very intelligent. If anybody has been stealing elections by plundering the Treasury of this 
province, they are the guilty party. It has to be the NDP and they are still at it bigger and more blatant 
than ever. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, they used to accuse us of bringing in the McLaren Advertising Agency 
from Toronto. According to Mr. Blakeney this was a very immoral act. We brought in this slick eastern 
advertising agency to bamboozle the poor Saskatchewan voters and get ourselves into power. It is true, 
we did use McLaren Advertising Agency. I was never sure whether they helped us or hurt us. But we 
did use them. Now we have “Mr. Clean’ as Premier, let’s see what he does. Well at first he fires the 
McLaren Advertising Agency and sends them packing back East or wherever they came from. Another 
promise made and kept by Premier Clean, but hold on, we see a new name appearing in Saskatchewan! 
It is Dunsky Advertising Agency. Would you believe it, Dunsky’s aren’t from the West. No, they are 
from even farther East - which must be worse - than McLaren’s. Dunsky’s are from Montreal. I have the 
write-up of a newspaper account from the Vancouver Sun of October 16, 1974. It tells how the Dunsky 
Advertising firm thrives on business they do with all the NDP governments in western Canada. The 
article points out and I quote, that this agency: 
 

Helped in achieving the two NDP victories in Manitoba since 1969 and directed the party’s successful 
campaigns to achieve power in Saskatchewan and British Columbia. 

 
Now, Mr. Blakeney may be a bit short on moral values, but I’ll tell you he is grateful because he 
rewarded Mr. Dunsky with millions of dollars in government advertising business. As well, Mr. 
Blakeney went even further. He has influenced some of his good friends like Carling’s Brewery, some 
of his friends like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, also to give their business to Mr. Dunsky and his 
eastern based company. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how much Mr. Dunsky charges Mr. Blakeney for his political advertising? 
Well, if Mr. Dunsky is as grateful to Mr. Blakeney as Mr. Blakeney is grateful to Mr. Dunsky, and it 
says in the paper that he, too, is a socialist, I don’t think he would charge him very much. You know, it 
seems like a nice, cozy deal, all at the taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Have you ever noticed, Mr. Speaker, how grateful these socialists are when they are spending someone 
else’s money? 
 
Once again, we’ve got one set of rules for the NDP and another set for everyone else. 
 
The Department of Northern Saskatchewan must be included 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

90 
 

in any review of the Blakeney Government’s less wholesome enterprises. One-half million dollars lying 
around in shoe boxes, improper accounting, shady business deals, one hundred thousand dollars 
overspent in only one welfare office. A Deputy Minister at $35,000 who insists he is on a political 
mission in the North. 
 
We only paid Mr. McArthur, the present Deputy Minister of Northern Saskatchewan about $12,000 or 
$14,000 a year. Now he gets $35,000. And like a good socialist he too is grateful to Mr. Blakeney. So he 
is spreading the NDP message in northern Saskatchewan at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
I’ll quote from a Leader Post; article of November 19 1974, where Mr. McArthur stated: 
 

A change in the pattern of northern under-development can only be found generally within the 
socialist ideology. 

 
Now Mr. McArthur is not the first NDP civil servant to use his position to spread NDP socialism. Mr. 
Borrowman did it when he was on the public payroll, so did Wilf Churchman when he won Deputy 
Minister. They failed and so will McArthur. The only difference is that Mr. McArthur is being paid 
twice as much as they received and at least five times as much as he is worth. 
 
However, remember, the political dishonesty (and that’s what it is) is still there. 
 
Before Mr. Blakeney says, ‘You did it too’, which is his excuse for every grubby little trick we can catch 
him at, I have never before seen a case where a senior civil servant openly boasted that his job was to 
spread the political message of the government in power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The handling of the land through the Land Bank is another example of the 
underhanded dealings of the Blakeney administration. We have brought case after case before this 
Assembly proving that land has been handed over to NDP supporters, by-passing the rightful claim of 
young farmers who were better qualified but could not pass the NDP political blood test. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the latest in the list of unsavoury actions by Mr. Blakeney and his 
Government has to do with the handling of our forest resources. Back in 1973 Mr. Blakeney announced 
he was going to change the whole government approach to the forest industry. He began by passing 
amendments to The Forest Act that literally tore up and made void every contract or lease held by 
anyone in the timber industry with his Government. The Premier made it crystal clear that he didn’t 
consider any contract with his Government worth the paper it was written on. That action, along with 
Bill 42 confiscating oil rights, proved Mr. Blakeney could not be trusted, that his word was worthless. 
 
He then launched his new forest program by hiring Mr. Springate and Associates of Vancouver to do a 
study of our 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

91 

woodlands and to recommend the best use of our timber resources. Mr. Springate recommended a 
tremendous increase in the cutting of soft woods, spruce and pine, he said we could have a plywood 
plant in Hudson Pay, a sawmill and treatment plant in Prince Albert, other sawmills in Carrot River, Big 
River, Creighton and Meadow Lake. Other things like planer mills, stud mills, post and pole treatment 
plants and even a pulp mill in the north west part of the province, where we had one and Mr. Blakeney 
cancelled it. It cost us $6 million. Hard to believe. 
 
I talked to professional foresters who were familiar with our timber resources. They were outspoken in 
their condemnation of the Springate Report because it recommended serious over-cutting of soft woods. 
Since these foresters all work for the Government, or for companies dependent on the Government, they 
were afraid to speak out publicly. Under Mr. Blakeney’s NDP Government you speak against the 
Government at your peril. 
 
Still, Mr. Speaker, I wondered why Mr. Springate would recommend what appeared to be a disastrous 
over-cutting program. ‘What would he have to gain? 
 
I soon found out. Mr. Springate was paid very well for his Forest Report. He then put on another hat and 
he designed a plywood plant he had recommended for Hudson Bay, and again he was well rewarded. As 
far as we can find out he has already been paid almost $200,000, or it could exceed that amount. 
 
Now it became clear he was catching the people of Saskatchewan coming and going. But that’s not all. 
We now learn that the manager of the new plywood plant is an employee of Mr. Springate and the mill 
will be managed under contract. So Mr. Springate has three hands in the public purse, an unbelievable 
conflict of interest. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I don’t know for sure how much money Mr. Springate and his associates have 
ripped off this Government, but I do know the following: 
 

1. The cost of the mill will not be $6 million as Mr. Blakeney said, it will be closer to $10 million. 
 
2. The building was so poorly constructed the roof leaked allowing rain to pour in all summer on the 
new and expensive machinery. 
 
3. The mill is away behind schedule and not really in steady production yet. 
 
4. The bottom has dropped out of the plywood business and all kinds of plants are closing down here 
and in the United States. 
 
5. The consultants have given Mr. Blakeney bad advice and should have been fired, not rewarded by 
handing them a contract to run the plant. 

 
However, I presume Mr. Springate, too, will be suitably grateful and just what form this gratitude will 
take is open to question. What is not open to question is that this whole 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

92 
 

mess smells to high heaven and should be investigated by an independent commission and the truth 
made public. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, let us not forget the infamous Intercontinental Packing House deal, 
another mess the NDP have never explained. 
 
First Mr. Blakeney places Al Gedge the Vice President of Intercontinental on the board of The 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation. Then this Government owned corporation called 
SEDCO carries on negotiations, I presume maybe with Mr. Gedge and with Mr. Mendel, owner of 
Intercontinental Packers. Within a few weeks the Government buys 45 per cent of Mr. Mendel’s shares 
in Intercontinental for $10.2 million. It was then proven beyond any doubt by an audited statement of 
Intercontinental Packers that 100 per cent of Mr. Mendel’s shares were only worth about $7 million. 
Thus, Mr. Blakeney paid $10.2 million of the taxpayers’ money for shares he knew were only worth 
about $3 million. Why did he do it? Was Mr. Mendel also as grateful to Mr. Blakeney as he should have 
been? And if so, what form did Mr. Mendel’s gratitude take? 
 
Again we asked for an investigation of this mucky deal, again Mr. Blakeney turned us down, which 
under the circumstances doesn’t really surprise me. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to turn to Federal-Provincial relations. I believe we should examine 
what Mr. Blakeney says about his dealings with the Federal Government in the light of his questionable 
record here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier has given us proof that we cannot trust his word when it comes to dealing with farmers, 
timber operators, oil men, the business community, the Metis Society and his own Government 
employees. Yet, Mr. Blakeney says, “Trust my word when I tell you how the Federal Government 
double-crossed me”. 
 
Mr. Blakeney has shown us his moral standards, or lack of them, in his defence of the Service Printers 
scandal, Intercontinental Packers, Springate and the Dunsky mess. However, Mr. Blakeney says, “Never 
mind about those questionable affairs, ignore those black marks, in my dealings with the Federal 
Government I have been the soul of honour”. 
 
Mr. Blakeney would also have us believe that although lie and his Ministers have been incredibly inept 
and gullible in their dealings with Mendel and Springate and others, they have been hard-nosed, efficient 
bargainers in their negotiations with Ottawa. I can’t believe it, I don’t believe it and neither do the bulk 
of the people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — With all this in mind let’s examine this NDP Government’s bargaining with the 
Federal Government. It began 18 months ago. I reminded you in August and early September it became 
obvious to everyone but Mr. Blakeney that Saskatchewan’s oil was actually being sold into the United 
States below the world market prices. Instead of acting at that time to protect the right of the people of 
Saskatchewan to receive the full benefit 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

93 

from this resource the Premier did nothing. Finally the Federal Government acted by imposing the 
export tax on oil. They increased it so that it became $6.50 a barrel. During this time Premier Blakeney 
never raised his voice in protest of the so-called intrusion of Ottawa into the resources of our province, 
or if he did, nobody heard him. He only whined for some of the money. If he was so concerned about 
provincial rights he should have slapped his own tax on and met the Federal Government head-on, going 
to court if necessary. Instead he did nothing. 
 
In January of 1974, Prime Minister Trudeau called a national energy conference to try and settle the 
growing differences between Ottawa and the oil producing provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta. Mr. 
Blakeney went down there several days before the conference and made a series of speeches in eastern 
Canada. He even went back to the Maritimes where he came from to show the folks back home how 
tough he had become since he went out West. He really came out swinging. Told those easterners he 
was going to demand over $9 a barrel for Saskatchewan oil. By then he was the star attraction on the 
first day of that conference. 
 
Here was Premier Blakeney with only 11 per cent of Canada’s oil. He was doing 100 per cent of the 
talking. Poor Premier Lougheed couldn’t get a word in. He has 85 per cent of the oil and never said a 
word. On the second day the Prime Minister took all the Premiers to lunch. It turned out to be the most 
expensive lunch in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Blakeney went in demanding $9.50 a barrel. Came out taking about $4 a 
barrel, plus another dollar, if he could get it. He also claimed he had received assurance at that time that 
our equalization payments from the Federal Treasury would not be touched. He soon lost the extra 
dollar, within a month, but he said, “Oh! We’ve got the equalization money”. 
 
The next conference was in March. Mr. Blakeney agreed to $6.50 a barrel and came home claiming once 
again that he had a guarantee that our equalization grants would not be affected by our extra oil revenue. 
 
When the Federal Budget came down, indications were that in fact Saskatchewan would lose substantial 
sums of money through reduced equalization payments. Mr. Blakeney cried that he had, in effect, been 
double-crossed by the Prime Minister. Mr. Trudeau denied this, saying Mr. Blakeney knew his position 
depended on what both Saskatchewan and Alberta did with their extra oil revenue. Well now, whom are 
we to believe? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to begin with the Premier knows how the equalization formula works. If a province’s 
revenues go up from certain taxation fields, including oil, their equalization payments go down. The 
plan was designed to help provinces when, their economy is in trouble and to cut them off when the 
revenues are high. Mr. Blakeney is aware that because of our very large oil revenues this year, probably 
over $150 million, we cannot in honesty claim to be in need of equalization payments. He also knows 
the Federal Government must treat all provinces the same in regard to this formula, if they ignored 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

94 
 

Saskatchewan and Albert’s huge oil revenue the whole plan could well collapse. 
 
In spite of this, he asks us to believe that he mode a very special deal with Ottawa, not given to Alberta, 
not given: — to the Maritimes, riot given to anyone else, just to Mr. Blakeney. This is the same Mr. 
Blakeney who tears up contracts, seizes the assets of companies, hands out profitable business to his 
own political party and now tries to pose as a man who never misrepresents a thing. I don’t believe him, 
he made a poor deal for Saskatchewan: — and now ho is trying to cover his tracks. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I challenge Premier Blakeney to table proof of this deal with the Federal 
Government. Surely an astute lawyer like our Premier dealing with his political enemies in Ottawa for 
stakes as high as $40 million, surely he got this contract in writing. I asked him this yesterday. I say 
again, if he did, let him prove it, table the proof. If he failed, then we sent a boy on a man’s errand. In 
fact, Mr. Premier if you were double-crossed and the Federal Government really broke their end of the 
bargain, why don’t you break yours? Raise the price of Saskatchewan oil to $9.50 a barrel as you said 
you would a year ago. Don’t just sit there and cry, do something. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Don’t tell me when you get up that you have now found out that you can’t trust 
Ottawa. I have been listening to you for 10 or 15 years and you have been crying about Ottawa every 
one of those 10 or 15 years. You have been spreading the gospel, “you can’t trust a Federal Liberal 
Cabinet Minister” for 15 years. Now please don’t tell the people of Saskatchewan that having this in the 
background you went down there and made a deal involving $40 million in a year, which is going to 
amount in three or four years to huge sums of money, and you say, “I took their word. I thought they 
were dealing honestly”. The truth is somebody wasn’t dealing honestly and it was Mr. Blakeney, why 
would he make that deal with him and him alone! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — He didn’t make the deal and he knows it. He cannot and never will prove he made 
such a deal, because he didn’t do it. The Premier stands for all to see, he is a poor bargainer and even 
poorer story teller. I use story teller, because I am cognizant of the House rules. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Now it is Mr. Romanow’s turn to take on the mighty dragon in Ottawa. In July of 
1973 at the Calgary Conference Prime Minister Trudeau agreed to freeze certain freight rates for 
western Canada for 18 months, to give the provinces time to make a case for a more equitable freight 
rate structure. That 18 months is up at the end of this year and the railways have applied for an increase 
in those rates, frozen since the Calgary Conference. Mr. Romanow is horrified, they are all horrified 
over there. Mind you the Minister in charge of Transportation 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

95 

in Saskatchewan has allowed the trucking rates to go up substantially in his own province. Even the 
rates for moving freight by the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, owned by the Government have 
been raised sharply. Two days ago Mr. Kramer, the Minister of Highways, who is probably out having 
an auction somewhere today, reduced the load limit for Saskatchewan trucks on most of our highways 
by almost 10 per cent, which will mean another 15 per cent increase for most Saskatchewan people for 
trucking inside our province. It is all right for the NDP Government to raise freight rates, but when 
anything like this happens in Ottawa it is a terrible thing. One set of rules for them, another set for 
everybody else. 
 
I am not satisfied with the pace of negotiations to bring fair freight rates to the West. I believe we should 
see some substantial reductions before the freeze is lifted. However, Mr. Romanow must share some of 
the blame, he has been more interested in gaining political publicity by taking cheap shots at the Federal 
Government than he has in getting a better deal for Saskatchewan’s people. The truth is the NDP 
Government deliberately sabotaged the Federal-Provincial, negotiations because it suits them politically 
to fight with the Federal Government. 
 
You can talk to people, not just from Ottawa, but from every capital in this country and Saskatchewan 
Cabinet Ministers are becoming notorious across Canada as an untrustworthy lot. I am told by not just 
Ottawa people, but other people that our NDP Cabinet Ministers regularly sneak out of 
Federal-Provincial Conferences to break news stories ahead of their colleagues from across Canada. I 
know that they twist and turn the truth in all their dealings with every Federal department. They get over 
40 per cent of their money, and every department is helped, they twist and turn and lie about everything 
that comes from Ottawa. They now ask us to believe that they got a bad deal. They got a bad deal, they 
made the bad deal. The normal good will that prevails even among Cabinet Ministers of different 
political parties in national conferences is not there when it comes to Saskatchewan Cabinet Ministers. 
Nobody trusts them any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, show me another province that gets 40 per cent of its total revenue from the Federal 
Government, and spends as much time in its Throne Speech whining, complaining and threatening the 
same Federal Government. 
 
The New Democratic Party carries on this way because they think it is good for their politics, not good 
for their people. They won’t get away with it, the Blakeney Government will be judged on their own 
record. The voters of this province will hold them accountable for the loss of freedom, of rights, of 
economic opportunities and of jobs. 
 
I invite them to look at our alternatives, a program based on belief in the individual and in the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I tell you, Mr. Speaker, a Liberal Government will return the people’s freedom of 
choice. We will strike off the law books legislation unnecessarily restricting your rights. We will sell 
land to our farmers. We will give producers a vote on marketing boards. We will develop our resources 
using private investment and initiative. The Liberals will slash 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

96 
 

government spending on useless programs. We will clean up the welfare rolls, requiring able bodied 
people to work for a living and then we’ll give them jobs. Education will get top priority and the 
independence of school boards and teachers will be restored. Old age pensioners will be guaranteed 
$350 for single people and $500 per month for married couples. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — With over $150 million in new revenue, I don’t know how much they are gouging 
off the potash, don’t let that Government say they can’t afford it. I still predict they will be forced to do 
it in the Budget. I say, I hope they will because the needs of old people should rise above politics. 
 
I tell you a Liberal Government will end the war on business large and small, we’ll cancel the estates 
tax, union men and women will have their freedom of speech returned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, local governments will be given back their independence. We have 
faith in the people who run our villages, towns and cities. We have faith in the people that are elected to 
run our rural municipal associations and the rural municipalities. I say to them, you have already seen 
tremendous amounts of your independent action taken away by the NDP Government. If they come back 
into power the rural people of this province had better get ready to have the county system imposed on 
them, the same plan that the old CCF brought up, then lost their nerve. It is still there, it is still the 
socialist plan and I say it will be brought out if they are returned to power after the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these and many other programs based on our faith in this province and its people will be 
our alternatives to the NDP program of regimentation and stagnation. I think that the tremendous 
tragedy of this last three and a half years has been that when we count our blessings of coal, land, oil, 
potash, uranium and hard rock minerals - instead of having a government that said, here is a golden 
opportunity for Saskatchewan people to make it rich, to be a have province, to be one of the rich places 
in Confederation, not only to look after our own people, so that our young people getting out of our high 
schools, technical institutes, universities, if they want to stay here and make their life, they can. We have 
got the resources to do it. 
 
Mr. Blakeney was elected with a large majority. He had a mandate to do what he wanted. Thanks to a 
world screaming and willing to pay almost anything for our wheat, oats, barley, for our potash, our oil, 
he took that golden opportunity and he literally threw it away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can gather the Throne Speech offers nothing, offers nothing, to the people of 
Saskatchewan to give them new hope, new expectations that this Government will change. That’s why I 
will not support the motion, and I will propose the following amendment. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He just picked it out of 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

97 

a garbage can. 
 
MR. STEUART: — No, I looked in the garbage can and I found it full of NDPers, so I didn’t pick it up 
out. . . 
 
I move, seconded by Mr. Gardner that the following words be added to the motion: 
 

But this Assembly regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to provide leadership or act 
in any way to cope with the problems facing Saskatchewan; that the government provides no programs 
to increase the production of potash or other Saskatchewan resources; that it provides only another 
bureaucracy instead of needed financial help to senior citizens; that it has failed to negotiate 
completely with the National Government on the question of resource revenue and has only promoted 
a spirit of confrontation and regionalism. 

 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I first want to compliment the mover and 
seconder of the motion, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Comer) and the Member for Hanley (Mr. 
Mostoway). Each did an excellent job of pointing out the programs that are already in operation and the 
new proposals set out in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Each is a credit to his constituency and each I know will serve his constituency 
long and faithfully in the future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition bid the Member for Nipawin 
goodbye. He said in the next election both of them aren’t going to be in this House. I rather think he may 
be right. I am sure the young and able Member for Nipawin will be in this House. But what about the 
Member for Prince Albert West. I think that after we have heard today’s speech we all know that in spite 
of all the camouflage that the McLaren Advertising Agency, now back in Saskatchewan, can throw up 
there is no doubt that the Leader of the Opposition is tired, ailing and failing and he is not going to be 
back in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — After the next election he may wish he was a school teacher, because when a 
school teacher, like the Hon. Member for Athabasca currently, goes back to his profession he’ll find that 
the school is still there and it hasn’t gone bankrupt while he was in this House. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition calls the Throne Speech a sick document. He says among other things that 
we talked about removing deterrent fees - we talked about it once, and twice and three times. I 
understand why that speech makes him sick. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

98 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — He’s sick because he can’t talk about removing deterrent fees three times or 
twice or even once. He is the one who put them on back in 1968 during his infamous budget of that year, 
Black Friday. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And after 1968 he had three Throne Speeches in 1969 and 1970 and 1971, and in 
none of those Throne Speeches… 
 
MR. STEUART: — Eenie, meenie, miny, moe! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . In none of them. Oh, eenie, meeny, miny, moe! We can take the first one, 
second one and third one and none of them had a word of comfort for those people who were paying 
deterrent fees. Not a word! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — During those entire three years those deterrent fees were filching money from 
the sick and the elderly, those very people the Member for Prince Albert West is now professing 
friendship for. We removed the deterrent fees. We keep reminding them of that, every Throne Speech. 
He feels sick and well he might. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We enjoyed the Leader of the Opposition announcing, in part, the program of 
the Liberal Party for the next election. He announced it before their convention but that ‘s 
understandable. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — There is no reason to believe that the delegates will have anything to say about 
it. They won’t have very much to say about anything. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition was talking about us financing our party from the East. Well at least we 
publish the financial statements of our party. That s more than the Liberal Party does and that’s more 
than their delegates will see at their forthcoming convention. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He is talking about all these memberships in the Liberal Party. I remember the 
memberships in the Liberal Party. I’ve still got files with letters in them from Members sitting opposite 
sending out complimentary memberships to the Liberal Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I had to raise it in this House. We were talking 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

99 

about people who were sending out unsolicited credit cards. We all agreed that was a bad practice, a bad 
practice! Then we had to point out that there were Members, now on that side of the House, who were 
sending out unsolicited memberships in the Liberal Party. That’s not surprising because I don’t know 
who would knowingly buy a membership from the Liberal Party. They were sure sending them out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Then we heard the Leader of the Opposition talk about the Land Bank. He was 
saying how the Land Bank was making it tougher for a young man to get into farming, making it 
tougher for young men to own their farms. I say to him he had better try that out in rural Saskatchewan 
because . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . wherever I go I meet reeves, councillors, who say that in their rural 
municipality there are three new farmers, in their rural municipality there were six new farmers. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I believe we could have a little more quiet in the House. We listened 
intently to the Leader of the Opposition who spoke with little or no interruption. Please let’s extend the 
same courtesy   
 
MR. GUY: — On a Point of Order. I think it has always been the tradition of this House that we 
applaud when Members on either side make a particularly exciting and interesting statement. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will agree with the Hon. Member but you don’t applaud by holding your mouth 
that way. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I agree with the Hon. Member too, and that is why we heard so little applause in 
the last hour or so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I was just saying that a reeve had pointed out to me that in his RM alone there 
were six young farmers who were on the land because of the Land Bank. Members opposite can say that 
is a bad idea but I shall have a good deal more to say about the Land Bank when I speak tomorrow. I say 
that those people who are going out around the country trying to knock the Land Bank will find that that 
particular policy is one which is shortsighted indeed and will cost them dearly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear’ 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I know we were interested indeed, in some of the leader of the Opposition’s 
comments about what he called the farmer’s right to market his produce as he sees fit without any 
government interference, without any marketing board, without any Canadian Wheat Board. The 
Members opposite know that the 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

100 
 

Canadian Wheat Board has never had a vote and the Members opposite know that a farmer cannot sell 
his bread wheat as he sees fit. They are standing four-square for saying that farmers shouldn’t have to 
sell their wheat through the Wheat Board. They are knocking the Wheat Board and we know it and you 
know it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — They arc also saying that poultry boards and milk boards and the hog boards are 
all bad. They didn’t talk about the majority of farmers. He said every farmer ought to have the right to 
market his product as ire sees fit. That is what he said. And this has nothing to do with votes. If 90 per 
cent of the farmers want to sell their milk through the Milk Board and 10 per cent don’t, these people 
say that the 10 per cent should have the right to buck the Milk Board. And that is their policy and they 
are going to have to stick with that policy because that is their unrestricted free enterprise philosophy. It 
is theirs but it is not ours. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We heard the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) attack The Foreign 
Ownership of Land Act. We heard him say that that is a bad idea, that Americans should be able to come 
up here and be able to buy land in large quantities. And I know that they are going to say, oh, what about 
Canadians? As the Member for Prince Albert West and all those Members over there know, if they had 
taken any trouble to look into this matter, they will know that it is now - and I underline the word ‘now’ 
- not within the power of a province to prohibit Americans from owning land in Saskatchewan unless we 
similarly prohibit Canadians who are not residents. That is the law and that has been laid out by an 
interprovincial committee and I want to point this out. Four months ago I asked the Prime Minister of 
this country to amend that law, amend that law so that we could in fact allow Canadians to own land in 
Saskatchewan and prohibit citizens of the United States and other countries from owning land. The 
Federal Government, as of now, has been unwilling or unable to act on that request. I am perfectly 
happy, if Members opposite would wish, to table the correspondence because then they will find out just 
precisely what the situation is. In the meantime, if Members opposite wish to pursue the line pursued by 
the Leader of the Opposition, I suggest they pursue it with their federal colleagues in Ottawa. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We certainly enjoyed some of the other comments that the Member for Prince 
Albert West made. We particularly enjoyed his comment that hearing aid dealers should be restored to 
their former position and, therefore, that the Hearing Aid Plan should be dismantled. We are aware that 
this plan has been a good plan for many people in this province, particularly the senior citizens. But now 
the senior citizens have their new “defender” insisting that this plan be dismantled. Well, I say to him 
that he can insist as long as he likes because as long as we are the Government of this province we will 
continue to supply hearing aids at cost. 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

101 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We heard some things that I did not ever expect a Liberal speaking in this House 
to talk about. We heard about population. We heard about population and remember it was Members 
opposite in 1964, who used to talk about population as the acid test, the good old acid test. Well their 
application of their own acid test will show that in their term of government in one year this province 
lost more people than in the entire three and one half years of our government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — But they are never very good at adding up population anyway. We just heard the 
Member for Prince Albert West tell us that the population of Alberta, which is about 1,800,000, is two 
and one half times the population of Saskatchewan. Well that is the sort of calculation that he does. 
Under those circumstances it is not surprising, that he has trouble with these calculations. 
 
He keeps rolling out these comments about 40 per cent of our money coming from Ottawa and the next 
line was, 40 per cent of our money coming from eastern Canada. He implies, in fact I believe if we 
analyzed the text we will see that he said that we are getting this money from Ontario and Quebec, from 
those wealthy provinces. In fact we are getting most of that money for medicare, for the hospital plan, 
for social service plans out of the pool of taxes which is paid for by all of us. And we have every right to 
get most of that money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And so does British Columbia and so does Alberta and so does Ontario get large 
portions of their money from the Federal Government and any suggestion that this is somehow all 
coming because of the largesse of that Government in Ottawa, is pure fiction and he knows it is pure 
fiction. 
 
I won’t deal with all of the many points raised by the leader of the Opposition as there are just too many. 
He talks about jobs and I will say a little bit more tomorrow about jobs because if there is anybody who 
should not talk in this province or in this House about the creation of jobs, it is any Member of that 
Opposition which promised 80,000 new jobs and fell down so miserably in their performance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He went on to talk about so-called restriction of freedom in a so-called draft 
bylaw which was being put forward up at Saskatoon. I felt that he was really reaching a bit there. 
Reaching a bit because he implied that this somehow was being imposed upon the city of Saskatoon. I 
think it would have been a lot more frank if he had told the House a little bit of the background about 
that particular proposal. It would have been better if he had told us that the Neighbourhood 
Improvement program is geared into the Federal Government’s Residential Rehab program and that it is 
financed 100 per cent by the Federal Government and that the model bylaw is specified as a requirement 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

102 
 

before participants can qualify for federal funds and that the bylaw is designed and put forward by the 
Federal Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He would have been a great deal more frank and fair if he had told the house 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could deal with a good many other items. I am flattered to have the Member for Prince 
Albert West class as a friend of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and I am proud to called a friend of the 
Wheat Pool. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I take it that he was using that as a term of abuse but I don’t really regard it as a 
term of abuse. 
 
MR. LANE: — What about the breweries? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, I don’t know whether Rothmans of Pall Mail, with its head office in 
London, is a very close friend of this Government. They own a great number of things, Mr. Speaker, and 
I don’t have any particular affiliation or affinity with many of the products which they produce, but it 
may well be that Members opposite can inform me more fully on their product line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shall want to say a good deal about federal-provincial relations tomorrow, hut I want to 
say a few other things today about some of the points raised by the Member for Prince Albert West and 
about some of his activities in the last couple of weeks. 
 
I noticed an interesting story in the recent Star-Phoenix of a couple of days ago and it went this way: 
 

Steuart would kill Churchill project if Liberals gain power. 
 
Now that is interesting, it is interesting on a couple of counts. It suggests that there is some kind of 
Churchill project to kill - and that is not true. It suggests that the Liberal party would kill it! All I can say 
is that if he is expressing any concern for the Churchill River it is a new found concern, because based 
upon his record of past performance, the only thing they would kill would be any environmental studies 
on the Churchill and perhaps the Churchill River itself. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The newspaper report goes on to say that Mr. Steuart, the Leader of the 
Opposition, told this to a student group. That was wise. Because certainly he wouldn’t want to tell it to 
anybody whose memory went back as far as 1970 or 1971, to anyone who remembers his key role in the 
Athabasca pulp mill project. Why didn’t he explain to those students why no proper environmental 
studies were undertaken before that project was committed? Why didn’t he explain why there were no 
public hearings, none at all before the province was committed to that project. 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

103 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He didn’t attempt to explain why he legally committed this province, nine days 
before polling date, to this project and put at risk $100 million of public funds without one day’s 
hearings. 
 
Let’s keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that this particular project would have poured effluent into the Beaver 
River, which would have poured it into the Churchill River, which on their own report would have 
polluted the Churchill River at least as far as Manitoba. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — I thought you said there was no report? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I said there had been no proper environmental studies; there was one report. 
There were no public hearings; the report was not even disclosed to any member of the public until the 
project was committed. 
 
Now let me quote from that particular study, one little portion just to give you the flavour. 
 

The volume of the mill effluent would be a very substantial portion of the flow in the Beaver River 
during low flows in winter and dilution would be minimal. 

 
Get the picture! Here would be that pulp mill effluent flowing into the Beaver River. It would make up 
at least half of the total flow of the Beaver River and the dilution would be minimal. This would have 
killed the Beaver River and would kill all the plant and animal life in the Beaver River. It would have 
carried pollution into the Churchill River system. It would have carried it into the whole system at least 
as far down as Manitoba, according to their own study. That is what the Member for Prince Albert West 
was suggesting and urging and recommending to this House in 1971. That is not away back in history, 
that is 1971. And now he is posing as the protector of Churchill. 
 
Environmentalists know better. They know that the NDP policies offer protection for the Churchill and 
that Liberal policies don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Prince Albert West spent a bit of his time on northern Saskatchewan. In a 
debate one year ago I spoke at some length on DNS and I called it potentially one of the greatest social 
experiments ever to be undertaken by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I spoke of some of the criticism coming about DNS, some coming from Liberals 
whose motives were just a little bit ulterior; some of them who, seeing no prospect of re-election up 
there, have decided to move to greener pastures. I think that it is pretty wise for them to move out of the 
northland and down to the greener pastures and warmer climes. I know the move was wise but I rather 
think that the selection of the pasture 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

104 
 

may have been a mistake. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He thinks that it is going to be nice and green and warm in Rosthern but I think 
in Rosthern it is going to be Friesen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I thick that the cold feet acquired by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) in the 
North in the last year or so are going to be even colder. He is going .to have frost bite by next year. 
 
When I review the progress in northern Saskatchewan over the past year I am not surprised that the 
Member for Athabasca - and I am careful not to say from Athabasca - is seeking another spot. He has 
become much quieter. Last year on the first day for Motions he put in a whole wad of Motions - a great 
fishing expedition, no less than eight queries about northern Saskatchewan. This year he is down to 
three. It is not that he has bigger fish to fry, it is just that he hasn’t been catching anything. And well he 
might be quiet because it has been a year of solid achievement in northern Saskatchewan, with more to 
come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The elected northern municipal council is in operation. It has a substantial 
budget of close to a million dollars, is working directly with DNS on northern housing, on winter works, 
on water and sewer projects. I know that when the Member for Athabasca stands up he will tell us about 
the elected northern council that was operating when he was on the Treasury Benches. He will tell us all 
about housing in the North. But just before he gets to that, let me tell him that in 1969 and 1970, the last 
two years of those lean, long Liberal years, the average number of houses built was 23. Twenty-three in 
one year. Under DNS in 1973 then were not 23 but 99 starts. In 1974 we estimate that the number of 
starts will be 151. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — How many for the natives? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — There are 111 new units in 25 settlements. In a place like Weyakwin there are 
many, many houses, all for natives. 
 
Let me say a word about education. The community college in La Ronge has been successful. There is a 
demand for more similar colleges on the east side and the west side as well. New schools have been built 
in Pine House, and Wollaston, 26 new teacherages have been completed. Grants to the northern school 
board have more than doubled in five years. 
 
In other areas employment is up, social assistance is down. DNS will spend a half million dollars less 
this year on social assistance than originally estimated. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

105 

MR. BLAKENEY: — And even if, as the Member for Milestone suggests, some of it has been 
transferred to the Family Improvement Plan, I want to point out to him that payments under that plan 
cannot go to people unless they are working. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Social assistance rolls have declined by 35 per cent. There are micro-wave links 
bringing telephone services to the North, and I know the Member for Prince Albert West was careful to 
cast aspersions on the need for communication systems, but I think people up in the North do appreciate 
them. Air strips and roads are being built at a tempo never before seen. 
 
There is a good deal more to be told but I know that my colleague the Member for Shellbrook (Mr. 
Bowerman), the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan will be speaking in this House and will outline 
more fully proposals for the North. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — My point, Mr. Speaker, is simply this. We took the plunge to move from the old 
style colonial rule, to a new style sharing rule with the people who are there. And we knew there would 
be troubles. We knew it would take time and guts and imagination. And there is still a long way to go. 
But I don’t believe anybody in this House, however warped he is, can doubt that the North is on the 
move and DNS is helping to make it move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Under Liberal promises it moved nowhere. The NDP promised northern 
development for the people in the North, and they are on the move. The people of northern 
Saskatchewan know and the people of the South know, as a matter of fact, that New Democrats bring 
progress and change in the North and Liberal promises don’t. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I ask this House to look at the record, look at the record of what has happened in 
the North. The record of the Liberals and the record of the New Democrats. Sorry the Member for 
Prince Albert West isn’t here because he suggested we would not run on our record. I want to tell him 
we will have new programs but we are happy to run on our record. They are running away from theirs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to mention just one other subject. The Member for Prince Albert West 
said he was sick, felt the Throne Speech was sick. He is sick because the Throne Speech contains yet 
another measure of electoral reform and since 1964 he has been trying to stay away from the wrath of 
the voters. Every election has produced a little bit of juggling of his constituency boundaries and of 
other constituency boundaries in this province. 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

106 
 

He has been trying, trying almost in vain, and latterly hopelessly in vain, to advance the faltering cause 
of the Liberal Party. But as we all know, for the Liberal Party the skein ran out in 1971. Since 1971 this 
Legislature has moved to make sure, that authority in our election system rests with the voters. Not with 
those backroom boys who hatched the despicable ‘Daveymander’ designed to defeat the public will. Not 
with the corporate managers who finance expensive media campaigns. But with the voters. 
 
Last year we put into legislative form the report of the Electoral Boundaries Commission. And we all 
remember the background of that legislation. I was in this House in 1970 when we put forward a 
proposal to refer redistribution to an independent boundaries commission. And that was rejected. It was 
rejected with scorn by the Members who now sit on your left, Mr. Speaker, It was voted down and the 
debate which we had displayed an arrogance which we don’t often see even from the Members of the 
party who sit to your left, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Liberals then introduced their gerrymander bill. It became known as the ‘Daveymander’, after its author. 
That Bill, Mr. Speaker, was as cynical an attempt to defeat the will of the voters as this province has 
ever seen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It was passed over the fierce opposition of the then Opposition, the New 
Democrats. It was designed to see that if the Liberals and the New Democrats got the same number of 
votes in 1971, the Liberals got 40 seats and the New Democrats got 20, Every calculation has been done. 
Everything had been taken into account, everything but the voters. Everything but the voters who 
decided they weren’t going to see their electoral system attacked in this way. As a result of the anger of 
the voters, they defeated the government, they defeated the ‘.Daveymander’ and they crushed its 
authors. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — In April of 1972, in our first regular session, we introduced a bill to provide for 
an independent boundaries commission. It was voted for by Members opposite. Some of us wondered - 
have they undergone a conversion or is it just another display of expediency? But last year in the House 
they removed any doubts. They showed that they don’t believe in an independent boundaries 
commission. They gave notice to the people of Saskatchewan that if they are re-elected the Independent 
Boundaries Commission will be out the window and we will be back to the ‘Daveymander’. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Last session they levelled a totally unprincipled attack on Judge Maguire and the 
whole Commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Without a shred of evidence they hurled charges of partisanship and foul play. 
They said they were attacking the report. 



 
December 3, 1974 

 

107 

That’s what they said, “We are attacking the report”. But in truth they were attacking not the report but 
the whole idea of an independent boundaries commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — They didn’t believe in it in 1973 and they don’t believe in it now. This year we 
are going to add to the rights of the Saskatchewan voters. We are going to introduce legislation to give 
special consideration to the handicapped voters. We believe that if at all possible, every eligible voter 
ought to have an opportunity to express his view and we believe that every vote ought to be counted 
approximately equally. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That last proposition I know has no appeal for Members opposite. That indeed 
does not have any appeal for Members opposite. I was elected in the constituency of Regina Centre and 
I got 9,800 votes. And my opponent lost his deposit and he got 4,200 votes. But at 4,200 votes and 
losing his deposit, he still got more votes than anybody sitting opposite, except the Member f or Prince 
Albert West and the Member for Lakeview. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — He got more votes than the total votes cast in Athabasca - which you might 
defend, and in Regina Albert Park, try that for a comparison. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Why should the people in Regina Centre have less than one-quarter the vote than 
the people of Regina Albert Park have? The answer is because the ‘Daveymander’ decreed it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, if the Members to your left 
are re-elected, we will see a ‘Daveymander’ revised. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we propose to expand the rights of Saskatchewan 
citizens to voice their views. And whether or not it makes Members of the Opposition sick, we are proud 
of what we have done. We are proud of what will be done to give every person in Saskatchewan a right 
to a full and free voice in the choosing of the government in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will have a few more words to address to the House tomorrow 
and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 
December 3, 1974 
 

108 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:40 o’clock p.m. 


