
























































Hansard: November 29, 1974


 
  
 

10 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

2nd Day 
 

Friday, November 29, 1974. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE - AVAILABILITY OF POTASH TO FAMINE STRICKEN AREAS 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 
request leave under Rule 17 to move a motion asking for: 
 

Priority of Debate for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance. I state 
that matter to be the need for immediate action by the Government of Saskatchewan to make potash 
available to those areas of the world such as India and Bangladesh requiring fertilizer in order to 
combat the daily starvation that they are faced with. 

 
RULING 

 
PRIORITY OF DEBATE - AVAILABILITY OF POTASH TO FAMINE STRICKEN AREAS 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — A notice regarding this matter proposed for Priority of Debate was received in the 
Clerk’s office at 12: — 20 p.m. today, for which I thank the Hon. Member. After careful consideration 
of this matter two areas of concern arise. The matter raised for debate must be an urgent and a recent 
occurrence. I refer all Hon. Members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practices, 17th edition, page 365 
which states that: 
 

The fact that a grievance is continuing is not sufficient if it is not of recent occurrence. If the facts 
have only recently been revealed that does not make the occurrence recent. 

 
Although all Members would agree that the plight of the starving people throughout the world is of 
concern to everyone, it is not a matter which has just arisen which would necessitate a Priority Debate 
today. 
 
And further from Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, fourth edition, page 90, Citation 
100(5): 
 

The adjournment of the House cannot be moved with reference to critical conditions generally 
prevailing in certain parts of the country. 

 
The second point of concern is that the matter of priority mist fall within the jurisdiction of the 
Provincial Government. I refer all Hon. Members to a Speaker’s Ruling, dated November 30th, 1973, 
which states as follows: 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

11 
 

A motion for Priority of Debate ‘must involve the administrative responsibility of the Government’ 
and it must be so pressing that public interest will suffer if it is not given immediate attention. This 
Assembly cannot give attention to matters over which it has not jurisdiction (Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, fourth edition, Citation 100, page 89). (See the Journals of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 1973, page 18.) 

 
The matter raised today by the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) involves the export of 
potash to areas outside of Canada. International trade falls clearly within the responsibilities of the 
Federal Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce and not within the provincial jurisdiction. 
Because this matter is of a continuing nature and is not within the provincial jurisdiction, I rule the 
motion out of order. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to your ruling, may I respect - fully suggest… 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Order. 
 
MR. STEUART: — I submitted a request for an urgent public debate. You have said for example in 
your ruling that there is nothing that this House or this Government can do about it. I should like to 
make a case that clearly it has been, and it is the continuing action of this Government that is denying 
these people fertilizer right now. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The point the Hon. Member wishes to raise is the subject matter not the urgency of 
debate. I have tried to carefully go over all the rules of precedence to show what the rules are. I would 
further like to quote from Beauchesne, page 90, Citation 7, this was a ruling made by the Speaker of the 
House of Commons on February 19, 1932: 
 

There is no appeal from the Speaker’s decision that a motion to adjourn the House for discussion for 
an urgent matter of public importance cannot be made unless the Member’s statement shows that there 
is actual urgency of debate. 

 
The Speaker’s decision of that day decided that the decision on this particular point was final. The 
House voted on it. At that time in the House of Commons they still had the right of appeal, the same as 
we have here, and the House voted on whether the Speaker’s Ruling would be upheld. I think that is the 
position we are at right now. The House can either confirm the ruling or they can reverse the ruling and 
have the Priority of Debate go on. But all the authorities that I can find would rule this out of order 
because it is not provincial, it is international involving the country of Canada and other countries. 
 
I rule it is out of order. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, you have made a ruling and you have said 



 
November 29, 1974 

12 

that in your opinion it is not anything that this Government can do something about. That it is national 
and international. I recognize that trade is national and international and is the responsibility of the 
Federal Government. However, this Government clearly can decide and has decided on the amount of 
potash… 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Order. As I understood it you had made your 
ruling. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have made my ruling. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — If you have made your ruling and if I understand the rules there is no possibility 
of debate on it. What is open to the Hon. Member is to appeal the ruling and that is all that is open to the 
Hon. Member and not to debate it, if I understand the rules. 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Premier is not quite yet a dictator. I am raising a question and asking a 
question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! We cannot debate the subject matter of a proposed motion on the 
Speaker’s ruling. We must debate the ruling if the ruling is left open for debate. Once the ruling has 
been made the House has the right to challenge the Speaker’s ruling under our rules. That is the only 
avenue that is open at this time. 
 
MR. STEUART: — My question then is, Mr. Speaker, you are saying that we don’t even have the right 
to question when you suggest that this is something they cannot do. I think it clearly is, when you 
suggest that it is not of immediate importance and when I think of 30,000 people starving every day it is 
important. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Unless the majority of the Members of the House reverse my ruling it cannot be 
debated. But it can be put on the Order Paper as a standing motion and debated when it comes up on the 
Order Paper. It can’t be debated under the rules of Parliament or our Legislature. My ruling is that the 
Motion is out of order. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE: — (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, I think we do have the right to question the reasons for 
your ruling and those are the matters we are taking into account. There is no question that this… 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think the Hon. Member is well aware that if you don’t have the right to 
question the ruling, you can challenge the ruling and at a later date you can bring the motion up on a 
substantive motion. I have quoted from Erskine May and I have quoted from Beauchesne plus our own 
rulings of 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

13 
 

the past of this Legislature. I rule that the Motion is out of order. 
 
MR. STEUART: — I realize, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite who have callously allowed this to 
happen don’t want a debate, they don’t want to talk about it. However, I challenge your ruling. We will 
find out whether they want to vote about whether 30,000 people today starving to… 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Leader of the Opposition has challenged the Ruling of the Chair. 
Will the Members take the ruling that I read as read or do you wish it read again? 
 
Is it the pleasure of the House to sustain the Ruling of the Chair? I declare the ruling sustained. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, according to Rule 17(7)… 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, we are in the midst of a vote and you cannot raise another point now. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — This relates to the correct rule under which we should be operating. It is my 
understanding that Rule 17(7) is the relevant rule which says that if objection is taken, the Speaker 
requests those Members who support the motion and if more than. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
The Hon. Member is not in order. If he would read five and six he would find that seven follows those. 
 
My ruling has been challenged and those in favour that the Ruling of the Chair be sustained will please 
rise. 
 
Ruling of Chair sustained on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 36 
 
Blakeney Brockelbank Matsalla 
Dyck MacMurchy Faris 
Meakes Pepper Owens 
Wood Michayluk Gross 
Smishek Byers Feduniak 
Romanow Thorson Comer 
Messer Whelan Rolfes 
Snyder Kwasnica Lange 
Bowerman Engel Hanson 
Thibault Robbins Feschuk 
Larson Tchorzewski Kaeding 
Kowalchuk Taylor Flasch 
 

NAYS — 13 
Steuart Gardner MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 



 
November 29, 1974 

14 

 
Coupland Weatherald Malone 
Guy Lane Richards 
Boldt MacLeod Grant 
Wiebe   
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition 
(Mr. Steuart): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of three former 
Members of this Assembly, expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they made to their 
communities, their constituency and to this province. 

 
Hon. Robert Leith Hanbidge, Q.C., who died on July 25, 1974, was the 12th Lieutenant-Governor of 
the Province of Saskatchewan, serving from 1963 to 1970, and was a Member of this Legislature for 
the constituency of Kerrobert from 1929 to 1934. He was born at Southampton, Ontario in 1891 and 
received his education at Southampton Public School, Port Elgin High School and Owen Sound 
Collegiate in Ontario and Wetmore Hall Law School in Regina. He was a member of the Regina 
Rugby Club from 1910 - 1912. This Club won the Western Canadian championship in 1912 and later 
became the Regina Roughriders Football Club. He articled with the Regina law firm of F.W.G. 
Haultain and was admitted to the bar in 1915. In that year he moved to Kerrobert where he established 
a law firm with his brother. He maintained his Kerrobert law firm from 1915 to 1963 when he became 
the Lieutenant-Governor. In 1933 he was appointed King’s Counsel. He was a town councillor for 
Kerrobert, then mayor from 1921 to 1923, and later was chairman of the school and hospital boards. 
He was elected to the House of Commons in 1958 for the constituency of Kindersley, and was 
re-elected in 1962. He was chairman of the Board of Stewards of the Kerrobert United Church, and 
was a member of the Scottish Rite, the Odd Fellows and Elks Lodges. He served as Grand Master of 
the Grand Masonic Lodge of Saskatchewan in 1953 and 1954. He was invested as Knight of Grace of 
The Order of St. John of Jerusalem by Governor General Vanier in 1963. In 1968 he received an 
honorary Doctor of Law Degree from the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. 
 
James Gordon Taggart, who died on June 11, 1974, was a Member of this Legislature for Swift 
Current from 1934 to 1944 and was Minister of Agriculture for that period. He was born in 1892 at 
Parrsboro, Nova Scotia. He was educated at River Hebert, Nova Scotia public school, and went to high 
school at the College of Agriculture in Truro, Nova Scotia. He graduated from the Ontario 
Agricultural College in Guelph, Ontario, in 1912 with a Bachelor of Science (Agriculture) degree. He 
was Superintendent of the Swift Current Dominion Experimental Farm and Principal of the School of 
Agriculture, Vermilion, Alberta. He was the Saskatchewan Minister of Reconstruction, Labour and 
Public Welfare from May 1944 to July 1944. He joined the federal Department of 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

15 
 

Agriculture and was Deputy Minister from 1949 to 1959. He had two honorary degrees conferred 
upon him and was awarded the Order of the British Empire. 

 
Sinclair Alexander Whittaker, who died on July 10, 1974, was a Member of this Legislature for 
Moose Jaw County from 1929 to 1934. He was born and educated in Port Perry, Ontario in 1888 and 
moved to Briercrest, Saskatchewan in 1910 where he operated a small chain of general stores, 
Whittaker’s Ltd. He was one of the founders of the Briercrest Bible Institute which opened in 1935 
and was chairman of the board for many years. He was an active supporter of The Gideons, Wycliffe 
Bible Translators, the Canadian Sunday School Mission, the Evangelical Alliance Mission and 
Christian Business Men’s Association. He also served as President of the Retail Merchants 
Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 
May I, Mr. Speaker, add a word or two of a more personal nature, to the more formal motion of 
condolence? 
 
We have noted this year the passing of the Hon. R.L. Hanbidge. R.L. Hanbidge was one of 
Saskatchewan’s most distinguished citizens. Dinny Hanbidge had an outstanding career as a lawyer, as 
an athlete, as mayor of his home town, as chairman, or board member of almost every civic endeavour 
in Kerrobert, as a Member of the Provincial Legislature, Member of Parliament, finally as 
Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
Dinny Hanbidge was not only respected, as he undoubtedly was, but he was beloved by many tens of 
thousands who have come under the spell of his charm, his genuine friendliness, his fondness for people 
in all walks of life. I know, many of us knew Dinny Hanbidge. He was one of nature’s gentlemen, one of 
the real natural political figures of this province. And he used to say, he had his ups and downs in 
politics and he left this Legislature with the consent of the majority of his constituents, but he didn’t in 
any way lack those political gifts which many of us envied. I recall when he was sworn in as 
Lieutenant-Governor and the little story is indicative of what Dinny was like. 
 
The late Mr. Lloyd and I went down to the dinner which Mr. Hanbidge gave for many of his friends 
upon the occasion of being sworn in as Lieutenant-Governor. He had a good number of his friends 
around and we looked around, and he saw us looking around and when he got up to speak he said that he 
saw people looking around and he could guess that they were wondering about the political complexion 
of the group. Doubtless they were wondering whether or not they hadn’t recognized a good number of 
these people in political circles, particularly circles of the Conservative Party. I must say that thought 
had crossed my mind. He said, “Yes, that’s true, there are a good number of people here whom you 
might call ‘Tories’. And it’s also true that Lieutenant-Governors are neutral in politics But I want to tell 
you that I was sworn in as Lieutenant-Governor today and these invitations to all these people went out 
last week.” That was an indication of the sort of charm he used to radiate. I remember Woodrow Lloyd 
and I leaving 



 
November 29, 1974 

16 

that dinner and thanking our lucky stars that he was being sworn in as Lieutenant-Governor and 
accordingly could not be a candidate in either the constituency of Biggar or the constituency of Regina 
Centre. 
 
On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan I extend sincere sympathy to Mr. Hanbidge’s daughters and 
their families. 
 
Mr. Taggart, I did not know. He was active as a public servant in Ottawa until relatively recently and 
there may be some in the House who were familiar with him. It’s clear from the description of his career 
that he has made an outstanding contribution to agriculture in Canada. 
 
Mr. Sinclair Whittaker, I had met. I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. and Mrs. Whittaker in October, 
1973 on the occasion of the official opening of the new dormitory residence at the Briercrest Bible 
Institute. The residence was dedicated in honour of Mr. and Mrs. Whittaker and was named Whittaker 
Hall. I addressed a few remarks on that occasion and so did Mrs. Whittaker, who had proved to be a real 
pioneer Saskatchewan woman who, without particular reference to notes, recalled the early days of the 
Briercrest Bible Institute and the struggles of the Whittakers and others who established that Institute, 
first in Briercrest and later at Caronport. I have great admiration for people like the Whittakers. They 
were and are builders of Saskatchewan. They were the sort of pioneers who felt that with a lot of work 
and a lot of faith, many things were possible in this province. The Whittakers were particularly 
interested in young people and in their obligation to create and build organizations in society for the 
benefit of young people. I know that Mr. Whittaker will long be remembered for his contribution to 
Briercrest, to this province and particularly to the founding of the Briercrest Bible Institute. 
 
On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I extend our sincere sympathy to Mrs. Whittaker and to their 
daughter, Mrs. Rohde and their son Morgan Whittaker. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART: — (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to join with the 
Premier in paying a word of tribute to these three men who served our province, and indeed our nation 
in the past, and to whose memory we pay tribute to today. 
 
Unfortunately, Dinny Hanbidge left us some time ago. The tributes poured in from every corner of this 
province, in fact every corner of this country and beyond. 
 
I suppose when you think of Dinny Hanbidge, if you thought of someone who was a typical 
Saskatchewanite from a small town in rural Saskatchewan, who could handle himself in any situation 
whether it was at a rural sports day or at an auction sale, or in the House of Commons, or as 
Lieutenant-Governor at a very official function, he would be the ideal. 
 
As the Premier, said, he had a great sense of humour. I’ll always remember when he was 
Lieutenant-Governor and he would read the Throne Speech, when I first knew him, when the late 
Woodrow Lloyd was Premier, the CCF Government then and later we were the government, every time 
that he would read that phrase, ‘my Government;’ he would get a little twinkle in his eye. He used to say 
on several occasions, “You know, Pave, some day I 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

17 
 

would like to be able to sit up there and say ‘my government’ and really mean it all the way down to the 
bottom of my heart.” 
 
You couldn’t help but like Dinny and you couldn’t help but love him. He did make a tremendous 
contribution at every level of the community, the province and the nation, in sports, in politics and a host 
of other activities. 
 
He was a wonderful man. We all miss him. He came the closest of anybody in the history of this 
province of becoming, I think, for a great many interesting circumstances which he used to enjoy as 
much as anyone, almost a permanent Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
I knew James Taggart. I met him in the late ’50s. He had a very interesting career. He was Minister of 
Agriculture for many years in the Province of Saskatchewan and later became Deputy Minister of 
Agriculture of the Federal Government. In those years covering a span of about a quarter of a century, 
there were many advances made in agriculture and in almost every one of them he played a role in their 
development. 
 
He was an outstanding man both as a politician, as a Cabinet Minister, in this province, and as a public 
servant for many years with the Federal Government. 
 
I didn’t know Mr. Whittaker, but having come from Moose Jaw I remember hearing about him and I 
know that he enjoyed a reputation as a very sound and honest successful businessman. What is even 
more important and more note worthy he enjoyed a reputation as a very dedicated Christian, who made a 
public commitment, as the Premier has pointed out, to the health and guidance of young people. 
 
The Province of Saskatchewan is a better place because of these men who passed this way, and because 
they served here. Their loss is a loss to all of us and I join with the Premier and every Member in this 
House in paying tribute to their memory and in passing on to those who are still here, their relatives and 
friends, our deepest condolences. 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I count it a particular privilege as 
the MLA now representing Kerrobert-Kindersley, to have this opportunity of saying a few words 
regarding the Hon. Robert Leith Hanbidge. 
 
Compared to many other Members of this Assembly I knew Dinny Hanbidge for a relatively short 
period of time. However, during the few years I did have the opportunity of knowing him I came to have 
a great deal of respect and admiration for the very basic concern he had for the welfare of people 
generally, and also for his great interest in community life. 
 
In the Kerrobert area, where he was best known, he was also probably the most highly regarded. His 
involvement in the community had already been well established by reference to the fact that he served 
the town of Kerrobert as mayor and as councillor, and he served the area as chairman of the school and 
hospital boards. His service to people more generally can be noted, not only from the elected positions 
which he held, but also from his activities in the various lodges and as a member of the board of his 
home church. 



 
November 29, 1974 

18 

In these various positions, Mr. Hanbidge was never the silent listener. He was a man who participated 
fully in the life of these various organizations. He was admired by those who knew him; for his innate 
sense of fairness and for his common-sense approach. 
 
Dinny Hanbidge’s concern for people beyond his own area is probably best demonstrated by looking at 
some of his speeches when he was a Member of this House and of the House of Commons. When he 
was first elected to the House of Commons, in his maiden address, he expressed his concern over the 
movement of grain and the need to ensure the sale of wheat. He also spoke of his concern for senior 
citizens and the need for higher old age pensions. He took this opportunity of commending the 
Government for extending the period of payments under The Unemployment Insurance Act, and then he 
turned and called on the Government, as a suggestion, to extend this coverage to farm labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dinny Hanbidge will not quickly be forgotten by those who came in contact with him. We 
have all, in some ways, been affected by his wit and friendship. We shall all, of course, have our own 
memories to remember. I know in my case, and the Member for Rosthern will not appreciate this, but in 
my case I could never escape from Dinny without an extra cigar in my pocket. It was one of the first 
things handed out as one walked in and one of the last things thrust upon me as I left. 
 
Above all else, I think the friendship he extended to all is what will be most remembered. One of his 
own quotes from 1958 most demonstrates this fact. At that time he said in a speech in the House of 
Commons: 
 

I should like to say, Sir, that in the four political campaigns in which I have been a candidate my 
opponents were friends of mine. We were friends when the campaign started and we were still friends 
when the campaign ended. We managed to conduct all four campaigns without bitterness and better 
still without any mud-slinging. 

 
Dinny Hanbidge was not only a friendly man, he was indeed a friend which says much more. 
 
In closing may I say that the people of Kerrobert-Kindersley join with the Members of this House and 
the citizens of this province in expressing our regret at the loss of such a man, and we extend our 
sympathy to his daughters and their families. His friendship and his work will long be valued. 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of knowing Dinny 
Hanbidge before I was a Member of this House and I certainly want to join with others on this occasion 
to say a few words in memory of Mr. Hanbidge. 
 
I think as most of us go through life we accumulate friends or accumulate enemies depending on our 
natures and personalities I found that Dinny Hanbidge was one of those fortunate individuals who 
seemed to have what was required to not only make friends but keep them. He had friends of all ages 
and in all walks of life. 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

19 
 

As has been indicated here today I certainly found Dinny to be a most friendly man, a most happy man 
and an optimistic individual. He certainly wasn’t one to look on the bad side of things. 
 
One thing that impressed me was his sincere interest in the careers and the accomplishments of young 
people particularly. He showed a genuine interest and was a good listener, which is a. pretty important 
asset. I think that these traits did much to project Mr. Hanbidge into public life where he made such a 
sizeable contribution. 
 
He will certainly be not only missed by all those who knew him, but probably of more importance, will 
be remembered for all the good things that he did in his life. 
 
I should like, Mr. Speaker, to join with the others of this House in expressing our sympathy to his 
daughters and their families. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, may I join with the previous Members in expressing 
my words of condolence to the relatives of the three deceased gentlemen, but most particularly relating 
to the Hon. R.L. Hanbidge, former Lieutenant-Governor of our province. 
 
In looking back to my first year in 1964, Mr. Speaker, when I became a Member of this Assembly, there 
were many things that happened which to a new Member were very significant. One that I shall never 
forget was the opening ceremony of the Legislature. The moat outstanding to me was the arrival of the 
Lieutenant-Governor, the Hon. R.L. Hanbidge. The impressive manner in which he walked across this 
floor of this Chamber with that smile on his face, creating an atmosphere of warmth and gratitude, 
which gave me the assurance, Mr. Speaker, that I, even a new Member was welcome and that he, as the 
representative of the Queen, was human and we had nothing to fear. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while it is with regret that one must accept the passing of such a notable person in this 
history of our province, I can safely say that his contribution to Saskatchewan, in whatever capacity he 
served, will be remembered throughout the years and when history is written the late Hon. R.L. 
Hanbidge will be given his rightful place as one of the most humble and yet statesmanlike public 
servants Saskatchewan has ever known. 
 
I should like, Mr. Speaker, through you to express these words of sympathy to the Hanbidge family at 
this time. 
 
HON. G. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t personally know Mr. Sinclair 
Alexander Whittaker, the man who was a Member of this House as the Member for Moose Jaw County, 
however, he was well known in the Moose Jaw community and in the surrounding area as a fine and 
honest Christian gentleman. 
 
Mr. Whittaker was one of the founders and the central figure in the Briercrest Bible Institute. He 
contributed in a very generous way financially and in a moral way to the operation of that institute. 
 
I had the opportunity to substitute for the Minister of 



 
November 29, 1974 

20 

Education on October 20th last, when the Library at the Briercrest Bible Institute was dedicated and it 
was obvious from talking to those people who were close to the Institute and close to Mr. Whittaker that 
he had left a permanent impression of generosity and sacrifice for those causes in which he believed so 
sincerely. 
 
The Premier indicated that the new dormitory at the Institute bears his name and I suggest that it will be 
a constant reminder of this man’s dedication to Christian ideals. I should like to join with those who are 
paying tribute to him today and express my sincere regret at his passing. The qualities which he 
possessed are a rare commodity today and his family can be justifiably proud of this distinguished 
Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
HON. E.I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words 
along the lines of those that have spoken concerning the Hon. R.L. Hanbidge. 
 
Hon. R.L. Hanbidge, I think was one of the truly great men of Saskatchewan whom we have had to deal 
with. 
 
Back in time when he was elected in 1958 and before Mr. Hanbidge became the Lieutenant-Governor of 
Saskatchewan, he and I represented some of the same people. He, in Ottawa, and I here in Regina. A 
part of the Swift Current constituency was in the Kindersley federal constituency so we had the honour 
of representing some of the same people. 
 
But back in those early days, I am sorry to say, I had never met Mr. Hanbidge. My paths were from 
Swift Current to Regina and I was dealing, more or less, with the CCF circles and government circles in 
that way: — Mr. Hanbidge, his movements were between Kindersley and Ottawa and he was dealing 
with a different set of people than what I was and somehow we never met. The place where we did meet 
was over in London, England. It was at the time of the Parliamentary Conference in London in 1961. I, 
Sir, then held the position that you hold now and I was the representative for Saskatchewan at that 
Conference. It was really strange, both of us thought, that we had to go over to London in order to meet 
when we really represented the same people here in Canada. I think that some of the people from other 
parts of the Commonwealth thought it was rather strange that we had to go over there to meet. But we 
did. 
 
I want to tell you people here today that Dinny Hanbidge with his big white stetson hat was the lion of 
the whole Conference. Everybody at that Conference knew Dinny Hanbidge and they knew him well. 
He really stole the hearts of everyone at that Conference. 
 
I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was also very happy to be invited to the dinner of which the 
Premier speaks. I was pretty proud at that time to be counted as one of the Lieutenant-Governors friends. 
I am still very proud and very pleased indeed to have the privilege of being one of Mr. Hanbidge’s 
friends. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it surely was not an exclusive privilege. I am sure that Mr. Hanbidge’s 
friends numbered very well up into the hundreds and thousands, that he 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

21 
 

was one of the best liked and better known people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I should also, Mr. Speaker, like to say a few remarks about the Hon. J.G. Taggart, who represented the 
Swift Current constituency and was my predecessor as the representative of that Constituency in the 
Legislature for some 10 years between 1934 and 1944. 
 
I am sorry I have to say in this regard that I was never personally acquainted with Mr. Taggart. I guess I 
was rather small fry and I wasn’t travelling too much in political circles in those days and I don’t think 
that I ever exchanged a word with him. We just never met in that way. 
 
My first recollection of him, Mr. Speaker, was just a little better than 50 years ago this year, when he 
addressed what we called an “Open Lit” in the Swift Current Collegiate back in 1924. I am afraid I can’t 
tell you what he spoke about that day. At that time he was the superintendent of what was then the Swift 
Current Experimental Farm. It is now the Research Station, but in those days it was the Experimental 
Farm where Mr. Taggart was the superintendent. He came to speak to the high school students on that 
day. As I say I can’t recall whet he said but I recall that I felt it was a good talk and I was much 
impressed by his bearing, athletic figure and good looks. He really made an impression on the kids that 
day. 
 
He came to Swift Current from Vermilion. I believe he had been in the Vermilion School of Agriculture. 
He remained superintendent of the Experimental Farm until he ran in the 1934 election campaign. 
 
This was one of the harder fought election campaigns that you will ever see around the country. I am 
quite sure it was one of the hardest fought that was ever fought in our constituency. It was between Mr. 
Taggart and the Hon. W.W. Smith, the Minister without portfolio in the Anderson Government, who 
represented Swift Current constituency at the time, and Allan MacCallum who later became the Deputy 
Minister of Education in Saskatchewan for many years. When the votes were counted I think there were 
two votes between Allan MacCallum and Mr. Smith and Mr. Taggart had a majority over Mr. 
MacCallum of just over one hundred votes. It was a pretty close election. 
 
I can well recall the debate that Mr. Taggart and Allan MacCallum had in the Metropolitan Church in 
Swift Current. I think it was just the night before the election. The debate in the packed church was a 
very, very interesting one I can assure you. It was very well carried on by both the debaters and it was 
one that went down in history in that constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a terrible thing to say, but they tell me that confession is very good for the soul and 
maybe this is the right time to say it, but I voted for Mr. Taggart in that election. That was 40 years ago 
and it was the first, last and only time in my life that I voted Liberal. But Mr. Taggart went on and as I 
say he won that election and was in the Saskatchewan Cabinet at the time and became the Minister of 
Agriculture, which position I believe he held until 1944. I think he held that position with great 
distinction. When he was defeated in the 1944 election, he went back to working for the Federal 
Department of Agriculture and before too long became the Deputy 



 
November 29, 1974 

22 

Minister of Agriculture for Canada. 
 
I must concur with the remarks of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) that I believe that the 
Hon. J.G. Taggart, did contribute a great deal to the agriculture and the people of not only his own 
constituency but to the province and to all of Canada during his years of service to the country. 
 
I should like at this time to express my sincere sympathy to the bereaved family of both the Hon. R.L. 
Hanbidge and the Hon. J.G. Taggart. 
 
MR. A.W. ENGEL (Notice-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, should like to say a few words 
today and pay tribute to a man who, as mentioned by others here today, left his mark on our province. 
 
Sinclair Whittaker was born in Ontario. He was orphaned when he was just a very young boy. He was 
raised by a God-fearing grandmother. During his boyhood years he worked in a store for a Mr. Charlie 
Brown. He enjoyed telling about this. He reminisced about a room he had upstairs in that store, how he 
had spent time counting pelts because the store did a large trade with the local Indians. 
 
He headed West at the age of 20 to the village of Briercrest equipped with some education in commerce, 
some experience in working in a store and a whole lot of enthusiasm. He put these assets to work and in 
less than one decade he acquired a chain of six stores throughout southern Saskatchewan. He turned his 
attention to the field of politics and was elected as a Conservative Member from Moose Jaw county, as 
has already boon mentioned, in 1929. In the election of 1934 he ran as an Independent and was defeated. 
 
During the years that Mr. Whittaker served as a Member, his wile Isabel, to satisfy a deep spiritual 
hunger, enrolled in j correspondence course from the Moody Bible Institute in Chicago. Her interest was 
contagious and before too long a study group in the Briercrest area decided to hire a young minister by 
the name of Mr. Henry Hildebrandt. The early services of this group were held in a large room above the 
Whittaker store. 
 
Mrs. Whittaker, the correspondence school student, along with Mr. Hildebrandt and a Mrs. Helton, 
became the first teachers of the newly formed Bible Institute. Mr. Whittaker had a new avenue for his 
enthusiasm and it wasn’t long until this new school moved from a shack next to the pool hall to the 
Briercrest Hotel. The school was officially organized and chartered in 1935 with Hr. Whittaker as the 
first president and chairman of the board, a position he held until 1950. 
 
During those years the Whittakers placed all they had behind the school. The store became the school’s 
supply depot. One will never know just how much he invested but under God their financial support was 
a key factor in enabling the Briercrest Bible institute to continue to function during those early 
depression years. As his commitment grew, and it has been talked about by others today, in the 
importance or teaching the Bible to young people his vision also was broadened including some other 
Christian organizations as are mentioned in the main motion. The Canadian Sunday School Mission, the 
Northern Canada Evangelical Mission, the Soldiers’ and Airmen’s 



 
November 29, 1974 

 

23 
 

Christian Association and the Wycliffe Bible Translators, just to name a few. 
 
He personally encouraged another young student, John Parshower to engage in Bible School ministry as 
well. This led to the establishment of two other schools, the New Brunswick Bible Institute and one in 
Bracke, Germany. 
 
The greatest single contribution that Mr. Whittaker made to the Briercrest Bible Institute was in the 
purchase of the Caron Air Force Base in 1946. While a high school student there from 1947 to 1950, I 
became closely involved with this great man. I remember one instance when we were sitting at the table 
before meal time and over the loudspeaker system somebody asked him to say grace and he stood up 
and said, “Whittaker speaking,” and this tells a little bit of the kind he person he was. It was a thrill for 
me and an excuse to get out of school to drive his 1940 Chevy for him as he went out on speaking 
engagements to raise funds and support for the Bible School. 
 
His personal encouragement led me to seek a nomination alter a setback in 1967. Mr. Speaker, it is not 
an accident that this area is known as the “Bible Belt.” It is the direct result of men with a vision and a 
commitment to God. Men like Sinclair Whittaker. 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I am thankful also for this opportunity 
to express a few words in tribute to the late Mr. Sinclair Whittaker. I had met Mr. Whittaker but I really 
did not know him on a personal basis. However, I do know of many of the activities in his community 
and I do, of course, know of the high esteem in which he was hero by his friends and neighbours. It was 
just recently, in fact it was yesterday, that I discovered that my late grandfather, Flory MacDonald, and 
Mr. Whittaker were very close personal friends. I. think that possibly they had known each other in 
Ontario before coming out here. But this friendship was undoubtedly fostered by their mutual interest in 
the Conservative political party. 
 
As has been noted Mr. Whittaker was a successful businessman. He had a small chain of general stores 
and I believe that some of these stores were in Bayard, Hearne and Tilney, which are all very close to 
Moose Jaw, and of course his home base was at Briercrest. It has been suggested he was a founder of the 
Briercrest Institute and chairman or the board for a number of years. This Institute, of course, started at 
Briercrest and moved to Caronport alter the war where the facilities were much more adequate. 
 
I think that the Briercrest Bible Institute is in itself a very fine tribute to Hr. Whittaker. It has become 
one of the finest learning institutes in Saskatchewan, both academically and religiously. This institution 
has adopted, or possibly I could say it reflects the very character and personality of Mr. Whittaker. I 
think that it is because for this reason that it has become as successful as it has. ‘The BBI as it is called 
has always operated on the principle of self help. The board and the staff and the students and their 
parents have always worked co-operatively to achieve what was necessary at that Institution. It is this 
aspect of the Briercrest Bible Institute that is so refreshing to me and I 



 
November 29, 1974 

24 

give Mr. Whittaker full credit for the part that he played. 
 
I have taken the time to examine the record of Mr. Whittaker when he served in this Legislature from 
1929 to 1934. I must say that I am very impressed with the actions he took at that time, Of course, it is 
very evident from the time that he spent from 1929 to 1934 that it was a difficult period in 
Saskatchewan’s history to serve in this Legislature. From reading the record it is very evident that he 
brought to this House his strong moral convictions. It is very evident that first of all he was a 
humanitarian. He was a member of the Anderson Government during the depression and at that time he 
made a plea for the co-operation of all groups in this Legislature. In fact, on March 9, 1932, he 
suggested and indicated that he would be willing to go along with a coalition government if that is what 
it would take to run Saskatchewan in the best interests of its people. He did not always support his 
government’s party. Records indicate to me that he was certainly his own man. He was never a party 
man at the expense of his convictions. The good of his province and the welfare of his people always 
came first. 
 
During the early depression he was one of the strongest advocates of the policies of retrenchment. Mr. 
Whittaker was very critical of the theory of spending one’s way to prosperity. He also felt that elected 
Members should show the way and he was the first to advocate a cut in MLAs’ indemnities and also in 
civil servant salaries in very difficult economic times in Saskatchewan. He felt very strongly that the 
Government must lead the way. As a matter of fact he was so sincere in his quest for economy in 
Government spending that it was his suggestion that the City of Moose Jaw could perhaps do with one 
representative instead of two and this might be a way to cut down expenses It should be known that 
Moose Jaw at that time was represented by two people of his own party. He certainly pulled out all the 
stops to lead the way in economy in Government spending. 
 
After searching and reading through the Legislative records on Mr. Whittaker I can say that his service 
and his conduct in this House could be an inspiration to any political person. May I join with others in 
this Legislative Assembly in expressing condolences to the family of Mr. Whittaker. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) 
 

That the Resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased Members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 o’clock p.m. 


