



















































Hansard: April 18, 1974


2467 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

53rd Day 

 

Thursday, April 18, 1974. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to all Members of the Assembly, 75 Grade Eight students seated in the west gallery. They attend St. 

Mary's School in Regina North West. Their teachers, Mrs. Peart and Mr. Carey are with them. 

 

My family have had a pleasant relationship with this school and the teachers. All of my children attended 

here and many of the students are my neighbors. 

 

The other group I should like to introduce is seated in the Speaker's Gallery. It is made up of 35 adult 

students from the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Science in Regina North West. Their teacher, Ray 

Scheske is with them. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that Members join me in welcoming these two groups to the House. We hope that 

they enjoy the proceedings and find that their visit here will be worthwhile and educational. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish to 

introduce to you a group of students, Grade Eleven and Twelve from Manor High School in my 

constituency. I believe that this is the first occasion that Manor has attended the Assembly and I think that it 

will be a new and fine experience for them. I should also like to introduce their teacher, Mr. Hampole. They 

are sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

EXPANSION OF THE PRINCE ALERT PULP MILL 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to direct a 

question to the Premier. I was absent from the House yesterday and I should like a point of clarification. I've 

just been able to see press reports and they may or may not be accurate and I should like to ask the Premier if 

he would clarify for me if the Government of Saskatchewan is now or has entered into any negotiations or is 

doing any planning for the development of an expansion at the Prince Albert Pulp Mill, for a second line, or 

any expansion to develop the production of hardwood pulp at the Prince Albert Pulp Mill in conjunction 

with the Prince Albert 



 

April 18, 1974 

2468 

 

Pulp Mill, 70 per cent owner Karl Landegger of New York? At the same time could he answer if they are 

negotiating with Domtar or any other company to be their sales agent or to do anything else in connection 

with a proposed government-owned pulp mill at Meadow Lake? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Hon. Member's question, there is 

nothing to report to this House by way of Government policy at this time and when there is something 

further to report to the House by way of decisions of the Government it will be announced in due course. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Then can we take it that there are some 

negotiations going on, my question is, with Mr. Landegger or his representatives for a further development at 

the Prince Albert Pulp Mill for the development of a hardwood line to use the poplar in the north central area 

of the Province of Saskatchewan at the present location of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill? Can we also take it 

then that the Premier has discovered that the raping of the forest is quite legitimate now, the cutting of the 

forest is quite legitimate as long as it is done under the NDP Government? Can I take it then that they had a 

change of heart about Mr. Landegger, about selling out some of the resources to these big Americans? Can 

we take it that there has been a change of heart as reported in the paper, any change of heart, any change of 

mind at all? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, he can take what he likes, but not on my say so. I didn't say anything 

which will substantiate any of those rather remarkable pronouncements. 

 

GRANTS TO MUNICIPALITIES RE FLOODING 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a question 

to the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers). In light of the fact that the people of Saskatchewan have just 

come through one of the most severe winters on record, and done it on their own, and with very little help 

from the Government and the Government opposite has refused to consider a once-in-a-lifetime gift or grant 

to municipalities for snow removal and assistance, in that we have seen some RMs having to increase their 

mill rate 15 mills as a result of the winter. In light of the Disruptive Circumstances Assistance Program, or 

whatever it was that was announced yesterday to assist businesses that were caught in things beyond their 

own control, would the Government now consider a once-in-a-lifetime grant to RMs and urban 

municipalities to cover the possibly severe effects of flooding which we expect in the very near future? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I doubt if ever in the history of 

Saskatchewan there has been a more comprehensive plan developed involving the Provincial Government 

and local governments and local EMO authorities to deal with any flood problems, as that undertaken by this 

Government in the past three months. We have worked up a very comprehensive scheme to assist the 

municipalities. The EMO people of this Government has been working with municipalities almost since the 

first snow fall last fall to cope with 



 

April 18, 1974 

2469 

 

the flood problem. We have developed a work plan whereby the manpower and the machinery of nearly 

every government agency and department in this province is available and on hand to assist local people with 

any upcoming flood problems. We have employed people from departments such as the Department of the 

Environment throughout the province to work closely with local people in dealing with this very great 

problem should it arise. The resources of this Government are on tap and available to assist local 

communities where local communities are not able to cope with their own problems. The province has 

certainly made every machine and every man that is possibly available to deal with this problem. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — Just a supplementary. That was a rather fluid answer and unfortunately it didn't answer the 

question. It is interesting to note — I am going to preface my question with a comment in spite of the fact 

that the Minister said that all the help he is giving to the RMs and the municipalities, that in every 

Government ad dealing with flooding and what the people should do . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What's the question? 

 

MR. LANE: — The question will be on assistance to RMs and urban municipalities. Every Government ad 

states that the responsibility is that of the RMs and municipalities and not the Government. It is unfortunate 

that the Government refuses to take the responsibility. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Hon. Member knows he can't debate an answer, he can ask a follow-up 

question but he can't debate it. 

 

MR. LANE: — I'm wondering if the Minister is going to get away from the Paul Revere approach that he 

has had — "the waters are coming, the waters are coming." In light of the fact that the Government has 

already been caught short once in the city of Regina will the Government now tell us when they expect the 

peak flooding times in the city of Regina and in the surrounding areas and have the waters started to run in 

the tributaries into the Wascana system? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report to this House that at least this Government has 

established some hydrometric stations on the river basins of this province so that we can at least measure 

river flows to advise people in advance that a flood is coming. That's something that we certainly did not 

have when the Hon. Member for Lumsden, as an executive assistant advising a Cabinet Member who lived 

in a very flood-prone constituency . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — . . . as to the potential for a flood. If the present sunshine prevails and present temperatures 

prevail we expect 



 

April 18, 1974 

2470 

 

that the peak flood will probably reach Regina in about three days. We expect, according to recent 

projections, that the water levels will be about or equivalent to the 1971 level and we expect that the flood 

control measures taken to improve the dykes and so on in Regina since 1971 will be adequate to cope with 

that water flow. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

PEOPLE'S WOOD PRODUCERS BOARD 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a question to the 

Premier in the absence of the Minister of Natural Resources. In the Leader-Post today the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Kowalchuk) is reported as stating that the report is an absolute bunch of "gibberish." The 

reference is unclear as to whether it refers to the Leader-Post story or the material I tabled. 

 

I would agree that the tabled material is gibberish inasmuch as it concentrates on capital intensive projects. 

Mr. Premier what progress has been made with respect to negotiations with the People's Wood Producers 

Board who met yesterday with the Minister of Natural Resources on the question of cutting rights for labor 

intensive small co-ops? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Member asks what transpired at a meeting yesterday between the 

Minister and, as he advises, the representatives of the People's Wood Producers Board. I am not advised as 

to what transpired at the meeting and I am unable to assist the Member in relaying to him what may have 

transpired. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — That's certainly quite adequate and as a response, before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, 

I should like to give to Members of the House copies of background material on the forests which I hope 

they will find useful in deliberations about this issue. 

 

WHOLESALE PRICE OF BEEF 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski) regarding wholesale meat prices in the Province of Saskatchewan. I 

wonder if the Minister is aware that the wholesale price of A-1 meat on April 11th, earlier this month, was 

74 1/2 cents, later this same day it went up 5 cents to 79 1/2 cents. I wonder if he is aware that on April 15th, 

it went up to 84 1/4 cents and yesterday at one packing plant and today at another packing plant in the 

province it went up again another nickel. A 15-cent rise. I wonder if he is aware also, Mr. Speaker, that at the 

same time the price of beef received by the producer was not going up in a parallel manner, in fact far from 

it. During that period of time, a week to 10 days, prime beef was going down instead of up. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Minister in this regard, will he consider, and I know he has been asked this before, but will 

he consider or reconsider investigating the wholesale price range of meat in this province over the period of 

the last two 



 

April 18, 1974 

2471 

or three weeks and try to relate that to the price received by producers for beef at a similar period of time. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am aware 

of the increase in wholesale prices of meat as is the case of most products in North America and in fact 

throughout the world today. I must say to the Member that the situation as it exists is just another indication 

of the very dismal and terrible failure of the Federal so-called subsidy that they instituted for beef producers 

in Canada. I don't think that it is the role of the Provincial Government to try to make up for the kind of 

misjudged errors that are made by the people in Ottawa. Now, Mr. Speaker, when and if the Government 

makes a decision to investigate any particular area of the industry, whether it is the food industry or another 

industry, we will certainly announce it in due course. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just don't think that is good enough. I asked the Minister if he 

would consider investigation, it is a current problem and it is totally unrelated to the point he tried to make 

with respect to the five cent subsidy aspect, no relationship whatsoever to that. I should like the Minister to 

conduct an investigation or an inquiry as his Department is certainly entitled to do to try and clear the air in 

this regard. I know very well when he does that the facts will demonstrate otherwise, that the rise in prices 

has nothing whatever to do with the five cent subsidy or any other aspect. That's the point and, in due course, 

Mr. Speaker, just isn't good enough. Due course isn't good enough. I would ask him, as I say, to utilize the 

facilities at his disposal in his Department and investigate a current issue that demands attention and a lot 

more than he has been giving it. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that a Liberal Member of this House would, by the 

statement of the Member opposite, admit and maybe that's a good sign of things to come for the future, but 

admit that the one review committee which exists in Canada and I don't see the benefit of a conglomeration 

or duplication of many, which is called a Food Prices Review Board set up by the Federal Liberal 

Government in Ottawa, is not doing any good because it is not taking the appropriate action which in fact it 

should be taking. For the Member to allege, in answer to his question, that any one province can effectively 

control the meat processing industry . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — An investigation . . . 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We already have an investigative body, it's called the Federal Food Prices 

Review Board. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that does not mean to say that a province cannot investigate, it is 

certainly possible. If such a decision is made I said it would be announced in due course. We have not made 

such a decision on that kind of an investigation. In the meantime though, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 

press, as we have pressed before, upon the Federal Government at Ottawa that they should provide their 

Prices Review Board with some power and some teeth and some authority to do an effective job which at the 

present time it is certainly not doing. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2472 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 43 — An Act to provide for 

the provision of Legal and Associated Services to certain Persons in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 43, The 

Community Legal Services Saskatchewan Act, 1974. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the few things which the Liberal Government, the Members opposite when they were in 

government, attempted to do while it was in power was to establish a partial legal aid scheme. Those who 

are familiar with that period of Saskatchewan history will not be surprised to learn that the Liberal Legal Aid 

Plan has proven to be completely unsatisfactory. 

 

Faced with a flood of complaints from lawyers and clients alike, one of the early duties of the Attorney 

General was to set up a special committee, headed by Dean Roger Carter of the College of Law at Saskatoon 

Campus, to investigate the entire legal aid question and to recommend a legal aid plan for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Dean Carter's committee, task force if you will, which had representatives from poor people's groups, native 

groups, judges, the Law Society, legal aid clinics and which, by the way, received submissions all across 

Saskatchewan, reported to the Department about two years ago. And Bill 43 which I am about to move, to be 

read a second time, was prepared in accordance basically with that report. 

 

I must express, Mr. Speaker, a word of thanks for the hard work done by the Carter Committee. 

 

Now, what are the objectives of this Bill? In our system of law and justice all men are born with equal rights 

and obligations before the law. Depending on the wealth of a child's parents, birth is often where this 

equality ends, however, 

 

In recent years governments in general, and I say the Government of Saskatchewan in particular, have 

markedly expanded this basic legal rights of citizens. Such things as: the development of the Human Rights 

Commission; the development of the office of the Ombudsman. Also new legislation has extended and 

codified the rights of the individual in such areas as human rights, consumer protection, landlord and tenant 

law and employment opportunities. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, basic human rights are of no benefit to the citizen unless he has some means of 

enforcing them. It does a poor person, who is wrongfully evicted, say from his home no good to know that 

there is a remedy for him under The Residential Tenancies Act, if he has no way of obtaining that remedy 

because he cannot afford legal services. 

 

The Community Legal Services Saskatchewan Act, 1974, in my judgment, is a creative new measure to 

ensure that all members of Saskatchewan society have equal ability to enforce their rights. This will be 

accomplished by providing legal services 



 

April 18, 1974 

2473 

to those people in Saskatchewan who cannot afford to go to a lawyer. As well as enforcing their rights it is 

vital that means are developed for informing our citizens as to their legal rights and their obligations. This, 

too, is a basic objective of the Community Legal Services Bill. An objective of similar importance is the 

prevention of legal problems. 

 

It is well and good to defend a man charged with a criminal offense in a court of law. However it would be 

far more desirable if by means of such measures as legal counselling and prevention, the individual's 

criminal difficulties could have been avoided altogether. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a word or two about what the Bill will do. This Bill will create an independent Community 

Legal Services Commission, responsible for co-ordinating the development of legal aid on a province-wide 

basis. The Commission will be based in Saskatoon and be responsible for evaluating legal services under the 

plan; to fund local legal aid clinics; to provide technical backup facilities for those legal aid operations and 

where necessary, to provide legal aid services. 

 

The makeup of the Community Legal Services Commission represents a first in Canadian legal aid plans 

throughout Canada. Throughout this country, the province-wide management of legal aid plans has either 

always been handed over to the legal profession entirely or else has been entrusted to a commission on a 

province-wide basis, 100 per cent of the members of which are appointed by the government of the day. 

 

While we feel that government must retain a significant number of members on the Commission, it is also 

important that legal aid consumers be represented. For this reason the area legal aid boards which are set out 

in Bill 43 would have the same number of representatives on the Commission as the Provincial Government. 

 

The nine-member provincial commission will be made up as follows: The Provincial Government 

representing the taxpayer, three members; the Area Legal Aid Boards, representing the legal aid consumers 

and community, three members; the Federal Government from whom some cost-sharing will be obtained, 

one member; the Provincial Director of Legal Aid to represent the staff of the Legal Aid Program and other 

interests of that nature, one member; the Law Society of Saskatchewan to nominate and to represent the legal 

profession, one member - a total of nine on the Provincial Commission. 

 

In order to give the consumer a voice in legal aid, the Bill establishes that the bulk of legal aid services will 

be given out of legal aid clinics or community law offices, which will employ lawyers for this purpose. It 

will, in criminal matters, allow for legal aid clients to be served either by the community law office or by a 

private lawyer who is on a panel, willing to do legal aid work and resident in that area. 

 

For offences punishable by death or life imprisonment, federal-provincial cost-sharing requires a complete 

freedom of choice of counsel and the Bill will so provide. 

 

These community law offices will be governed by area legal aid boards. We anticipate the development of 

perhaps 12 to 13 such area boards to cover the province. They will be elected 



 

April 18, 1974 

2474 

 

from residents of the area, who wish to join the Area Legal Aid Society. So that these societies may carry out 

the objectives of this Bill at the local level, that is to say, hire their staff, rent their premises and reflect, sort 

of, the local attitudes and the policies, they will annually negotiate an area contract with the provincial 

commission, the nine-man body that I described above. 

 

This contract will deal with specific details of the legal aid program to be conducted by the board the local 

board. It will set up the procedures to ensure financial accountability requiring the reporting procedures, 

subject of course to usual solicitor-client privileges and the like. 

 

Pursuant to this contract with the area board, the board will then receive funds from the Provincial 

Commission. 

 

As you can see the consumer will, for the first time, have a meaningful say in the development and growth of 

a legal aid plan for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be pointed out that these Legal Aid Societies will not practise by themselves. Rather, 

it will be their responsibility to obtain the personnel and facilities necessary to deliver legal aid services in 

the area. The members of the board themselves, I hope, will take up an active role in public information and 

legal prevention activities and be the source to the professional and other staff of the needs of the 

community. 

 

The Saskatchewan Legal Aid Plan will therefore have two major thrusts. The first will be the traditional 

crisis servicing, if I may use that term, of the legal problems of the poor people. For example, a divorce 

action or a defence to a criminal charge. However, due to the suggestions of many people, such people as 

Chief David Ahenakew of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, a crisis prevention role is also sought to 

be developed. Through establishing programs of counselling, public education and other preventive legal aid 

programs I hope that a great number of legal problems can be prevented from occurring. The importance of 

preventive legal programs is just beginning to be realized. In this area, one should remember the great 

contribution that preventive medical service, such as immunization and sanitation, the important contribution 

these have made to our civilization, so, too, I say our goal in legal prevention is to produce similar important 

results in the legal field as have been accomplished elsewhere. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so much for the broad principles of the Bill. I should like to make some comments about 

proposed House changes to the Act. Never has more been done to ensure that the views of the people are 

reflected in law, certainly by my Department, as has been the case with this particular Bill that we are 

debating. The establishment of a most progressive sort of legal aid Bill has been a matter of some 

considerable concern to this Government to ensure that the best possible blueprint for a plan was established. 

As I mentioned, an Attorney General's Committee on legal aid, headed by Dean Carter, was established two 

years ago. As I have said, this committee has spent the better part of a year meeting with interested groups 

and individuals all over the province and considered legal aid schemes which have been attempted 

elsewhere. The report of the Carter Committee has been lauded all across Canada and has been 



 

April 18, 1974 

2475 

 

accepted almost in total by the Government as is reflected by Bill 43. 

 

But the process of dialogue with the public did not stop with the report by Dean Carter of the Attorney 

General's Committee on Legal Aid. As Members will know, Bill 43 was tabled in December of 1973 over 

three months ago so as to make it possible for the public to react to it. Over the last three months my officials 

and I have been in contact, sometimes almost on a daily basis, with a great number of interested groups, 

including several lawyers' groups, individual lawyers' groups, the Law Society of Saskatchewan, the Board 

of Directors of Legal Aid Societies and myriad of citizen's organizations. A number of changes are, 

therefore, going to be proposed as a result of those representations. To the extent that these changes are 

consistent with the philosophy of the Carter Report and where they will improve the Bill, we are pleased to 

recommend these suggestions to the House. There will be a few changes which will streamline the wording 

of the Bill. For instance, we have agreed that a new definition of legal services will eliminate the need to 

categorize and to use the words as appear in the printed Bill, "Associated services." Another example is to 

include graduate students in the definition of students. As well, there will be other changes which will 

improve the operation of the Bill or which clarifies the intent of the Bill and I think are probably of much 

more substance. 

 

Firstly, on the matter of fee-generating cases. Fee-generating cases such as accident cases, will be handled by 

private practising lawyers and not on the understanding that the private lawyers will receive no payment for 

their services except out of the award they have obtained for the clients. 

 

Secondly, there will be amendments to clarify that except in certain areas such as criminal cases where legal 

aid can only be delivered by community law officers. 

 

Thirdly, the Commission will elect its own chairman on an annual basis. This is a technical oversight which 

did not appear in the first Bill. 

 

Fourthly, students and lay persons assisting in legal aid matters will be supervised by a lawyer. This is not 

now mentioned in the Bill. It will also be clarified by House amendment that students and lay persons, the 

so-called para-professional workers, will not be able to appear in district or surrogate courts. 

 

Fifthly, administrative streamlining will be accomplished by abolishing the position of area director which 

appears presently in the Bill and asking the area board, the local community board, to assume many of the 

functions that would have been fulfilled by the area director under Bill 43 as introduced back in December. 

 

Provisions for ongoing liaison between Government and the Community Legal Aid Services Commission 

and the area boards will be made in these amendments. This will be accomplished by establishing a 

procedure to provide Government with a representative on each board to permit the Community Legal 

Services Commission to participate to a degree in the area board selection of staff as the Commission would 

see fit. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2476 

After all there must be some provincial direction for continuity. 

 

With respect to lawyers who are working for the area board, our amendments say that he can only be hired or 

fired with the consent of the Provincial Commission. Members of the law profession will know a part of the 

reason behind that. I should say that the same rights will also apply to the local boards so that the 

Commission can only act to dismiss or to hire the local lawyer with the approval of the local board. 

 

Sixthly, private solicitors who are removed from the legal aid panel will be given a full and new right of 

appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench if the removal from the panel is made by the Commission. 

 

Seventhly, changes in the cost provisions will ensure that the poor litigant has no undue advantage or 

disadvantage in court. In effect, cost can be awarded to either side. This will act as a deterrent to the legal aid 

clinics who may be prompted to take on frivolous or vexatious actions. The cost will act as a deterrent if they 

know that they can be assessed costs by the opposing side. 

 

Finally, the sections which will allow clinics to advertise and use paraprofessionals and conduct public and 

preventive legal programs will be clarified. The Law Society was concerned that the provisions with respect 

to advertising were too widespread and we will be narrowing them down to two or three sections. I think that 

the objectives of the Bill can be met and the suggestions by the Society incorporated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are, in general terms, the seven or eight major changes by way of House amendments as a 

result of our representations that we have received that I will introduce in Committee of the Whole. The 

precise wording of each of the changes will, in due course, be dealt with by the Committee of the Whole and 

at that time I will endeavor to answer to the House as best I can the questions that they raise. But I say the 

foregoing has summarized the basic intent of these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as for the timetable for implementation of this plan, I am very optimistic that the legal aid plan 

for Saskatchewan will be fully operative by July 1st of this year, and, if we are lucky, earlier. In anticipation 

of passage of this Bill, my officials have already met many hundreds of people and met in many 

communities throughout Saskatchewan. I may be perhaps prone to some exaggeration but the reports really 

of the meetings have been excellent, very fantastic indeed. We have had meetings in the existing clinics of 

Saskatoon and Rosthern. Meetings have been held in Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Regina, Battlefords and 

area, Melfort, to name a few. At Melfort, for example, nearly 200 persons attended an organizational 

meeting with my Departmental officials. As you will know Dean Roger Carter of the University College of 

Law has agreed to act as general counsel for the Provincial Legal Aid Commission. Mr. Speaker, Dean 

Carter's academic knowledge and practical experience will be of invaluable assistance to the clinic and to the 

plan in its first year, and to the lawyers especially in its formative stages. I think this appointment is going to 

be welcomed by the profession and the public. Mr. Linton Smith who has acted as Director of the Saskatoon 

Legal Aid Clinic which has operated with a great deal of success for the last number of years, has been 

acting as our pro tem 



 

April 18, 1974 

2477 

 

provincial director of the plan on an administrative basis. I am hopeful that Mr. Smith will continue in that 

position when the Bill and the plan are fully operative. He is ably assisted by Mr. Irving Goldenberg, a 

lawyer from Saskatoon who has joined in the spearhead group to organize. 

 

For the northern area of Saskatchewan, a solicitor has been acting as defence counsel for the past six months 

in anticipation of passage of this Bill. Mr. Lloyd Deshaye, formerly of Humboldt, is now resident in La 

Ronge on a full-time basis to provide legal aid for the North. 

 

Two years ago, Members will know that Mr. Bob Francis quit private practice of law in Saskatoon to 

become Saskatchewan's first resident northern Judge in La Ronge. He has followed a circuit of providing 

judicial hearings in the North only. 

 

These moves into the North, coupled with the native court worker program and programs for the 

involvement of natives as JPs and coroners into our judicial system, are the first positive steps in providing 

full legal benefits for the first time to all Saskatchewan residents everywhere in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, may I conclude by saying how pleased I am to be able to introduce this 

Legal Aid Bill. Perhaps it gets to be a little bit too political to say but Saskatchewan has grown accustomed 

to setting the pace in matters such as this and I have no doubt that when this Bill becomes law and when it 

becomes fully operative that it will lead the way in legal aid for Canada. I think one can safely predict that 

before long Legislatures of other provinces will be passing bills similar to the one that I'm introducing for 

second reading today, The Community Legal Services Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it give me a great deal of pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 43. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I hope to make a small contribution to this 

debate and I hope to do so in the spirit indicated by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and I hope to be 

helpful in some of the remarks. 

 

Let me say at the outset, that I believe and support the principle of the Bill and have in fact spoken in favor 

of it for some considerable period of time. I hope, however, to be able to make some suggestions to the 

Government and to the Minister on improvements to it from time to time and to pinpoint the occasional 

place where I feel that I am not entirely satisfied with what is being done in the implementation of 

community legal services. I might also say that to a considerable extent we shall have to wait to see how this 

thing works out because while I am not entirely pleased with the Bill as presented, and I am a little 

disappointed that we don't get these amendments a little earlier, nonetheless the people mentioned by the 

Attorney General as the persons who are actually implementing the Bill, actually give me a good deal of 

encouragement that this thing will work out as indicated by the Attorney 



 

April 18, 1974 

2478 

 

General and for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. And I do have to say that in selecting people, the 

Hon. Attorney General could hardly have done better. 

 

Now, I want to say of course, that I've had something to do with this kind of thing for some considerable 

period of time. In California, for example, for some long period of time they had a legal aid plan. And I 

studied that plan back in 1965 and 1966 when I became President of the Regina Bar Association. In 1967 I 

was very pleased to be in charge of the first implementation of a program of legal aid instituted at all in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That was the year, our Centennial year in Canada, that the Hon. Darrel Heald introduced for the first time, in 

Saskatchewan, a legal aid plan paid for, and sponsored and financed by the Provincial Government. It was a 

good limited plan but it was the first plan and it was a darn good start towards legal aid in Saskatchewan. 

And having done so, he discussed the matter with the Saskatchewan Law Society and they in turn looked to 

the local societies and the Regina Bar Association in particular to start the plan off and I was very pleased 

that the plan actually began under my own guidance, in Regina, when discussions with the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, Joe McIntyre, at that time the President and Darrel Heald, the Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan. It was the plan that we formulated and submitted from Regina which was adopted as the 

general plan for Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore, while that program is now out of date and totally inadequate I think full marks and full credit 

should be given to the Government of the day, the Liberal Government of 1967 for starting the program in 

Saskatchewan. I think nothing but good could be said about it and in fact it was the first plan of its kind in 

Canada. It was the first plan, in fact, one of the very few plans then in existence in North America. 

 

Since then, however, a good deal of attention has focused on this. That plan in 1967 provided a lot of legal 

services to people charged with criminal offences. There was a large area in which people required legal 

services and were not getting those legal services. 

 

In the domestic relations field, for example, we have done far less than we should have. People who are 

broke, but with domestic and family problems have found themselves desperately seeking, what amounted in 

many cases, to the charitable handouts of the legal profession. And I think it's to the credit of the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan and the legal profession in general, that millions of dollars worth of services have 

been provided, literally for nothing to people who had domestic problems and sought out their lawyer. In 

divorce matters and separations and in just ordinary family squabbles, the legal profession has day by day 

provided a tremendous amount of free legal services to these people in need. 

 

I observe year after year in the Estimates that this Provincial Government has given very little assistance to 

people with domestic problems. I noticed in the budget of the Department of Social Services, each year the 

amount of money expended for domestic relations and family problems goes down. The Department of 

Social Services, in fact, is budgeting less than the Liberals budgeted for these people in need. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2479 

It is also worthy of notice that this plan did not come into effect in Saskatchewan until the Hon. Otto Lang, 

Minister of Justice in Canada, indicated that it was his desire and intention that this kind of a plan should 

exist all across Canada and we in this Legislature amended The Law Society Act last year, to give the 

Attorney General of Saskatchewan the right to negotiate a plan with Ottawa. I have no doubt that such a plan 

has been arranged for and that this program here will be financed perhaps 50-50 with Ottawa and that our 

colleague the Hon. Otto Lang, Minister of Justice would be in full agreement. In any event, all I can say is 

that I'm sure the Hon. Attorney General and my colleagues will give full credit to our colleague in Ottawa, 

the Hon. Mr. Lang for his work in connection with a universal legal aid program. 

 

Now, there is a problem or two in dealing with this Bill. I am concerned about the proliferation of the 

structure to bring the legal services to the people of Saskatchewan. I notice that not only are we going to 

have commissions, we are going to have local boards and we're going to have a huge super structure to bring 

the services to the local areas. I notice in paragraph 15 that a society incorporated under The Societies Act, 

may apply to the commission to be appointed by the commission as a board for the area. 

 

There is far too little in the information given by the Hon. Attorney General today to tell me what is really 

intended by that provision. How broad these are to be, who is really to represent the area and so on. I am 

concerned that to a considerable extent these committees which are a habit with this Government, might just 

become another political arm of the Government and have nothing to do with the provision of legal services. 

And I do not prejudge this operation, but I do hope that this will be done on the highest possible level and 

with the minimum amount of political activity. This is far too important to have a lot of political hacks 

running around trying to make political hay while the needy people are deprived of adequate legal services. 

 

I might also suggest that I am troubled by section 30. Section 30 says this: 

 

Nothing done in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a 

contravention of The Legal Profession Act. 

 

The Legal Profession Act was brought to this Legislature . . . 

 

MR. CODY: — . . . By Roy Romanow. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — The Hon. Minister of Co-operatives (Mr. Cody) must know of course that it was not 

done by the Hon. Roy Romanow, and that he is totally in error in that. The Legal Profession Act was brought 

to this House many, many years ago, long before the Hon. Attorney General even went to law school. It was 

scrutinized year by year by a committee of this Legislature and one of the principal purposes of The Legal 

Profession Act is to provide adequate and professional services to people who need it and to be sure that the 

people who offer themselves out as lawyers have some minimum qualification. 

 

I hope that over the years that The Legal Profession Act 



 

April 18, 1974 

2480 

 

has been in effect that the quality of lawyers has, over the years, improved. I have checked with the very 

person who is to be the head of this Commission, namely Dean Carter of the University of Saskatchewan. I 

checked with him and he told me that in the past few years, the minimum requirements to be admitted to the 

law school in the Faculty of Law at Saskatoon, have steadily risen and that they have been able to improve 

their standards. I am concerned, of course, because last year something like 720 applicants, applications were 

made to the Faculty of Law to fill some 140 vacancies, so that there is a tremendous demand to get into the 

Faculty of Law at the University of Saskatchewan and it allows the University of Saskatchewan Faculty of 

Law to be very, very choosey in the people whom they allow into the school and who ultimately become 

lawyers in Saskatchewan. So I'm hoping that the quality of the law and the quality of lawyers in 

Saskatchewan will steadily improve and steadily be made better. 

 

I am, therefore, fearful when I see section 30 which says that the protections which are set forth in The Legal 

Profession Act do not apply to anything done under this Act. And this can only be a dangerous precedent and 

something which I personally must view with considerable alarm and perhaps dismay that it should be 

brought into this Act. 

 

I should like to see the Hon. Attorney General give serious consideration to the removal of the protections 

provided by The Legal Profession Act in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that consideration is given to the prevention of the kind of problem which will 

lead to the necessity for legal services. I am concerned that this will be a government board. The Hon. 

Attorney General, in presenting this to the House, said that this was to be an independent commission. 

Unfortunately it can't be totally independent unless it becomes entirely outside the purview of government, 

funded only by government, perhaps along the lines of the universities. That is the money should be 

presented to the Commission, they should be allowed to spend it, but the Commission must be totally and 

absolutely independent and I regret that it cannot be said at this stage that it is totally independent. I think 

that there should be a far larger input by the Law Society of Saskatchewan and a smaller input, except as to 

finances, by the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government at Ottawa. 

 

The reason for that is this. Many of the problems which people have today, many of the problems which I 

have as a lawyer and which my fellow colleagues in law have, are problems with governments itself. Perhaps 

at no time in the history of Saskatchewan has there been a larger percentage of the problems that come into 

the law practice than problems in dealing with governments. That is the city government, provincial 

government, and the federal government. And as governments more and more play a part in the lives of 

individuals, you are going to find a large part of the lawyer's time involved in the dealing with government. I 

made an estimate last year, that as a practising lawyer in the little time I have available to practice law, 

regrettably all too little in these days, but in the time that I was able to devote to the practice of law, fully 50 

per cent of my estimated time was in dealing with the Province of Saskatchewan alone. Another percentage 

of my time was in dealing with city government, the city council; another percentage of time in dealing with 

the Federal Government. Now that I think 



 

April 18, 1974 

2481 

 

is perhaps higher than is the case with every lawyer but quite frankly more and more the problems that 

citizens have are problems with the government itself. Consequently every step must be taken to make sure 

that the lawyers employed to deal with citizens' problems are independent of government. 

 

For example, how is it possible that a person on welfare who is not properly receiving the welfare payments 

that he should receive can deal effectively with government if the person dealing with them is in fact an 

employee of government? And I cite that only as an example. How can a farmer whose fields are flooded by 

actions of government, how can they deal effectively with government if the solicitor employed is an 

employee also of government? How can a solicitor go in and deal with a tax problem with the government, if 

in fact, the lawyer employed is in fact an employee of the government? 

 

I am concerned that these conflicts of interest will make these people as employees of the government, 

unable effectively to deal with other branches of the Government. 

 

Consequently, the only real and certain protection of the rights of citizens is a totally and truly independent 

legal profession. No place in the world, where we have a loss of freedoms, will you find an independent legal 

profession and no place in the world where every man has his full protection under the law do you find a 

weak legal system. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I agree with considerable enthusiasm but I hope with some, 

having pinpointed some areas of concern, the presentation of this Bill. It is a great step forward for 

Saskatchewan. I congratulate the Hon. Otto E. Lang and the Hon. Attorney General for presenting the Bill to 

the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I hope that the Government will look with favor upon our suggestions which are made 

as we see it with a view to improving the quality of law provided to people and making it more available to 

more people, particularly needy people, who up to now, in many cases, have got less in ability and less in 

quantity of legal services that they require. 

 

Now quite frankly I hope my other colleagues on this side of the House and I hope others on the other side of 

the House will have words about this particular Bill, because it should not be spoken to only by the lawyers. 

This is a matter which concerns every Member of the House. Now that we have the remarks of the Hon. 

Attorney General, I should like to have them studied by us on this side of the House and undoubtedly by all 

Members on both sides of the House and consequently I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): moved second reading of Bill No. 86 — An 

Act establishing The Saskatchewan Multicultural Advisory Council and providing for Assistance to 

Individuals and Groups. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by saying that it's a pleasure and a privilege to speak during the second 

reading of 



 

April 18, 1974 

2482 

 

this Bill, The Saskatchewan Multicultural Act. 

 

At the Second Session of the Seventeenth Legislature of Saskatchewan this Assembly approved legislation 

establishing the Department of Culture and Youth. At that time reference was made to the province's rich 

multicultural heritage and the need to bring about policies and programs which would not be primarily 

interested in tolerance, but positive promotion of multiculturalism in Saskatchewan. And this recognition of 

multiculturalism as a meaningful and a positive aspect of our lives must stem from all government 

departments and agencies. The particular responsibility for this development rests primarily with the 

Department of Culture and Youth. 

 

It is easy to talk about multiculturalism. Most people, especially in Saskatchewan, seem to be aware of the 

rich diversity of cultures in Canada and our province. Unfortunately, however, this awareness and 

recognition has gone little beyond courteous acknowledgment by society and by government. 

 

I should like to inform you of the comment — and I have done this twice before — of a comment by an 

elderly lady who came to this country from Hungary many years ago. I think her words are an example of 

what I am saying. 

 

She was interviewed during Mosaic ’73, a cultural festival sponsored jointly by the Regina Folk Arts and 

Cultural Council and the Department of Culture and Youth. She commented that she had been for all this 

time ashamed to display her cultural background but as she watched the performances and activities during 

Mosaic ’73 and the programs, she was very, very proud of her heritage. 

 

I submit to this House and I know that everyone here will agree that she had every reason to be proud. Our 

Canadian society and particularly our Saskatchewan society has been greatly enriched by the benefits of 

many cultural influences. This is a wealth that we cannot measure by any equation of economics. It is an 

accumulated fortune in which every Canadian citizen has a share. The dividends are being continuously paid 

out to all Canadians whatever their ethnic origin. They are paid out because Canadians are able to share, 

appreciate and benefit from the contributions made by people from every part of the world. 

 

This is a wealth that our Government hopes our society doesn't squander away for the sake of conformity to a 

uniform pattern some day. 

 

Among all of the freedoms that exist in this country is the freedom and the right to be one's self and to live 

according to one's own heritage. This freedom is very important. 

 

Unfortunately from time to time, this freedom has been in jeopardy because of suspicions, bitternesses, and 

events caused by world tensions or confrontations. But fortunately on the whole it has remained intact. Mr. 

Speaker, it is the responsibility of all of society, including governments at all levels, to maintain that 

freedom. 

 

It is not enough only to speak of this freedom and boast to the world about it. Our Government takes their 

responsibility very seriously and so today there is for the consideration of 



 

April 18, 1974 

2483 

 

this Legislature an Act establishing the Saskatchewan Multicultural Advisory Council and providing for 

assistance to individuals and groups to promote these traditions. 

 

As we talk of the heritage of the peoples who have come to enrich this province from all parts of the world 

— from the British Isles and France, from central Europe, eastern Europe, Africa and Asia — too often we 

tend to forget that before these peoples came, there was already a society and a culture in existence in this 

land. 

 

The Indian people had developed a culture which is now a very significant part of the multicultural mosaic of 

Canada and Saskatchewan. The early Europeans who came to this continent learned from the existing culture 

and adopted some of the knowledge about living in this new land. 

 

Unfortunately, those early settlers soon came to think that their culture was so superior that the native people 

had to desert theirs totally and adopt the culture of the old world. 

 

This has not happened completely and, therefore, much of the Indian culture flourishes, and will continue to 

enrich the diverse culture heritage of Saskatchewan. With the recognition of the value of multiculturalism a 

more fertile ground will exist for the development and sharing of all cultural traditions to the benefit of our 

society as a whole. 

 

I have said on a number of occasions that the development of multiculturalism is a great challenge. For a 

culture to survive it has to be used. It cannot be an occasional thing that happens on weekends. It can't be 

Easter eggs or traditional dress, or artifacts laid neatly behind glass windows for curious people to see, or a 

pow-wow at Saskatchimo or Buffalo Days. It must be alive and it must be lived. 

 

Governments and society must move in a direction to develop policies that encourage multiculturalism and 

view it as a vital asset. 

 

While the idea of cultural diversity is not new in Canada, it is only recently that it has been discussed 

seriously at the provincial and federal levels of government. We have for decades quietly prided ourselves on 

the reality of the Canadian mosaic, while at the same time viewing critically the American melting pot which 

molds people to fit a predetermined shape. 

 

Multiculturalism has been discussed in international circles in recent years as well. This is reflected in the 

Declaration of Principles of International Cultural Co-operation approved by the Fourteenth Session of 

UNESCO in 1966. This declaration provides that: 

 

Each culture has a dignity and value. Every people has the right and duty to develop its 

culture. In their rich variety and diversity, and in the reciprocal influences they have on one 

another, all the cultures form part of the common heritage to all mankind. 

 

In 1970 UNESCO followed this declaration with a resolution calling on all governments represented, which 

included Canada, to take the diversity of cultural and linguistic communities 



 

April 18, 1974 

2484 

 

within their borders as a starting point for the formulation of any cultural policy. 

 

The Prime Minister of Canada in a speech to the House of Commons on October 8, 1971, responding to 

Book IV of the Band Report and to these international urgings concluded and I quote: 

 

I wish to emphasize the view of the government that a policy of multiculturalism within a 

bilingual framework is basically the conscious support of individual freedom of choice. We 

are free to be ourselves but this cannot be left to chance. It must be fostered and pursued 

actively. If freedom of choice is in danger for some ethnic groups, it is in danger for all. 

 

While the Government of Saskatchewan endorses these broad declarations of sentiment both national and 

international, it is recognized that public opinion at home and abroad reflects varied and sometimes 

conflicting points of view on the subject. 

 

A policy of recognition and support to multiculturalism is far from being universally endorsed. Some may 

regard multicultural development as a threat to our technological or our commercial culture. Some may 

regard such development as government catering to the whims and fancies of small fractional minorities who 

should conform, not oppose majority opinion. 

 

There is also another objection to support for cultural pluralism which I know Members of this Legislature 

on both sides reject. That is the resistance which is based on racial and cultural prejudice. To the extent that 

prejudice exists and is based on ignorance, it is my hope that our multicultural programs and this Bill in 

particular, will have a very positive minimizing effect. 

 

In place of these negative attitudes to cultural pluralism, Mr. Speaker, two underlying principles have been 

adopted as a basis for provincial policy. 

 

The first principle is that linguistic and cultural diversity is not only an inescapable reality in our province 

and this country, but that it is a desirable situation which must be maintained and nurtured. 

 

The second principle is that cultural diversity must be a broadening influence on society as a whole. That is 

to say, that the welfare of the individual and the ethno-cultural group is not the paramount issue, but rather it 

is the unity and wellbeing of the whole society that is of major importance where there is cultural diversity. 

Cultural communities are necessary because they are rewarding to individuals in such groups, but they must 

not become cultural prisons which cut off individuals and group aspirations in other spheres. 

 

To promote these two cultural principles without fragmentation, Mr. Speaker, our Government has adopted a 

policy directed at three main objectives. 

 

1. The survival and renewal of individual cultural communities. Survival here requires no detailed 

discussion. If this objective is not achieved, then pluralism disappears. Renewal involves the idea that 

cultural communities who desire to regenerate themselves must be provided with support to do so. Cultures 

which have no opportunity grow have become no more 



 

April 18, 1974 

2485 

than folklore in the sense of outward, but largely meaningless, trappings and symbols which may have their 

own interest, but which are vestigial remnants unlikely to be fully satisfying to the associated community. 

 

2. Interaction between communities. There is a great deal of talk about the enrichment that occurs through 

cross-cultural contact. It is clear that, in many conditions, contacts are indeed enriching. However, in other 

circumstances, there may be a real risk that the smaller or less strongly held culture will be enriched to the 

point of disappearance into the homogeneity of the large one. Probably the greatest protection against this 

threat is to pursue policies that will sufficiently inform the dominant group or groups so that public and 

private decisions are made, taking fully into account the values of all the communities which may be affected 

by them. 

 

3. The optimum benefits for society as a whole. We are all aware of the difficulties that arise when 

discussing unity and diversity. We want diversity. We want unity, Mr. Speaker. It has been argued by some 

in the past that in order to have unity there must be uniformity and conformism. 

 

I, for one, reject that theory as one that in reality cannot succeed. I submit that in the diversity of cultures 

which we have in this country we can build a unity that cannot be paralleled anywhere else in the world. This 

is true because this diverse cultural mosaic provides an opportunity for people of various cultural 

backgrounds to know and understand each other. Understanding and an environment which provides the 

freedom for one to be oneself, are the bonds which can create the national unity which Canadians have 

spoken about for over 100 years. These two vehicles available to us must not be left unused. 

 

In cultural policy there may be tension among and between various elements, but this tension will hopefully 

be a creative force. In bringing about conditions which will nurture cultural development, there will be 

difficulties as we in society try to bring about some idea of the optimum, to ensure that as far as possible all 

residents benefit more or less equally, if differently, from cultural policies and that society as a whole is 

strengthened by cultural policy rather than being torn apart by it. 

 

It is in this setting, and within the general framework of policy, that The Saskatchewan Multicultural Act has 

been introduced to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a world of mass production and instant communication, people have become more aware of 

the value of their cultural heritage in their search for identity and purpose. In a world pressing us toward a 

kind of vague uniformity and anonymity, we have rediscovered the importance of those qualities which 

make us different, which unify us and enhance the ways we express ourselves. 

 

While people recognize that the increasing mechanization and depersonalization may be helping them to 

make a living, it is also being recognized that this does little to help us make a life — a life in which we can 

enjoy to the full the things of the mind and the spirit. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2486 

 

Governments have discovered that not all important problems resolve themselves into matters of economics. 

It is no longer acceptable for governments to ignore cultural aspirations or to attempt to submerge cultural 

distinctions within a nation. 

 

Very positive contributions accrue from cultural diversity. Government must, and ours has realized this. 

 

We, as Canadians, have a special interest in our multicultural tradition. Any society which forgets its 

traditions, its cultural roots, is an endangered society. 

 

When we speak of a mosaic, we are talking of a concept of building a new land, a new culture, and a new 

loyalty — not by displacing the old, but on the firm foundations of older cultural roots — tended, nourished 

and adapted over a space of generations. That is why the fostering and strengthening of multicultural 

traditions is not a matter of entertainment or of artistic and aesthetic pleasure alone, but more — a matter of 

strengthening and building the very foundations of a new society and hopefully a better society here in 

Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan is a young province and our respective cultural ties are alive and vivid. Ours must be a 

province where people of every cultural background have full access to their own ethnocultural heritage; to 

economic and political affairs, and to the future developments in all of these spheres in Saskatchewan, 

without discrimination. Such a society will not only guarantee that all our residents, wherever they came 

from, have a sense of full participation in the affairs of this province, but may also provide an attractive 

climate for new Canadians who we hope will join us in the decades ahead. 

 

If I were to state our broad goal as government, Mr. Speaker, it would be that it is to make that happen. 

 

Before I go on to the Bill itself, I should like briefly to point out some of the most recent developments of the 

multicultural programs of our Government. 

 

Last September, the Department of Culture and Youth sponsored Saskatchewan's first conference on 

multiculturalism. Close to 500 participants representing almost all of the province's ethnocultural groups, 

many giving up a day's pay in order to voice their recommendations for a provincial multicultural policy. 

More than 70 recommendations resulted from the highly successful Seminar '73. These related to a wide 

variety of issues relating to additional emphasis on assisting individuals and groups to achieve their 

particular cultural aspirations and that of cultural growth generally as well. 

 

Many of the recommendations related to the link between language and culture and the need to develop both 

rather than one in the absence of the other. 

 

Some of these recommendations are still under study, but I am pleased to report that a good number of them 

are, or will be acted upon shortly. 

 

The amendment in Section 209 of The School Act is a move which I believe will be viewed by all regardless 

of national origin or political persuasion as a milestone in the promotion of language development in this 

province. The amendment will 



 

April 18, 1974 

2487 

 

allow for instruction in Saskatchewan schools in languages other than English or French where local 

ratepayers through the local school boards so desire. 

 

In the next few weeks I will be spelling out in further detail information pertaining to summer language 

camps and a program to assist in providing language instruction outside regular school hours in communities 

which request such assistance. 

 

The Department of Culture and Youth will have an increased Multicultural Grants Program beginning in the 

1974-75 fiscal year, and will initiate, as I have mentioned, new programs emphasizing the importance of 

language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, such planning, I submit, has not been done in a smoke-filled room occupied by dedicated 

public servants, but has taken place on a co-operative basis with those people who will be most affected by 

cultural policy that will be developed. Seminar '73 is ample evidence of this co-operative spirit. 

 

Another major concern voiced at Seminar '73 was that cultural policy should seek to promote and foster 

cultural development. Delegates at the conference expressed a desire to be aware of their own particular 

culture and that of other communities as well, and that resources be developed to further enhance interaction 

and education among and between cultural groups in the province. 

 

This it will do primarily through the development of materials suitable for dissemination in institutions of 

learning and in the media. 

 

The Bill will provide for the creation of a Multicultural Advisory Council to the Minister. The Council, 

which will probably consist of 15 members, will be appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council after 

consultation with the various provincial multicultural groups. The duties of the Council shall include 

reviewing and making recommendations with respect to applications made under the Act, as well as 

providing a forum for discussion of other issues related to multiculturalism. It will serve as a forum between 

Government and the multicultural interest, as well as a forum for discussion among the various groups. 

 

In closing Mr. Speaker, it is my hope and belief that this Bill, other programs in the multicultural field, the 

amendments to The School Act, the provisions of The Saskatchewan Human Rights Act will together 

reassure all residents of this province that their cultural past has a rightful place in the cultural present and 

the cultural future of Saskatchewan. 

 

With these words, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments in regard to this Bill. The Minister's 

comments were quite lengthy and I should like to have a bit of time to study those comments so I shall be 

speaking briefly and adjourning debate. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2488 

 

Initially let me say that we welcome this Bill. We believe it is a step forward and I must agree with the 

Minister of Culture and Youth that the cultural heritage in Saskatchewan is one which we should preserve. I 

don't like the word, preserve, when it's used, to me it sounds as if you are putting it away and tucking it away 

in a corner. I think that the cultural heritage of Saskatchewan is one that we should cultivate and allow to 

grow and I think that this is the intention which the Minister, of course, wanted. 

 

We welcome this Bill and we welcome the step forward, as I mentioned earlier, but the Bill, as presented, is 

not one to bolster up or protect the threat of a dying culture in Saskatchewan, because I don't think that this is 

the case now. Full marks and full credit must be given to the various ethnic groups throughout the province 

for the tremendous job which they have done on their own over the years in preserving and maintaining their 

cultural heritage in Saskatchewan. And I certainly agree that this Bill will add to the strengthening of that 

cultural heritage in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister also mentioned the negative attitudes that people have throughout the province regarding 

various ethnic or cultural groups. I think in a way he is overplaying this a bit. Through my travels throughout 

the province, talking to people of Saskatchewan, I certainly had not noticed this. There is no one major 

dominant cultural or ethnic group in the province in fact I have found the opposite. I found that the various 

ethnic and cultural groups throughout the province certainly accept and in fact encourage the development 

and the growth of other cultural groups as they do their own cultural group. 

 

One comment which I would like to make regarding the Advisory Council which the Minister has 

mentioned. This is an excellent idea. I would hope that he stresses and puts a lot of emphasis on the various 

cultural groups themselves being the ones who will be appointing the members to that Advisory Council I 

think that it is important that in an area such as culture that there should be the least amount of political 

influence as possible in the decisions and in the programs which are planned for cultural groups in the 

province. 

 

As I mentioned in Culture and Youth Estimates, more money should be made available to cultural and ethnic 

groups, to school children and so on, and allow them to visit the countries of their origin. Grants can be 

made available to these students to spend a month visiting the countries from which their grandparents or 

their ancestors came. I hope that this type of a program can be implemented under this Bill. We noticed that 

there are conditions for grants, Clause No. 5, possibly the Minister can elaborate on this a bit more when he 

closes debate on it and in turn we can probably have more discussion on it when we get into Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

With those few brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I should like to study further the remarks made by the Minister 

and beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2489 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 107 — An Act to amend 

The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Associations Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains only three amendments. The amendments are designed, first to limit 

the use of the title, Community Clinic; secondly, to permit associations incorporated under this Act to 

operate pharmacies; and thirdly, to protect physicians from charges of unprofessional conduct on the basis 

that they have made a contract with a non-professional board such as the Health Services Association or a 

co-operative. 

 

The amendment respecting the use of the name Community Clinic, makes it an offense for this title to be 

used by a facility providing physician services unless that facility is operated by a community health 

association established under The Mutual and Medical and Hospital Benefits Association Act or an 

association incorporated under The Co-operatives Associations Act. The amendment also provides for a fine 

to be levied against a person or a group found guilty of such misuse of the title. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another amendment authorizes a Community Health Association to operate a pharmacy and to 

employ a pharmacist to manage the pharmacy. This amendment simply extends the right to operate a 

pharmacy directly by the community clinics. At present a pharmacy in a community clinic must be operated 

by some other body or administration thus imposing, it seems to me, unnecessary additional costs on the 

association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may recall that I have already introduced an amendment to The Pharmacy Act, 1971 to 

permit Community Health Associations to operate a pharmacy as part of its operational program. 

 

The third amendment is designed to make it clear that a physician is not guilty of unprofessional or unethical 

conduct because he has entered into an agreement or contract with a non-professional board such as a 

Community Health Association. Over the years there has been some concern on the part of members of the 

medical profession that entering into contracts with consumers or their services may lay them open to 

charges of unprofessional conduct. There appears to be no legal basis for this kind of concern, however, 

consultation with the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

indicated to me that there was some merit in making this point clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March 27th, just a few days ago I again met with the president and executive secretary of 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association to discuss this particular amendment. I might mention that when we 

introduced in the fall The Community Clinic Association Act, this particular provision was included in that 

Act and the medical profession has had an opportunity to review it for some months. They certainly express 

their support for that provision and as I say that as late as March 27th, when I met with Dr. Davis and Dr. 

Bergen I asked again what the position of the SMA might be on this particular amendment. They had no 

objections, in fact felt it would be a useful provision because it implied a certain umbrella protection to a 

physician working in a team situation. This question has been raised not only in Saskatchewan but in other 

provinces and the medical profession in Saskatchewan felt that this move 



 

April 18, 1974 

2490 

 

was a proper one and perhaps could help clarify this very situation not only here but be of help for the rest of 

Canada. 

 

I want to emphasize that the College and the SMA have looked at this provision and do not object in any 

way to the amendment, in fact, welcome the amendment. This amendment will establish in law the right of 

physicians to enter into agreement or contracts with consumer health associations, and I also know that this 

provision will be welcomed by the Community Health Associations and their physicians. 

 

With those brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister indicated there is not a great 

deal in Bill 107, there are three amendments and I certainly have no argument with any of the amendments. 

 

One, of course, as has been indicated, is to limit the use of the name Community Clinic and this is fair and I 

support it. 

 

The other two are really amendments to cover situations which are already presently occurring, one for the 

community clinics to operate a pharmacy and the other one to give persons some protection when they are 

offering services in conjunction with a community clinic. 

 

The very peculiar thing I find about this Bill is that it follows largely what we saw started in this House 

yesterday, the NDP getting into a little trouble and backtracking and trying to weasel out and finding 

themselves getting very embarrassed. It was just a short time ago that Bill 47 was withdrawn from this 

House. Bill 47 was an Act respecting Certain Community Health Associations and if we look at that Act we 

would find that it is identical to The Mutual Medical and Hospital Associations Act, the one that we are 

amending today. Almost identical except for really three things and these three things are the three 

amendments incorporated in this Bill today. So really the Bill that was pulled out the other day was a Bill 

that very largely was just going to change the name from Mutual Medical and Hospital Association Act to a 

Bill called Community Health Associations Act, that was really all that Bill 47 did. These three major 

changes that were in that Bill are now in this Bill today as three amendments to The Mutual Medical and 

Hospital Association. You have to ask yourself, just why was the Bill pulled out and this one brought in as 

amendments. And the only reason, of course, can be is that we didn't want to have an Act on the books called 

The Community Health Association Act and, of course, the reason this is, is the embarrassment of the 

Government at bringing in a Bill to try and enhance the community clinics in the eyes of the public and give 

them some status that they had their own Bill and so on. And this was the reason that the Bill was brought in. 

It was brought in unfortunately in December and when we reconvened this Session in February and now it's 

April, we find that the Community Clinic in Regina has collapsed and is in a terrible state and it seems to be 

a most awkward time to 



 

April 18, 1974 

2491 

 

try and give some public stature to the Community Clinic in Regina at a time when it is collapsing. 

 

The reason it is embarrassing for the Government is because the NDP have become known by the public as 

being closely allied with the Community Clinic. There is no doubt in the minds of the people that the 

community clinics were established and encouraged to be established by the NDP and the present failure of 

the one in Regina and the evident failure of the one in Prince Albert is now a tremendous embarrassment. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that I don't find any problem in supporting the concept of community 

clinics, I think that this is likely a good concept. I think it is something that we will see more of in the future. 

But there is one thing that has been proven very conclusively and that is that partisan politics and medicine 

don't work together. And it is partisan politics and involvement of the NDP in community clinics that has 

caused the downfall and the disastrous situation that the Regina Community Clinic finds themselves in 

today. So I think it is very interesting to see the NDP backpeddling, bringing in these three amendments 

instead of changing the name as they would like to have done. It is very interesting in the last few days in 

one issue after another backpeddling and trying to hide and escape the embarrassment that they are feeling 

because of some of the actions they have taken. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, I have no hesitation supporting this Bill and the three amendments that are contained 

in it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I never did like the name of this Association, 

it reminded me of the Irish Sweepstakes — Medical Benefits Association or the Hospital Association, so I 

welcome the name change. 

 

I was hopeful of having some additional information that I was seeking in connection with this Bill which 

hasn't come to hand yet and I should like to speak on it. In light of that I ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. D.W. CODY (Minister of Co-operative Development) moved second reading of Bill No. 108 — An 

Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance to Certain Persons for Construction of or 

Structural Alterations to an Eligible Residence. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to give second reading to The House 

Building Assistance Act, 1974. This Bill is intended to replace The House Building Assistance Act, 1972. 

The Government of Saskatchewan believes that decent housing is a basic right of all citizens and it is our 

objective to provide residents of Saskatchewan with an opportunity to exercise this right to acquire decent 

accommodation consistent with their social needs. 

 

It was with this objective in mind that the Government introduced the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Act in 1973. 



 

April 18, 1974 

2492 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, we now have the legislative scope and authority and the organization necessary to 

respond to the dynamic changes in housing needs throughout the province. I believe that the achievements of 

the Housing Corporation in its first year of operation provides solid evidence of the Government's increased 

emphasis in the social housing field. 

 

During the last full year in office of the previous government, and, I would like the Members opposite to 

take note of this, housing starts dropped to a 20-year low of only 1,743 units. By comparison, Mr. Speaker, 

in 1973 provincial housing starts reached the level of 6,386 units. In 1974 we expect to achieve a new record 

of housing for the past 25 years and this will be possible in large part because of the new and expanded 

programs of the Housing Corporation. 

 

In 1973 the Corporation pushed the level of activity under the public housing program for low income 

families and senior citizens to a record of 570 units. At the same time over 1,100 units, largely for senior 

citizens, were given preliminary approval. In 1974 the Corporation proposes to double the starts under the 

program and to maintain these higher levels of production until the need for public housing in all areas of the 

province has been met. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, that future plans call for the extension of the program to cover 130 centres in the 

province that previously did not qualify for assistance. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, it took a lot of work and 

a lot of hard negotiating with the Federal Government to see that they allowed us to go into these 130 extra 

communities. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, the Corporation introduced the subsidy and self-help program which extends the 

opportunity for home-ownership to low income families. The provincial program comes into effect where 

eligible families under the Federal Assisted Homeownership Program are earning $7,000 or less and cannot 

qualify for home-ownership using the federal assistance alone. In such cases the Corporation can provide 

down payment, mortgage payment and self-help incentives to make home-ownership possible for families 

earning close to the minimum wage. In 1974 the Corporation plans to assist approximately 1,400 families 

under the auspices of this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government recognizes that new house building is only one facet of the housing problem. 

That if housing needs are to be truly satisfied the need for rehabilitation assistance, for existing 

home-owners, must be recognized. 

 

Two major home repair programs were introduced by the Corporation in 1973. The first is the Senior 

Citizens' Home Repair Program, which provides assistance to needed pensioners who desire to continue to 

live in their own homes but who are finding it difficult to do so because of high costs of needed repairs. 

 

I am very pleased to report that this program is an outstanding success. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — At the beginning of March 8,846 applications for grants, 



 

April 18, 1974 

2493 

 

totalling over $3.8 million had been approved. Furthermore, another 1,500 applications are in the approval 

process and over 2,400 pensioners have already completed their repairs. The second home repair program is 

the Residential Rehabilitation Program, for low and moderate income homeowners. 

 

This program provides low interest loans up to $8,000 and low repayment forgiveness up to $1,000. The 

homeowner whose annual income is up to $9,000 to allow them to make needed repairs to their properties. 

In 1974 the Corporation proposes to make 1,000 loans for essential home repairs under this program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — I might add that neither one of these programs were in existence before 1971. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these efforts in the field of new home ownership and home repair are just a few of the many 

programs available to the municipalities and citizens of this province through the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation. 

 

I wish to focus my remaining remarks on the Bill presently before the House. The New House Building 

Assistance Act. The Act is intended primarily to assist prospective home-owners to meet the down payment 

required on a new home. Provision is also made to permit structural alterations to existing dwellings. Since 

1973, when we made important changes to the original Act, to permit us to direct assistance where it was 

most needed, that is, low and moderate income families, the grants have become a major component of our 

housing program. 

 

Last year grants were available to families earning up to $9,000 per annum. The maximum grant of $800 was 

available to families earning up to $7,000 per annum. For families earning between $7,000 and $9,000 the 

grants varied from $790 down to $300, depending on the income of the family. Under these terms 2,131 

grants were approved between March 31st and December 31st, 1973. 

 

These figures are reflective of the success of the policy of gearing the grants to income so that the needs of 

low income families are adequately recognized. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that the housing market is a 

dynamic one and that our housing policy, if it is to work, must be flexible enough to cope with a fast 

changing market. It seems to me that this is especially true right now at a time when world-wide inflation is 

placing pressure on all Canadians. Fortunately, through the actions of this Government we, in Saskatchewan, 

have not suffered to the same extent as some areas of this country from these recent steep rises in the cost of 

living. On the other hand it is impossible to completely isolate ourselves from inflation. 

 

The housing market in Saskatchewan is one area where nation-wide cost increases in materials, labor and 

mortgage money have 



 

April 18, 1974 

2494 

 

meant increases in the end price of new housing. Higher prices mean higher down payment requirements and 

these increases pose a very severe threat to the home-ownership aspirations of our low and moderate income 

families. 

 

In order to combat this problem, The New House Building Assistance Act, 1974 proposes the following 

changes: An increase in the eligibility for family income to a level of $10,000 per annum; an increase in the 

maximum grant payable to $1,000; an increase in the maximum grant of $200 per eligible family. In 

addition, the regulations will provide for a grant to income scale, whereby the families earning between 

$7,000 and $10,000 per annum, receive assistance in accordance with their needs to a maximum between 

$990 and $300, depending on income. 

 

Provision of grants for structural alterations to existing family units have also been changed. This grant 

would be available to families with incomes up to $9,000 per annum. By regulation the maximum grant 

payable will be based on a sliding scale of $800; for families earning $7,000 or less per annum and between 

$790 down to $300 for families earning between $7,000 and $9,000 per annum. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these are positive steps to ensure that Saskatchewan does not follow the lead of 

many other provinces where decent housing has become the exclusive domain of the wealthy and where the 

housing quality suffers from a lack of government action to assist in the low-income housing field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could still do better if we could convince the Federal Government to take off the 11 per cent 

tax on building products. Let me say that in the Housing Corporation and in the Government of 

Saskatchewan we are constantly putting pressure on the Federal Government to have this tax taken off. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks it gives me great pleasure to give second reading to 

Bill No. 108. 

 

MR. G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is one of the most surprising statements made in this House 

for a Minister of the Crown to stand up and say inflation has not affected the people of Saskatchewan, like 

the Minister just said. Certainly it is a shocking statement and it just proves the ignorance of the Member 

opposite. He presented this Bill in some very, very glowing terms and it is very interesting to note that the 

proposed increases aren't anywhere near the rate of inflation increase over the last year, the last two years, in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. The Bill does not take into account the proposed drastic increases that are 

going to the members of the construction trades, which we understand could go up anywhere to 60 per cent. 

That Bill does not take that into account. And for the Minister to stand up and say that inflation has not 

affected the people of Saskatchewan as much as other people in Canada, I think, is a glossing over of the 

truth and certainly a glossing over of the true facts. 

 

It is very interesting when the Minister talked about the sales tax and the pressure that he has been putting on 

the Government at Ottawa. We will find out how much pressure has 



 

April 18, 1974 

2495 

 

been put on Ottawa because we are standing on record right now as asking the Minister to start tabling the 

letters that he has written as Minister in charge of the Housing Corporation, to the Minister of Urban Affairs 

and the Minister of the Government of Canada responsible for urban affairs, with regard to the matter of 

construction sales tax, the 11 per cent sales tax, because I am willing to bet that there won't be any letters 

prior to this speech in the House today. 

 

It is also very interesting that we find out that the NDP in the Province of British Columbia says it will 

remove its sales tax on construction materials, but the Government opposite refuses to do anything about that 

and, in fact, is taking the usual cheap tactic of trying to blame Ottawa for all their failures. It is not a new 

approach that they try to blame Ottawa for every one of their failures. 

 

That is all that they have done, they have taken one more topic that they try to doctor up a little, add another 

$200 when inflation has gone up 30 per cent and they increase their rate approximately 25 per cent and it is 

not keeping up with the rate of inflation. 

 

So the new Minister, the junior Minister, or the second junior Minister or temporarily Minister, from 

wherever he will be, also ignores a very important factor that was announced in the Press yesterday and that 

was the decision of the Bank of Canada to raise interest rates, which could, if left untouched by a Provincial 

Government, do more to stop new house construction in the Province of Saskatchewan or anywhere else in 

Canada than any other factor. 

 

The increase in the interest rate will push mortgage rates up to 12 per cent. In many cases that certainly is 

beyond the means of most Canadians. I would think and I would expect that the Government of Canada 

would take action on it, not because of a demand from the Government opposite, but because of its own 

legitimate concern and its far-reaching policies in urban affairs and housing construction. But not one 

mention by the Minister responsible for housing about what he is going to do to subsidize the mortgage rates 

and subsidize the interest rates, which is a practical step that he should take and unfortunately has refused to 

take. 

 

We have asked the Minister responsible for Consumer Affairs if the Government opposite has done a study 

on the matter of housing and he says, yes, we have done a preliminary study. We will also go on record as 

warning the Minister that he be prepared when his Estimates come up to table his study on the cost of 

housing and the individual factors that go into the high cost of housing. Because we will want to know what 

effect the Government interference and the Government control, either to regulation or economic control of 

the timber industry, has had on the high cost of housing in Saskatchewan. And I am willing to venture that 

there is no study on the effect of Government control in the timber industry, or the high cost of housing. 

 

There is no doubt that the Government opposite is taking a very, very minor step in dealing with the problem 

of high cost of housing and the supply of shelter to people of all economic levels in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

$1,000 — even the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Baker) 



 

April 18, 1974 

2496 

 

agrees that this is a minor step. $1,000 a $200 increase, I believe in the words of the Minister, it is certainly a 

step, but it is no more than a minor step and it only indicates the Government's attempt to gloss over its own 

failures and to gloss over the Government's cover-up of its control of the timber industry and its failure to be 

of economic benefit to the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I will have more to say on this Bill and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


