
























































Hansard: December 02, 1974


 
 

25 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

3rd Day 
 

Monday, December 2, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

TELEGRAM ON CLOSING OF SCHOOL AT ILE-A-LA CROSSE 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 
should like to direct a question to the Premier (Mr. Blakeney). Did he receive the following telegram 
from Marie Rose Morin and Frank Kenny, of Ile-a-La Crosse? 
 

We the parents of Ile-a-La Crosse demand: 
 
- the immediate removal of Dave Adams and his supporters on staff; 
 
- education for our children like they get in the rest of Saskatchewan; 
 
- that the superintendent, Ernie Lawton and his director of northern schools, Mr. Glenn Lindgren, both 
be replaced. 
 
We will keep our children out of school until such time as these demands are satisfied. 

 
This is a telegram that I understand was sent to Premier Blakeney. My question is: — Did he receive it, 
what does be intend to do about it? Is he aware that 200 children are out of that school and have been for 
some time in Ile-a-La Crosse? Is it a fact that they tried to get a meeting with him? 
 
At first someone in his office said, yes, he would meet with him and then they were turned down for a 
meeting with the Premier and they offered to come all the way to Regina. 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of such a telegram 
having been received in my office and I am not otherwise informed on the matter as raised by the 
Member. I am simply not informed on the matter and if you would like to put the questions on the Order 
Paper I would be happy to attempt to find the answers. 
 
MR. STEUART: — You are not aware of a ‘phone call last week asking for a meeting? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — If the Member is asking me whether I received a phone call, the answer is, No. If 
he is asking me whether anybody in my office received a phone call, the answer is, I don’t know. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Is the Premier about to find 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

26 
 

out what is going on in his own office, because his office did receive that phone call? There are 200 
students out of school, they have been trying to get rid of that ex-NDP candidate Dave Adams, the 
principal for some time. It’s a disgrace that he stands up and tells this House that he didn’t receive the 
call. This telegram was sent some time ago and I suggest that the Premier had better find out what is 
going on in his own office. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I believe the Premier said he had no knowledge of it but if the Hon. 
Member would put his question on an Order Paper he would check into the facts. I don’t think we can 
ask the Premier to comment on a thing which he says he has no knowledge of. I think the House will 
realize that. 
 
MR. STEUART: — By the time he finds out and admits it those kids will be in high school or 
degenerate and out of school altogether. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to this House a group of adult 
students who are in the Speaker’s Gallery from the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences. 
There are about 40 students, so my notes say, accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Schesky, Miss Busch, 
Miss Parisien and Miss Terry. They are going to have a tour of the buildings. They will be in the 
Speaker’s Gallery for some time and then perhaps they will have an opportunity to meet with one or 
more Members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I know that you and other Members of the Legislature would wish to welcome them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

REPORT ON ALBERTA OIL INDUSTRY 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS: — (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to 
the Premier concerning the report from the Alberta Government which was made public in Edmonton 
last Thursday. 
 
The question I should like to direct to the Premier is: — According to this document, which I am aware 
he might not yet have had time to study, the after-tax profits in Alberta in the oil and gas industry had 
the old taxation system remained in force would approximately have doubled in 1974 over 1973. Is the 
Premier in agreement with the general conclusion which this report implies that the Alberta oil industry 
would be making unduly large profits were there not to be additional taxation on the oil industry over 
and above that provided for in the new Alberta royalty schedule? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is inappropriate for me to comment on what a report 
tabled in Edmonton seems to imply about the Alberta oil industry. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

27 
 

MR. RICHARDS: — A supplementary question, if I may, Mr. Speaker. I should like at this time to 
table the report; and the supplementary question concerns SaskOil. Is the Premier at this juncture willing 
to give the House any indication about expanding the scope of SaskOil in order that it may become the 
major exploratory agent in the province, given the taxation problems between the Federal Government.. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Member has asked to table a report. This has arisen on previous 
occasions and has arisen again at this Session. I should like to make a statement for the guidance of 
Members. The question has come up in the past as to whether a private Member can rise before Orders 
of the Day to table documents. I wish to take this opportunity to try to clarify this situation. 
 
All Members will realize that a Member can table correspondence or documents during the course of his 
speech. These documents are kept on the table but do not become official sessional papers. In order for a 
document to become an official sessional paper it must be tabled pursuant to one of the following 
conditions: 
 

1. Provisions of an Act; 
 
2. An Order of the House; 
 
3. An address to the Crown; 
 
4. The command of the Crown; 
 
5. Standing orders of the House. 

 
I would refer you to Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, 1958, page 176: 
 

Documents such as the annual reports of departments are required by an Act, while Returns are tabled 
under an Order of the Assembly. Both types of documents qualify as official sessional papers. 

 
The rules of the Assembly do not make provision for a private Member on his own initiative to rise 
before Orders of the Day to table a document or to have it become an official sessional paper. 
 
I would suggest to Hon. Members that this type of document can be tabled while he is participating in a 
debate that deals with that subject matter or he can send a document to the table by means of a page but 
no verbal statement can be made about it before Orders of the Day. 
 
So the paper referred to will not be received as a sessional paper, it will just be assumed that it was sent 
over by a page without a verbal statement. So as far as a followup question to the Premier, the Premier 
has answered the first time and the question, in the Premier’s view, was out of order because it is 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

28 
 

tabled in another Legislature, therefore the supplementary is also out of order. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

COST OF MATADOR FARM 
 
MR. T.M. WEATHERALD: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). In view of the fact that the Government of 
Saskatchewan now owns the first state farm in our province, the forty-nine quarter sections, Matador 
farm, would the Minister tell the House the price paid for the Matador farm? I know there are many 
people in Saskatchewan asking this question and since the information will be tabled at some time I 
presume, would he now clear up any misunderstanding and tell us what the actual price of the farm was? 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I know of no such state farm owned 
by the Government of Saskatchewan or the Land Bank Commission. However, if the Hon. Member 
would make available the location of the land I will give due consideration to announcing or tabling the 
price that was paid prior to the tabling of the annual document. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The lease that was actually given on 
the farm, does that lease contain any provision for the immediate buying of land or any future buying of 
land? 
 
MR. MESSER: — To my knowledge there has yet been no lease signed. 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
MR. J.K. COMER (Nipawin) moved, seconded by Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Hanley): 
 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 
 
TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE STEPHEN WOROBETZ 
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 
Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, I should 
like to thank the Premier for the honour that he has bestowed upon me and upon the constituency of 
Nipawin which I have both the privilege and the pleasure to represent. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

29 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — The people of Nipawin constituency are very proud of their area of Saskatchewan; 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — The Carrot River valley and the Saskatchewan River area. An area beginning in the 
rich farming area of the Carrot River valley through to the forest slopes of the Pasquia Hills and along 
the Saskatchewan River wedging in the world’s greatest muskrat factory in the Cumberland delta area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — The farm land produces rich crops of rapeseed, wheat and barley with a new 
cinderella crop in the wings, field peas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Our area has long produced large numbers of hogs and cattle and we have also 
produced much of the registered seed used in Saskatchewan. 
 
Tourists flock to Tobin Lake in the summer to catch Tobin Pike which is the largest pike in 
Saskatchewan and the only pike with $1,000 bounty on its fins. In the fall and early winter moose 
hunters come to Nipawin constituency, the real moose capital of the world. 
 
Our constituency has a number of fine villages and towns, prospering and progressing. In the south there 
is Gronlid, with a rink that would make Regina jealous. Ridgedale, a community as friendly as any in 
the West. Aylsham, in the best farming area in Canada. Zenon Park, an industrious French community 
with a community-owned garment factory and two locally owned alfalfa plants. Arborfield, nestled 
against the Pasquia Hills. Carrot River, with a sawmill under construction . . . 
 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — ..replacing the one that the Liberals had under destruction. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Carrot River is one of the newest communities in the West. There is also White Fox, 
Garrick and Love, north of the Saskatchewan River, industrious and co-operative communities. In the 
far North, Cumberland House, a community that is older than the United States, by two years. The 
largest community is Nipawin, a town of 4,300 people, the second largest town in Saskatchewan and the 
home of Nipawin butter or margarine made from rapeseed oil. Nipawin constituency contains 
Saskatchewan’s oldest, its newest and beyond a doubt, its finest. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

30 
 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to the House a group of 
civic leaders from Carrot River who have been down visiting with some of the Government departments 
this morning. In the Speakers Gallery is the Mayor of Carrot River, His Worship Jim Lockhart. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — A Councillor from Carrot River, Ken O’Byrne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Another Councillor, Dick Klassen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — As well as the Town Secretary, Miss Lois Little. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — I should also like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the New Democratic 
Party caucus for giving me the opportunity to represent this Legislature, along with Mr. Speaker and the 
Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) at the second annual conference on parliamentary procedure held 
in Ottawa last week by the Canadian Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 
Conferences such as this are valuable in giving Members an understanding of the British Parliamentary 
system as well as an opportunity to talk to Members from across Canada and gain an understanding of 
the problems that face their legislatures and their provinces. It further gives us an opportunity to explain 
what Saskatchewan is all about to people from across this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1971, when the last provincial election was called, the people of Saskatchewan were 
losing hope and faith in this province. They were losing hope that this province could ever prosper and 
grow again. On June 23, 1971, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that that hope and that faith, which has so 
characterized the people of Saskatchewan was revived. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — That hope and that faith which instills in people the will and the determination to 
work together to overcome all adversity whatever the form, was revived. In that election, Mr. Speaker, 
the people had a choice between a sorry seven-year record that nearly destroyed the soul of 
Saskatchewan and a program of action to face the future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — A program of action to challenge the inherent determination of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the New Deal for People. On that date, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan went to 
the polls in record numbers to elect the New Democrats 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

31 
 

under Premier Blakeney. The people of Saskatchewan convincingly defeated a tired government, young 
in years but ancient in outlook, the Liberal government in which the present Leader of the Opposition, 
Davey Steuart, played such a major role. It’s funny today how the Liberal Party so carefully avoids any 
mention of their activities in those seven years. It’s funny that they try so hard to get the people of this 
province to forget those seven years. 
 
In the New Deal for People we made 139 pledges to the people of Saskatchewan, we have fulfilled 133 
of these pledges. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Of the others, some are already obsolete because of other government action. The 
remaining pledges will be implemented in the immediate future. Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa we have a 
Prime Minister who promised nothing and delivered even less. In Saskatchewan Premier Blakeney 
pledged a great deal and has delivered a great deal more. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Never has any party running for office in the province or in this nation, laid out such 
a comprehensive program of action before the electorate and never has a government so completely 
lived up to the program it was elected on. Never has a government after three and a half years had such 
an impressive record of achievement. 
 
We pledged to remove deterrent fees, they are gone. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — We pledged a hearing aid-program, it’s been a reality for over a year now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — We pledged a drug plan and in the next few months that program will become a 
reality. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — You may remember that the Liberals promised a drug plan in 1964. Unfortunately, 
D.G. Steuart was named the Minister of Health. The promise was never kept, nor was it meant to be 
kept. We made the promise, we kept it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — We pledged a denticare program for school children, it’s in operation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

32 
 

MR. COMER: — I’m sure that all Members of this House and all the citizens of this province 
remember when we introduced the dental care program. There were those, mainly across the floor in this 
House, who bawled and howled like a bunch of freshly weaned calves. They complained that the care 
was not good, that the dental nurses weren’t qualified, now there is silence. They know it’s working. 
Like so many programs they have criticized it’s working and it’s working well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Today there are delegations and groups from across this country and across this 
continent coming to examine this program. Mr. Speaker, I predict that within ten yearn our dental 
program will have been copied across this country and in many American States. Once again, 
Saskatchewan is leading the way in social legislation after seven years in the dark ages, leading the way 
in social legislation like this province did with free cancer treatment, hospitalization, medicare and so 
many other programs. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the late ’60s I was talking to a Liberal, a Liberal Member from the National 
Assembly from Quebec and he said to me, “We used to look to Saskatchewan as the bright light on the 
Prairies. The place where so many new ideas came from.” Then he said of the then Liberal Government, 
“The lights have gone out. The ideas aren’t coming any more.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Well in 1971 the lights went back on, the ideas like Dental Care started to come 
again, with a New Democratic Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main thrust of the New Deal for People was that a Blakeney Government would take 
action to assist to save rural Saskatchewan. It is this thrust that I should like to deal with first. 
 
If there has been a most important piece of legislation brought in, in this Legislature, that piece of 
legislation is The Act establishing The Land Bank. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Of course the Opposition has tried to discredit this legislation in the House and, of 
course, they have tried to deceive the people of Saskatchewan about this program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — They tried unsuccessfully I might add. Today there are indications that every 
province except Ontario and Alberta is seriously considering bringing in such legislation, not just NDP 
Governments but Liberal and Conservative Governments and if there was a Social Credit Government 
they would be considering it too. In the United States many states, North Dakota, South Dakota, 
Minnesota, Colorado, Pennsylvania and others are 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

33 
 

seriously studying our Land Bank with a view to introducing such a program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Why is there such interest? Every agricultural area in North America is facing the 
same problem. The problem of the concentration of agricultural land into fewer and fewer hands, while 
willing young farmers have no way to get into farming. In Saskatchewan we have done something about 
it. The Land bank has leased over 1,000 parcels of land. Many of these to farmers who otherwise 
wouldn’t have had farm land. Most of the other parcels went to farmers who needed extra land to make 
an economic unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a good deal said in the press, a good deal said by that Member from Prince 
Albert (Mr. Steuart) that the Land Bank will not sell the land. I ask anyone to read a lease from the Land 
Bank, it is in there that the option to purchase is there, in five years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, in the years ahead when the public judges this Saskatchewan’s 
Seventeenth Legislature, The Land Bank Act will be the landmark legislation. Twenty years from now 
when speakers rise in this House and quote back Liberal opposition to the Land Bank, the Liberals will 
feel as stupid as they do today when we remind them that they opposed rural electrification and said 
farmers could get along with wind chargers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, we have further assisted young farmers through FarmStart. FarmStart 
has made loans and grants to 1,800 farmers. The average age of the farmer taking advantage of this 
program is 27 years. It has been said that the banks could do as well, but we should remember that old 
saying about the banks and the bankers: 
 

A banker is a man who lends you an umbrella when the weather is fine and takes it away when it rains. 
 
You could also say that about a Liberal. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — FarmStart isn’t for the man who has an umbrella or two, FarmStart is for the man 
who is venturing out in the rain without an umbrella, FarmStart isn’t for the well-established farmer, 
FarmStart is for the farmer who is just beginning, for the farmer who isn’t well established yet. 
 
We have assisted all farmers through a greatly expanded crop insurance program. The Western Producer 
of November 21, reports that crop insurance was written in this province in the amount of $290 million 
this year, compared to $140 million last year and $29 million in 1972. This amounts to a 1,000 per cent 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

34 
 

increase in coverage in two years. These increases speak for the success of the crop insurance program, 
they speck for the greatly extended coverage, they amply demonstrate the popularity of the crop 
insurance program with the Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, I also notice that the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) is labouring 
under his disability as he has in the three years previously in this house. The Member for Lumsden has a 
problem, he can’t speak unless he has pressure on his brain, he speaks best when he sits. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Government has taken action to assist hard lilt hog 
producers and cattle producers while the Federal Government has done next to nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney Government has and will continue to stand four square behind the 
Saskatchewan farmer. We have stood behind the farmer with the Land Bank, with FarmStart, with an 
expanded crop insurance program, with a Farm Fuel Rebate Program, with a hog subsidy, with cash 
advances for cattlemen and with numerous other programs which our farmers have greatly benefitted 
from. 
 
We have stood behind our farmers because Saskatchewan is still a farm province. Though there is a 
growing industrial and resource base in Saskatchewan our economy still rises and falls with the 
economy of the farm. Under the Blakeney Government, the farm economy is strong though there are 
many disquieting; initiatives which I am sure will be mentioned many times in this debate coming from 
the Federal Government and more particularly from the Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Premier Blakeney has been more aggressive than any other government 
in the history of this province in its effort to improve the quality of life in the rural areas. When we look 
around this country and around the world we can see millions upon millions of people crammed into 
faceless cities. I was talking to a man from Montreal recently who told me that in that city there is 
presently under construction an apartment complex which will house over 20,000 people. I only thank 
God that no one in Saskatchewan has to live in that sort of an incubator. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — A few years ago, Mr. Speaker, a group in the northeast corner of Saskatchewan, The 
North East Saskatchewan Development Council placed an ad in the Toronto Globe and Mail classified 
advertisements inviting people from the cities to investigate the pleasures of a simpler, less cluttered life 
in northeastern Saskatchewan. They received over 200 replies and not just replies from Toronto’s 
unemployed, but from a lot of highly qualified professional people who wanted to get away from the 
noise and the press of a super city, who wanted to take 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

35 
 

advantage of the Saskatchewan option. The Blakeney Government has been making the Saskatchewan 
option even more appealing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — The Blakeney Government has introduced many programs to improve our rural 
communities, it has greatly assisted rural communities in meeting their goals. 
 
Through the Department of highways we have established a program called Operation Open Roads. This 
program has given dust-free access roads to over 500 small Saskatchewan communities, reaching over a 
quarter of a million people. This program recognizes that our people in our small towns, in our villages, 
in our hamlets have a right to a higher quality road to and from their communities. This program gives a 
quality access road to communities like Ridgedale, Arborfield, White Fox, Codette and Aylsham. 
 
The Highways Department is also beginning an ambitious highway extension program which will take 
over 600 miles of grid roads into the highway system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — I am sure that the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) will appreciate this and 
withdraw his resolution. These grids have come to act as connector roads between provincial highways, 
grids which were as heavily travelled as some provincial highways, grids which the RMs had an 
extremely difficult time maintaining to the traffic volume. Roads such as the grid road from Arborfield 
through to Gronlid, serving Zenon Lark and Ridgedale passing through three RMs and connecting three 
provincial highways. I know that all of rural Saskatchewan will join me in welcoming this initiative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — This Government has actively continued to extend services to our senior citizens in 
the rural areas by continuing to build senior citizens’ homes in our rural communities, with the help and 
the support of these communities. Homes like the fine senior citizens’ home which was recently opened 
in Nipawin, Jubilee Place. These homes allow our senior citizens to acquire high quality housing in the 
towns that they have built. Surely this is a more attractive option than having our senior citizens go to 
massive senior citizens’ housing development in the cities. Surely the best option and the option that we 
are following, is to let the senior citizens live in the communities they have lived in for years, to live 
with their old friends. 
 
We have expanded special care homes to the point where they are available to communities with a 
supporting population of 3,500 people compared to the Liberal 5,000. Once again we are extending 
services to our rural people, to our rural senior citizens, in the communities they live in. Once again we 
are improving the Saskatchewan option. Homes like the one which will be opening in the next few 
weeks at Carrot River are a demonstration of this initiative by the Blakeney Government. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

36 
 

The Liberal policy in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was to close down every small hospital possible 
and leave these communities without any form of health care. This Government has encouraged these 
communities to open health and social service centres to allow these communities to continue to have 
health care locally rather than tell the community to hit the road to the next town when their people need 
medical care. When a community is unable to keep a resident doctor, communities such as Zenon Park 
can maintain medical care at home as well as extend services such as meals-on-wheels, to their people, 
thanks to the Blakeney Government and in strong contrast to the policy of D.G. Steuart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have already mentioned that special quality of Saskatchewan s rural people, their ability 
to get together to solve their local problems and to meet their local goals. The Blakeney Government has 
assisted our people in these co-operative endeavours through a number of widely used and, 
well-appreciated programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Government knows, as J. S. Mill once said, ‘The worth of a state in the long run is the 
worth of the individuals composing it.” 
 
We have given special recognition to that worth in a number of programs involving people in our 
communities: — The Winter Works Program, the Community Capital Fund and the Community College 
system. 
 
Dealing for a few minutes with each of these, the Winter Works Program has been widely used by our 
local people. I don’t think there is a rural community in this province that has not taken advantage of this 
program to improve existing facilities and to build new facilities. This program has built rinks, it has 
built and upgraded halls, it has built libraries, it has built swimming pools, senior citizens’ centres. In 
short, the Winter Works Program has lifted the face and the spirit of hundreds of communities across 
this province. It has allowed local people to get together and plan and dream of the facilities they need. 
It has turned these dreams into realities. It has improved the Saskatchewan option. Improved the 
Saskatchewan option with a rink in Gronlid. It has improved the Saskatchewan option with a library, art 
gallery and museum in Nipawin. It has improved the Saskatchewan option with a swimming pool at 
Pasquia Regional Park and a chalet at Nipawin Regional Park. It will be improving the Saskatchewan 
option with a recreational centre at Aylsham to be built this winter. These stories could be retold 
hundreds of times across this province in hundreds of communities, thanks to the Blakeney Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Last year in response to the requests of the urban municipalities, our Government 
introduced a community capital fund of $75 per capita over 5 years. Our small urban communities are 
putting this money to good use in constructing various buildings, improving streets, buying fire fighting 
equipment, street maintenance equipment. The Provincial NDP Government is helping our rural 
communities to meet their goals, to make their option more attractive. 
 
We have established a community college system unique in 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

37 
 

Canada. A few years ago the Minister of Education established a committee to tour the province and 
find what form of community college system would best serve the people of Saskatchewan. It was 
decided to establish a community college network that would use the facilities that exist in each 
community, rather than build eight or ten universities around Saskatchewan. After all, we have two 
universities and a number of technical institutes and with less than a million people we hardly need eight 
or nine more facilities which, due to Saskatchewan’s population dispersal, would still be far away from 
most of the people. Rather our community colleges will use the facilities in each community, the halls, 
the schools, the church basements. The courses are whatever the local people want, where they want 
them. If enough people are interested and a teacher can be found the course can be offered by the 
community college. It could be the course in Christian ethics in Nipawin, a course in Ukrainian dancing 
in some rural hall, it could mean a course in bead work at Cumberland House, a course in French 
literature at Zenon Park, it could mean a course for credit union directors at Carrot River. These are all 
possible courses. If there is the interest there is the possibility. Our community college system doesn’t 
maintain expensive buildings, nor does it maintain a large, expensive full-time staff. Rather, our 
community college system is accessible to everyone, everywhere, it is flexible enough to meet any 
community need. If there is the interest and a teacher any class is possible. Another program making the 
Saskatchewan option all the more attractive. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — I know that all the Members of this House and all of the citizens of this province 
welcome the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that in the not-too-distant future the 
community college system will cover all of Saskatchewan. 
 
These programs recognize the worth of our people, they provide an opportunity for our rural people to 
put their worth to work improving the Saskatchewan option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that every Member of this House and every citizen of this province was proud to 
live in Saskatchewan when Premier Blakeney captured the imagination of this country with his proposal 
to establish a Canadian Food Bank. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — This proposal would see Canada take its rightful place as a provider in a hungry 
world. It would see all Canadians bear the cost of this program rather than just the western farmer. In 
effect, the World Food Conference in Rome accepted this type of program and Canada has pledged one 
million tons of food grains. This is a hopeful beginning but it can only be accepted as a beginning in the 
hungry world we live in. 
 
While dealing with international aid, I should like also to congratulate the Government on its 
introduction of a program of matching funds for aid to developing nations. As requested by the 
Legislature last year, with almost unanimous support, this program will mean that every dollar a 
Saskatchewan citizen contributes will mean $4 in international aid, through provincial and federal 
matching. It is my hope that every 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

38 
 

citizen in Saskatchewan who is able will continue to contribute to international development and relief 
agencies as a citizen of a rich province in a rich country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier in my address I had the honour of being in 
Ottawa a couple of weeks ago. While in Ottawa I was able to sit in the gallery of the House of Commons 
and listen to and watch John Turner, the Liberal Finance Minister, deliver his Budget Address. In that 
address he said that western Canada wants and is entitled to its place in the sun. He went on in effect to 
say unfortunately the sun had set for Western Canada. 
 
This Liberal action in the form of a Federal Budget is clearly aimed at stealing the control of natural 
resources from the provinces. Natural resources are a responsibility of the provinces as laid out in the 
first acts of Confederation first agreed upon in 1867. The Liberals are clearly attempting to steal that 
responsibility. In the immediate future these budgetary measures are aimed at Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Charles Lynch writing in the Ottawa Citizen of November 22 asked what federal policies would be on 
oil resources if these resources were concentrated in Quebec rather than in Alberta or Saskatchewan? 
That’s an interesting question. I think the answer is evident and it would be the same if Ontario had the 
oil. As far as Ottawa is concerned the Maritimes and the West may deserve a place in the sun, but 
Ontario and Quebec have occupied all the seats and the rest of Canada has to continue contribute to their 
brightness, but stay out of the warmth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — In thinking about the treatment that we have received in this province from the 
Federal Government in this Budget, I am reminded of a quotation from the Anglican prayer book which 
goes, ‘We are not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under thy table.” Now John Turner and 
Pierre Trudeau are saying to Saskatchewan and to Alberta, that not only can’t we gather up the crumbs 
under the table, we have put the food on the table and put it there at cut rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been an accepted principle in this country that when a resource corporation pays its 
income tax it can deduct land taxes and its royalties from its taxable income, which accepts land taxes 
and royalties as a cost of production. Turner and Trudeau now say that the resource companies can’t 
deduct royalty payments from taxable income. They are either trying to take away provincial control of 
natural resources or force resource companies out of business. After listening to Turner’s rhetoric in 
Ottawa I can only assume it is the provinces they are after. 
 
When a farmer pays land tax to the rural municipality this amount is deducted from his taxable income 
as a cost of farming. The rural municipality is therefore recognized as having a right to collect these 
taxes. If a resource industry pays a royalty to a provincial government that is not now deductible. The 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

39 
 

Federal Government is in effect saying that the provinces have no right to a royalty. This is as idiotic as 
telling a farmer he can rent his land out but he can’t charge any rent for it. At the same time, if a royalty 
is paid to the CPR or any other company or individual, that is a legitimate expense according to Turner. 
 
Saskatchewan and Alberta have clearly stated in the last year that they intended to use the money they 
were receiving from the oil companies to develop an industrial base. Alberta is faced with dwindling oil 
resources and wishes to diversify its economy to maintain its provincial prosperity after its oil and gas 
reserves are gone. Saskatchewan has been struggling to diversify its economy away from agriculture and 
was clearly using its oil revenues to spur this diversification. Ottawa appears to be dissatisfied with these 
developments. Ottawa, it would appear, would rather have the West supply cheap food to eastern 
Canada and have all the industry stay in the East. This is especially galling when one considers that last 
March the oil producing provinces, Saskatchewan and Alberta agreed to keep the cost of oil artificially 
low to the rest of Canada at $6.50 a barrel. The Federal Government would then levy an export tax on 
oil leaving Canada with the proceeds of that tax going to keep down oil prices for those areas which 
used more expensive foreign oil. 
 
Alberta and Saskatchewan made sacrifices running into millions of dollars; hundreds of millions of 
dollars for the benefit of all Canadians. For that sacrifice Liberals say we must be punished. 
 
In March we agreed that oil revenues would go into a special capital fund and thus not be used against 
equalization payments. We have established such a capital fund. We felt that this program of 
equalization payments was at least partial recognition of the hundreds of millions of dollars this 
province had forgone by holding down the price of oil across Canada. This is not to be the case. The 
Federal Liberals have decided that we will also lose $40 million in equalization payments. We will lose 
$40 million when we gave up hundreds of millions of dollars for the benefit of all Canadians. 
 
This vindictive, stinking, rotten attack on Saskatchewan doesn’t stop here. Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation provides cheap natural gas to its people. The natural gas companies sell their natural gas to 
SPC at low rates. The Federal Government is going to charge these companies taxes as though they had 
sold SPC natural gas at the higher rates that prevail in the rest of Canada. This is as though a fellow 
making $2.25 per hour were charged income tax if he made $5.00 an hour. This proposal is clearly 
meant to force natural gas prices up in Saskatchewan. 
 
For giving Canada cheap oil, Saskatchewan will lose $40 million, the people of Saskatchewan will be 
forced to pay much more for natural gas. Saskatchewan is the only province which loses by the Budget. 
It loses $40 million, it loses cheap natural gas and it loses millions of dollars which could have been 
invested in uranium mines, which could have been invested in hydro plants, which could have been 
invested in coal deposits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago this evening Mr. Turner and the Liberals delivered a vicious spiteful 
underhanded blow to the people of this province. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

40 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — It sickened me Mr. Speaker, to watch as the three Liberal Members of Parliament 
from Saskatchewan pounded their desks in approval of this rape of their province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Liberal Opposition in this House will not stick to the folly of their Alberta 
Liberal friends in praising this most insidious document, the Federal Budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the days ahead Saskatchewan faces one of the most serious challenges it has ever faced 
in its history. In the days ahead we must no longer think of ourselves as Liberals, Conservatives, New 
Democrats or Social Creditors, there can only be citizens of Saskatchewan, citizens of Saskatchewan 
standing together against this threat of the loss of control of natural resources, this threat of the loss of 
control of our province. Mr. Speaker, the Members of this House and the citizens of this province must 
realize that never has a province been singled out by the Federal Budget for such abuse as Saskatchewan 
has been singled out. Now is not the time for fair weather friends and sunshine soldiers, now is the time 
for pulling together in Saskatchewan, now is a time for all those who count Saskatchewan as home to 
stand together shoulder to shoulder. Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the people of this province will unite 
against this threat. I only hope that all Members of this House will similarly unite against this threat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, when we took office in 1971 there was widespread concern for the way 
the Liberal Government had handled the development of our forest resources. Large foreign owned 
corporations were granted leases over enormous forest areas, leases to practically all of our timber. 
There was no concern for local control, no concern for return to the province. Almost all of the timber in 
eastern Saskatchewan was leased out to Simpson Timber Company of Seattle, Washington, USA. This 
company was to establish a stud mill at Hudson Bay to turn 18-inch, 24-inch even 36-inch logs into 
two-by-fours. There were no provisions to utilize the sawdust, the slabs or the shavings. All the timber 
of central Saskatchewan was to go into the Prince Albert Pulp Company mill owned by Parsons and 
Whittemore Limited of New York, New York, USA. All the timber in western Saskatchewan was to go 
into the Meadow Lake Sawmill Company stud mill and pulp mill owned by Parsons and Whittemore, 
again of New York, New York, USA. 
 
Even if one ignores the foreign ownership and the financial deals behind these companies one is 
sickened by the practices of these operations. These companies clear cut large areas but this did not 
mean they picked up all that they knocked down. Smaller trees and less desirable species were knocked 
down and often as not were allowed to rot. As I mentioned earlier, there were little or no provisions for 
the use of chips or sawdust or shavings. 
 
During and before World War II this type of forest practice was used across North America because it 
was felt there was an inexhaustible supply of wood so there was no need to worry 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

41 
 

about the morrow. In the fifties and sixties as Canadians came to realize that there was an end to our 
forests and that we were cutting them much faster than they were growing, a change came about in our 
forest practice. It became common practice never to waste a tree. If it wouldn’t make a plywood bolt or 
dimension lumber, it would make two-by-fours, if it wouldn’t make studs, it would make fence posts, 
chip board, fibre board or pulp. It is said of a packing house that they sell everything but the squeal, in 
the forests Canadians began to sell everything except the wind going through the leaves. 
 
In Saskatchewan instead of going for maximum utilization under the Liberals we were going backwards 
towards high grading on a massive scale. To the people of this province and to this Government this was 
not good enough. 
 
The first problem we faced was that we did not have control of the forest. The American corporations 
the Liberals had brought into Saskatchewan controlled the forest, lock, stock and barrel. To remedy this 
situation we amended The Forest Act to return control of all the forest to the Province of Saskatchewan. 
With that done over the opposition of the Liberal Party and the American forest barons we were and are 
in a position to decide what shall be the best use of the forests. No longer does all the timber in an area 
have to go to one mill to make one product, rather logs over 10 inches in diameter can go to make 
dimension lumber or plywood. Logs between four and ten inches can either go to a dimension mill or a 
stud mill. Logs under that size and logs that are too crooked or logs of a less valuable species can be 
used to make pulp, or chip board or fibre board. Small logs can go to make fence posts. No longer will 
slabs and sawdust and shavings be burned, they also can be utilized. Without doubling the cut in our 
forests we are doubling and tripling employment in forestry, we are tripling and quadrupling the value of 
forest production and this is all being done with a massive increase in the return to the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — We have witnessed the announcement of a plywood mill at Hudson Bay, now in 
operation. This fall we witnessed the announcement of a sawmill at Carrot River and at Big River and a 
major post treating plant at Prince Albert. We have witnessed the reopening of a planer mill at Meadow 
Lake. We have witnessed the construction of a number of smaller mills in northern Saskatchewan to 
supply the local demand for timber. 
 
When we hear Liberals complaining about the initiatives of this Government in forestry and in other 
natural resource industries we must always remember that they are calling for the closing of these new 
industries, they are calling for the destruction of these hundreds of new jobs, they are calling for 
increased taxation to replace the enormous returns this province will realize from these industries, 
increases in taxation that would make Black Friday of 1968 look like a Sunday School picnic. Not only 
will we be able to gain maximum utilization from our forests, not only will we be able to realize 
substantial provincial revenues, as well we will be able to spread the benefits of the forest industry to 
many communities, rather than to just three or four communities. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

42 
 

Mr. Speaker, our initiatives in the forest industries are another example of this Government making the 
Saskatchewan option work for Saskatchewan people. Another example of this Government’s efforts to 
make Saskatchewan resources benefit the people of Saskatchewan and return the maximum benefit to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were elected in 1971 we pledged to make sweeping changes and to bring 
economic development and local control to northern Saskatchewan. Our first initiative in developing the 
North was the establishment of a single department to deal with northern Saskatchewan. The problem 
the North found itself in formerly was that northern problems had to be dealt with by southern 
departments, some of them with a northern annex or agency. The northerners were constantly 
short-changed in this process. The less the department had to do with the North, the less it understood 
the North, and the less emphasis it was willing to place on northern problems. It was for this reason that 
we established a single Department of Northern Saskatchewan as a department concerned only with 
northern problems. 
 
In the first two years of operation the department of the North has come in for more than its share of 
criticism and controversy, some of it justified, some not justified, some well meant, some not so well 
meant. But if one listens today the criticism and the controversy are largely gone, gone because residents 
of northern Saskatchewan know DNS is working with them and for them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Last June in preparation for the Cumberland House Bi-centennial Celebrations a 
reporter for the North East Community Booster asked Jim Carrier, the overseer of Cumberland House, 
how his community got along with DNS. Jim answered in the direct and open manner of northerners 
when he said, Good, those fellows speak our language.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — And it is this acceptance of DNS by northerners that has caused the Liberals and the 
Wafflers and other various rumour mongers to go elsewhere to spew their poison. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — DNS has introduced positive programs to the benefit of northern people. Positive 
programs such as the extension of local government to northern Saskatchewan, the extension of local 
community authorities, local advisory councils to others. These authorities are locally elected and we 
have given them the resources through the Northern Municipal Council to plan and carry out the projects 
necessary in their communities. 
 
The Northern Municipal Council was established as an elected body, made up of northerners, elected by 
northerners. This council has many of the powers of a municipal council in the South. Many programs 
are designed and administered by the Northern Municipal Council. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

43 
 

The department through its many programs is rapidly upgrading the standard of living in northern 
Saskatchewan. Housing has always been a pressing need in the North. Most of the people lived in 
crowded sub-standard homes. In 1971 the last Liberal housing program saw no housing starts in the 
North. In 1972 we saw 40 housing starts, 1973 saw 99 housing starts and 1974 saw an astounding 151 
housing starts in 22 settlements. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — This impressive record will be continued into the future. 
 
There is improved schooling, improved health care, improved economic opportunities in the North, 
economic opportunities being made available through economic development loans and grants. I think 
the best way to illustrate the effect of the economic development carried out by the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan in northern Saskatchewan, is to look at the welfare figures in the North. I think 
you have heard that the whole of the North is on welfare. The statistics that I am about to quote not only 
bring this contention into question they set it to rest. In September of 1973 there were 1,788 welfare 
recipients in the area of Saskatchewan known as the DNS area. One year later in September of 1974 
there were 1,279, a drop of 509 cases. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Of these cases, in 1973 there were 1,075 receiving financial assistance, the people 
most people think of when we talk about welfare, those who receive a cheque every month. In 1974 the 
financial cases dropped to 579, a drop of 496. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — When you take the lame, the halt and the blind away from that figure of 579 that 
leaves very few who under any circumstances could be expected to work. The Department estimates that 
there are just over 100 welfare recipients capable of working in northern Saskatchewan compared to 450 
a year ago. This shows that there have been economic developments in the North, and it shows that the 
people of the North are willing to work, given the opportunity and DNS has given them that opportunity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COMER: — Mr. Speaker, there is much more that I could say here today about the Speech from 
the Throne, about the legislative program of the Government, about the ongoing programs of this 
Government. I have only touched on a few. I know that the Member for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) will 
also touch on many, and I know that other Members of this House will touch on them. It has been an 
impressive record, it will continue to be an impressive record. With that, I am proud to move, seconded 
by the Member for Hanley, that a humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, with much pleasure I rise to 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

44 
 

second the reply to this Throne speech. For this, I certainly want to thank the Premier. I say this because 
I believe this Government, true to its promises, has done more to get Saskatchewan moving again than 
most people even dared dream. And if I was an Opposition Member, Mr. Speaker, having to go into an 
election . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — … .Mr. Speaker, it seems to me.. Are the bathrooms locked, or what? The 
Opposition Members seem to be in a dither. 
 
At any rate, it would seem to me, if I was an Opposition Member, Mr. Speaker, having to go into an 
election against an enviable record such as this Government has, I, too, would he green with envy and I, 
too, would spend hundreds of thousands of dollars, such as they are now doing, in advertisements, to 
build up the proverbial Opposition smoke screen to hide the true facts from the citizens of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How much money.. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, calculators are trying to figure out the amount of money that they are 
spending, but they keep burning out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from my opening remarks you can well assume that I believe this is a dramatic period in 
the history of Saskatchewan. Dramatic it is because of our good economic position, thanks to good, 
clean and bold government. Dramatic it is also because, as mentioned in the Throne Speech, 
confrontation with the Federal Government, initiated by that same government, seems to be 
unavoidable. It is a dramatic time because that same government, the Federal Government, seems bound 
and determined to rewrite the BNA Act and, as usual, present to the people of western Canada, and 
particularly Saskatchewan, another raw deal in favour of central Canadian interests. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — But before I go on, Mr. Speaker, I should like to inform you that I am sure that 
I speak for all Members of this House in saying your not being a candidate in the next election and your 
departure from this House will be a sad occasion. Mr. Speaker . .  . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! Hypocrite. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — It sounds like goose season, Mr. Speaker, and you know what happens during 
goose season, people take a . . . 
 
 
Well, at any rate, your departure from this House will be a sad occasion. Mr. Speaker, your wit, humour 
and wisdom will be missed by all. With this thought in mind, Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity 
to say we all wish you a happy time in your future endeavours. 
 
It is also at this time that I wish publicly to congratulate 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

45 
 

Dr. Cliff McIsaac, former MLA for Wilkie, and newly elected Member of Parliament for Saskatchewan. 
Now I always regarded Dr. McIsaac as a reasonably sensible man, and his departure from this House 
will certainly be missed. Who am I to argue with him for leaving the Saskatchewan Liberal Party as one 
leaves a sinking ship? To this, I say, more power to him and good luck in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government Budget, as mentioned in the Throne Speech, is an ominous 
warning to the people of western Canada that Federal Government policies will once more be directed to 
humbling western Canada, a position, I know Members opposite agree with. The interference implied 
and confrontation suggested in that Government’s Budget can only harm all of western Canada, 
especially Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government’s plan to break tradition, to tear up the 
BNA Act and control the natural resources that rightfully belong to the people of this province, is, to me, 
dictatorial, unconstitutional and unprecedented. Who am I to argue with the Premier of one western 
province who has publicly stated that these ugly Federal Government policies will do much to harm 
confederation? Who am I to argue with oil company and mining executives who maintain that the 
Federal Government’s intention to muscle in on provincial resource control will only hurt those who 
should benefit from those resources - the people of western Canada? Who am I to argue with the silence 
of Members opposite who must surely agree that once again the arrogance and ruthlessness of the 
Federal Government in this matter of resource control is further evidence of Federal Government 
inability to appreciate the economic inequities traditionally faced by the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government’s plan, whereby it imposes a high tax on Saskatchewan oil, to, in 
turn, subsidize eastern Canada, is, in reality, putting into practice the old saying of robbing poor western 
Canada to pay richer eastern Canada. And this is particularly galling because we have been subsidizing 
central Canada for so many years now that it has almost become a way of life for us in western Canada. 
We subsidize through higher freight rates. We subsidize through a tariff structure originally meant to 
protect a small but growing manufacturing industry in central Canada; in fact, Mr. Speaker, the forced 
subsidization of central Canada by westerners is really an open and callous admission by Ottawa that our 
votes in Parliament don’t really amount to a row of beans. And the Federal Government’s plan not to 
allow companies’ royalty payments to provincial governments to be income tax deductible, is further 
proof that we, in western Canada, really don’t count when it comes to meting out economic justice. 
 
And what about Ottawa’s threat to tax provincial Crown corporations - provincial Crown corporations 
such as Saskatchewan Power, which has, over the years, sold gas to the citizens of this province at 
reasonable rates? Mr. Speaker, if Sask Power is forced to increase its gas prices to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the story should be told loudly and clearly that Ottawa dislikes the concept of the people 
of this province paying low gas rates as a consequence of wise planning. 
 
Further to my remarks relative to the recent Federal Budget, I should like to comment on the announced 
reduction in income tax payable by most Canadians. I believe the average working person will have a 
reduction of roughly $200. Now I’ll admit this is better than nothing, but if one considers that 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

46 
 

through inflation, the average worker will lose close to $1,000 in purchasing power, the net effect is that 
in reality he will lose $800 per year. Now, I don’t expect Government Members in Ottawa really to 
understand the plight of the less fortunate in Canada. I don’t expect too much from them when certain 
Members tell the working people of Canada they should drink wine if milk is too expensive; that they 
should drink powdered milk because, as one of them remarked, “We do” on our measly $40,000 a year 
salary .. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — … I’m sorry, I can’t hear the Hon. Member from where is it again? 
Thundermouth, or whatever it is. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — We can’t expect anything when some say that too high a bacteria count in the 
meat we eat is nothing to worry about because it can always be burned to nearly a crisp, thus causing the 
bacteria to die, but nothing about the people. Nor do I expect too much from that same Ottawa clique 
when their leader can ask our senior citizens to eat stale bread if they feel the price is too high. Mr. 
Speaker, such remarks come only from those who have been and still are insulated from the harsh 
economic realities of Canada - from those who would do well to think before they speak. Maybe they 
should never be allowed to speak. 
 
MR. LANE: — What about the starving millions? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, it doesn’t sound like you are. 
 
I noticed the Federal Government’s Budget allows individuals a complete write-off in the construction 
of apartments and the like in the hope that this might provide some relief to the people of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, I maintain this concession will do absolutely nothing to make housing more readily available to 
Canadians. I maintain that housing, under Federal Government jurisdiction, in the main, is in an unholy 
mess; that it is out of reach for Canadians at the bottom of the economic ladder; and that the only 
solution to the crisis is for the Federal Government to make mortgage money available to people at 
reasonable rates, either through Central Mortgage and Housing, or through banks, or both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past year or so we have seen a Madison Avenue advertising campaign put on by 
mining and oil companies throughout Canada. This campaign seems to be trying to convince the citizens 
of Canada how poor these companies are. Nothing could be further from the truth for if one were to look 
at the latest profit records of these companies one would find that these corporate profits are 
embarrassingly larger than ever. In fact, if I remember correctly, Eric Kierans, that wise, that great 
Liberal, put it in a neat nutshell when he stated most have so much profit money they don’t know what 
to do with it. In fact, most of these corporate concerns are buying into other non-mining concerns in an 
effort to get rid of these higher-than-ever profits. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, this barrage of advertising seems to have fitted right in line with the 
advertising of the Members 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

47 
 

opposite, seems to have one objective in mind - to convince Canadians they are poor. Mr. Speaker, I, for 
one, do not accept what these misleading corporate advertisements are trying to do, and that is to hide 
the truth. Nor do I accept their pitiful pronouncements that they are caught in a tax squeeze - a tax 
squeeze brought into existence by federal and provincial government policies. Mr. Speaker, I know of 
thousands of people who would gladly trade places with these poor little corporations. And so I say to 
these same concerns, forget about trying to tell us how poor you are. Most people have their own 
problems. Most people still remember the so-called energy crisis in Canada - a crisis artificially created 
to gouge from Canadians. To these gougers and their political friends, I say, if you really want to save 
money, stop spending millions on those advertisements. 
 
Nor do I, Mr. Speaker, accept the near blackmail as suggested by one large mining company head who 
claims his company will adopt a wait-and-see attitude before going ahead with a planned large mining 
project in Saskatchewan. To that gentleman, I suggest that some mining companies are getting into a 
new field, the field of political activity, or to be more specific, the field of political party activity - bias 
and all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some time ago this Government announced a new potash mining policy for the future. In 
essence, the policy states that future potash development will have to have provincial government 
involvement to the extent that at least 51 per cent of the controlling interest will have to be held by the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I welcomed that announcement because I believe this resource 
should belong to our citizens and not foreign interests. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — At any rate, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t surprise me one bit when the Leader of the 
Opposition (Mr. Steuart) bemoaned the fact that this valuable and nearly inexhaustible resource would, 
in future, not be controlled by foreign corporations. It didn’t surprise me, not when I recalled how he 
had a hand via the previous Liberal junta, in surrendering control of our forest resources to those from 
outside Canada, whose only interest in Saskatchewan is profit. Mr. Speaker, I challenge all Members 
opposite to tell us where they stand on this issue, with foreign control or with control by the citizens of 
Saskatchewan? We know where they stand - the question is, do they have guts enough publicly to admit 
it? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — You’ll have the floor later on, Mr. Leader, if you can just contain yourself. I 
have some goodies for you. Just wait. You have to wait your turn like others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it now appears certain that the Federal Government plans on lifting the freight rate freeze 
and this on top of its publicly announced plan to scrap the Crow’s Nest rates structure. Is this move 
evidence of good faith on the part of the Federal Government at recent transportation conferences? Why 
should, in the very near future, goods moving to and from Saskatchewan cost more to our citizens and to 
those 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

48 
 

outside our province who buy our products? Mr. Speaker, to me it’s a simple case of knuckling under to 
private transportation companies. Mr. Speaker, it’s just another example of Federal Government 
insincerity and insensitiveness to the needs and desires of Saskatchewan and of western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that as of late, there has been much more economic activity in northern 
Saskatchewan than ever before. 
 
MR. STEUART: — With Government money. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I see the Leader of the Opposition feels that government should spend no 
money up North. Well, the people will remember that at the next election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — We now know where he stands on the people of the North. 
 
Well anyway, increased mining activity, increased forest related activity and various activities designed 
to make life a little better for northern people are all welcomed as being good for all of Saskatchewan, 
particularly for those in the North. 
 
As evidence of this increased activity in the North, I note that social assistance cases have dropped by 
more than 55 per cent. To me this is a good sign because it means more employment is now available in 
that area. And more employment here will give the people of that area more opportunity, for it is a 
known fact that unemployment has been the curse of northern Saskatchewan in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this reduction in the number now forced to rely on social assistance, reduction brought on 
by a buoyant economy, is a far cry from the way the former Liberal junta tried to solve the problem. Do 
you know how they tackled the problem, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It seems that around 1969, the Liberal regime of that day put out a special set of regulations which in 
essence said that employable people of the North were to be denied social assistance even though there 
was absolutely no employment available for them. Well, Mr. Speaker, so vicious were these regulations, 
so much hardship and suffering did they cause, that the Federal Government threatened to withdraw 
cost-sharing unless this vicious set of regulations were withdrawn. Mr. Speaker, they were withdrawn 
because they did see the error of their ways a little later on. And I might . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Too bad. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — .. The gentleman says too bad. He’s making a mockery of the northern 
situation. Is that what it means to you? That’s all you can say is, “it is too bad”? Well, the people will 
remember that. 
 
And I might add, when I was up North with the Special Committee on Welfare, I saw numerous copies 
of these regulations. 
 
MR. GUY: — Playing bingo. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

49 
 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Oh, I have some goodies for you, Mr. Retread, who is coming down to run.. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — . . . Mr. Scared, who has decided not to run up North. 
 
MR. GUY: — Why don’t you run? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — We might run.. Well, anyway when I was up North I saw numerous copies of 
these regulations, copies saved to remind non-believers that the Liberal Government of that day really 
didn’t care about our northern people - that it did use them as pawns in its human chess game of modern 
day feudalism. 
 
MR. GUY: — Bingo. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Bingo, Oh, Mr. Hon. Member for Athabasca, I am glad you mentioned that. 
You know they play bingo in many places in Saskatchewan. You want me to remind you of some of the 
places they play bingo in? You do? I don’t really think you would want me to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I note the other day, the Leader of the Opposition spoke to a 
gathering whereby he announced that if his Party by some fluke accident gained power at the next 
election, it would probably not go ahead with a power project on the Churchill River. This is an 
incredible about-face for a man who, when his party was last in power, killed the rights of Saskatchewan 
people when they rose against his proposed give-away pulp mill, and the other pulp mill which he 
literally gave away to his corporate friends at the expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same man who literally gave away our forest resources 
to those same friends. It is also the sane man who allowed the fish of northern Saskatchewan to be 
poisoned, in fact in all of Saskatchewan, to the point where in many northern communities, the very 
livelihood of the people, fishing, came to a complete halt. Mr. Speaker, this incredible statement by a 
man who has done more to despoil the environment of Saskatchewan, is really another opposition 
smokescreen to screen what I saw with my own eyes while visiting the North - the terrible destruction of 
our forests, the pollution of our streams, 
 
MR. STEUART: — Ha, ha! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — There they go again, it’s a big joke to the gentlemen opposite. And the 
poisoning of fish, so important to the economic and social well-being of many citizens, especially those 
of the North. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

50 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, if he speaks for all Opposition Members, and I presume he does, he should tell this 
House when Members opposite had a change of heart. And if they really have a change of heart, I say 
well and good because Members on this side of the House have always been vitally concerned with the 
protection of the environment. In fact, it was a major issue in the last election if you will recall - Liberal 
mismanagement of the environment. 
 
And while I’m at it, Mr. Speaker, I should like to remind Members of this House that this Government 
has made no decision in regard to a hydro project on the Churchill River. In fact, a study of the whole 
situation is being made at this very moment. Opposition Members would like people to believe a 
decision to go ahead with the project has been made. This is not true, and I for one, last year, publicly 
stated I would be opposed to any such project on that system. I feel this way because I believe the 
economic rewords would not be worth the sacrifices that the people of that area would have to make, 
sacrifices, economic, social and historic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to things of particular interest to Saskatoon and area. I note with 
pleasure that manufacturing licenses for Saskatoon for 1974 will greatly exceed the number issued in 
previous years. To me this is significant because what it really means is that a healthy climate for 
industry locating here has been established. And for this, I believe credit must be given the city 
administration as well as the Federal and Provincial Governments. 
 
From the latest statistics I have been able to see, it appears there will be an increase of 500 jobs in 
manufacturing this year for Saskatoon, making an approximate total of 5,500. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — A better overall view of Saskatoon’s good position in manufacturing can be 
seen in the fact that over 1,000 new manufacturing jobs will have been created in Saskatoon from a 
variety of projects started over the past 3 years - projects such as Westcott Casuals, Great West 
Garments, Intercontinental Packers, Lenkurt Electric, Waldman & Paul Women’s Clothing and a 
number of others. 
 
And when one considers Provincial Government involvement in assisting industry to locate or expand in 
Saskatoon, one gets a much clearer picture when it is noted that SEDCO, for the first eight months of 
1974, approved 61 loans for Saskatoon and area for a total of close to $20 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, estimated value of construction for Saskatoon in 1973 was over $40 million. Retail trade 
for last year and this year has increased tremendously. The Aid-to-Trade program is assisting Saskatoon 
and area firms in marketing their products. A SEDCO office in Saskatoon facilitates dealings with that 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the opening of a Provincial Government cabinet office in Saskatoon has been and 
will continue to be an asset to the people of Saskatoon and area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

51 
 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I note that no mention has been made relative to the partial or 
complete removal of the onerous 5 per cent sales tax. No doubt all Members of this House are aware that 
this tax, brought in by a Liberal regime when times were very bad in this province, has caused much 
hardship, especially to those in the lower income bracket. Oh, I know there are those who will say this 
tax is insignificant, and for some, it is. But to the average family breadwinner or breadwinners, this 5 per 
cent tax can add up to a considerable amount if applied to such things as, for example, clothing and 
reading material and a host of other essential articles in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that in the very near future, this Liberal imposed tax on the people of this 
province will be either wholly or partially removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should think that most citizens of Saskatchewan are aware of some recent court 
judgments whereby women have been denied their rightful shares in the disposal of assets on the 
breakup of their marriages. To me, some of these judgments legally correct, so to speak, were in reality a 
denial of the justice we in Saskatchewan expect all people to receive, regardless of sex. Now I know this 
Government is very concerned about cases such as these. In this regard, I believe it has shown its 
concern in asking the Saskatchewan Law Reform Commission to study this general situation and make 
appropriate recommendations to present to this Government. 
 
I have read the Commission’s three working papers and recommendations and look forward to 
forthcoming interim legislation which should guarantee women their rightful share in relation to 
matrimonial property. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal to create a special branch of government to deal with 
the specific needs of our senior citizens will certainly be welcomed by all citizens of this province. To 
me, it is proof that this Government recognizes the valuable contribution of our senior citizens. 
 
Relative to our senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that this Government, in the absence of any 
Federal Government moves in this area, will consider some sort of added Provincial Government 
assistance to our needy senior citizens. Why, in Saskatoon Centre, alone, I know of many who, even 
though they might not complain, are living very marginal existences what with atrociously high rents 
and food prices. Mr. Speaker, our senior citizens, most of whom worked hard all their lives, deserve 
such consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt that this Government’s Property Improvement Grant Program has 
brought indirect tax relief to thousands of home, farm and business owners in Saskatchewan. For this, I 
am certain such owners are thankful. But what about the many renters of this province? They, too, pay 
taxes, indirect though they may be. On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, may I suggest that consideration be 
given to extending the Property Improvement Grant to the renters of Saskatchewan? 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

52 
 

Mr. Speaker, I feel obliged once again to compliment the Department of Culture and Youth, particularly 
in regard to its tremendous program to assist various groups to preserve their cultures and languages in 
this province. From my dealings with some of these groups in Saskatoon and area, I know this program 
is well received and certainly taken advantage of. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it is my opinion that these 
language and culture grants have sparked a new interest in this area, for I have had the pleasure of being 
invited to some of these projects and found them to be stimulating and of great value to Saskatchewan. 
So, I say, Mr. Speaker, this Government’s desire, dedication and action in things cultural and lingual 
needs commendation as much as commendation is needed for those citizens who believe in the 
multiculturalism of Saskatchewan and donate their time in this belief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a day and age of almost unbelievable contrasts in the well-being of men and 
women throughout the world. We in Canada live in a land of plenty. We live in a land of plenty while 
others live in lands where starvation and death is a way of life. We live in a land of plenty, and 
consequently, we have much to share - to give to those less fortunate such as may be found in lands such 
as Ethiopia, Bangladesh and even certain South American countries. Therefore, it was with a certain 
amount of disgust that I followed events relative to the recent World Food Conference. Mr. Speaker, that 
conference, studded with high sounding phrases really degenerated into a conference of confrontation 
based on political philosophies, appeasement to certain resource-rich states, reasons for a world wide 
food shortage, in fact, almost everything but what the conference was originally called for to help solve 
the world food crisis. Mr. Speaker, I know Canada’s pledge to help solve the world food shortage was 
significant in relation to pledges and half-pledges of other nations, but I think much more can be done 
and should he done. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I urge this Government to continue its efforts to help 
solve this shameful problem of mass starvation throughout much of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on a neat Opposition trick that almost worked recently, but 
didn’t. It involved the Leader of the Opposition ordering one of his Regina area MLAs to come to 
Saskatoon and complain about the Saskatoon MLAs. Apparently he thinks they are doing too good a 
job. Well, like a good little follower, he went to Saskatoon and while there he had an interview with the 
TV station. In the interview he complained about the Saskatoon MLAs, no doubt at the suggestion of his 
master, he complained, about how the Saskatoon MLAs voted on the two University bills during the last 
session. Mr. Speaker, what he failed to say was that all Opposition Members voted with the Government 
on those two bills. I distinctly remember the Speaker asking if the House was in agreement or not on 
those two bills. Not one solitary ‘no’ was heard from Opposition Members. They were in complete 
agreement. 
 
MR. GUY: — You weren’t here that day. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Are you finished gentlemen? I beg to differ, I was here that day. I believe that 
you probably weren’t here that day. I believe you were talking to a political meeting someplace up in 
Timbuktu. That is a good place for you to go for your 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

53 
 

political meetings. Don’t have them in this province, though. 
 
Anyway, they were in complete agreement with these two university tills. Further on this matter, may I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in the future, the Leader of the Opposition send a man to Saskatoon who does 
not suffer from amnesia, a man who does not have trouble separating fact from fiction; but then, of 
course, whom would he get? 
 
MR. LANE: — Are you telling the truth now, Paul? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Absolutely, Hon. Member from Lumsden. It is in contrast to what you told the 
people of Saskatoon. You tried, but you didn’t get away with it. 
 
MR. LANE: — They are all asking . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — The same way as you did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words in regard to the other old line, unchanging political party 
of Saskatchewan. No doubt you know which party I am referring to. The one that viciously attacked 
traditional school rights when it was last in power. At any rate, Mr. Speaker, that same old line party, 
true to its fossilized position, now bemoans the fact that there are too many Government programs like, I 
presume, denticare for our children, low cost hearing aids for many of our senior citizens and, in all 
probability, the Family Income Plan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of this party yearns for the good 
old days when the rich got rich and the poor got poorer. It would appear that this old line party still has 
an eighteenth century mentality, and it would appear, so has that gentleman opposite. This kind of 
thinking, Mr. Speaker, will not wash down well with the citizens of this province in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a known fact that quite some time ago I questioned the sale by the Federal 
Government of the Bessborough Hotel in Saskatoon. I questioned this sale, at a fire sale price, after a 
very large amount of money had been spent on it for renovations. Well, Mr. Speaker, I question no 
more. Who am I to suggest that certain people had certain inside knowledge pertaining to the hotel? I 
would not suggest that. Who am I to suggest that this free enterprise deal involving a publicly owned 
hotel, was a deal that leaves many questions to be answered? Mr. Speaker, I do, however, suggest that 
there just could be somebody who might be able to tell the complete story, and if somebody is willing to 
do just that, I am sure it would be very much appreciated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words in regard to the eating establishments of our province. 
Now I’ll be the first to admit that, in the main, they are doing a good job in satisfying the needs of their 
hungry customers. But I do wish to make a plea to these same eating establishments for special 
consideration in fulfilling the needs of those who are restricted to special diets due to such things as 
diabetes and hyperglycaemia. Mr. Speaker, I find that dietetic meals and lunches are usually not 
available to the public at large. Now I am not suggesting that these eating places carry a full line of 
dietetic foods, for I realize that would be too costly. However, I am suggesting that with what these 
same establishments 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

54 
 

have on hand, the general public could be accommodated quite easily if a little more effort was directed 
to this end. I bring this to the attention of House Members because numerous people have brought this 
situation to my attention in the hope that a receptive food industry will be only too happy to keep their 
customers well fed and satisfied. 
 
MR. LANE: — Name one. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — One what, Hon. N ember? 
 
MR. LANE: — One of these . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, you wouldn’t know them anyway. You would probably go up to 
Saskatoon again and distort, like you did before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I saw an article in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix where the results of a study 
show that the people of Saskatchewan have a higher life expectancy than in any other western Canadian 
province. The study seems to indicate that the reason for this is because Saskatchewan people are 
probably socially and economically better off than in any other western province. Now the point I 
should like to spend a little time on is the statement in regard to them being socially happier. Everyone 
knows that social happiness is dependent on numerous factors, among them being the various programs 
that become a part of their lives, and I am referring to non-governmental as well as governmental 
programs. 
 
MR. LANE: — I hear . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Right, we are quite happy to do so because our restaurants are good restaurants. 
We don’t frequent the few high falutin’ places that you probably do. 
 
MR. LANE: — Like what? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — We do visit all of them. 
 
MR. LANE: — Like what? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, I don’t know. I don’t go to them. 
 
As for the non-governmental programs, I think it speaks well of the initiative of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, and for this they are to be commended. As for the various governmental programs that 
contribute to this social happiness, I am of the opinion that this Government should be commended. And 
what about those who laid the groundwork for this social happiness in the first place, those who gave us 
medicare, hospitalization, Saskatchewan Power and a host of other things? I say they, too, should be 
commended. 
 
Now at this point you may well wonder why I have completely ignored the period from 1964 to 1971. It 
is because during that period of time, during Liberal oppression, that negative programs were put into 
operation - programs like gouging the sick, like initiating a pupil/teacher ratio, like selling Crown 
agricultural land for ridiculously low prices to their 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

55 
 

friends. 
 
MR. LANE: — What about . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, I don’t know, ask that Hon. Member about turkeys. 
 
. . . Like selling out to foreign corporate interests, ad nauseam. 
 
MR. LANE: — .. Service Printers. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — You want to place an order at Service Printers? You should go down to 1630 
Quebec Street. They will give you some tips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention this nightmarish period . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! A little less interference. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: —. . . in our history so as to remind the citizens of this province what could be in 
store for them if the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) should ever form a government again. I say 
this because there is no indication that he has reformed. There is no indication to show that the old 
saying, ‘You can’t teach an old dog new tricks” is still not applicable, and if he has reformed, I say to 
him, “Welcome to our way of thinking”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to dwell on a few other points. I was going to terminate my speech at this point, but 
I see it is being so well received, I have decided to continue. I am going to give you a treat instead of a 
treatment. I want to spend, Mr. Minister, a few minutes on the Family Income Plan. You can quit 
wincing, boys. 
 
MR. LANE: — Are you getting the . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — No, but you make a mockery of it because you don’t believe that working 
people should be helped along. Admit it, or keep your mouth shut. Either one. 
 
Now the Family Income Plan, Mr. Speaker, was one of the recommendations of the Special Committee 
on Welfare. We suggested that there should be the removal of the extreme hardship clause. And I am 
pleased, Mr. Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) to see that you have got this plan off the ground. It 
speaks well for you and your department in initiating such a program, another first for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to suggest to this Government, a suggestion that has 
been made before in regard to housing, particularly plots for housing. 
 
MR. LANE: — Plots? 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

56 
 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Yes, plots for housing. If you don’t know the meaning of the word, bring your 
dictionary. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that in the large urban centres, the cost of land for housing is ridiculously high. 
There are numerous reasons for that and I am not going to go into that right now. But it is my opinion, 
and these remarks have been directed to me by Liberals and New Democrats, that the Provincial 
Government should think in terms of a land bank scheme for land in urban centres whereby houses can 
be built. People say to me that they don’t particularly want to own their lots. They would like to, but the 
cost is too high. So they say, can not a scheme he worked out where they could ‘own’ that plot of land in 
perpetuity, hove a house built on it, and it would reduce the cost of the house considerably. 
 
I want to direct a few remarks to the Department of Consumer Affairs. I want to suggest, Mr. Minister of 
Consumer Affairs (Mr. Tchorzewski) that your department is doing a good job insofar as warranties 
being honoured and possibly prodding certain companies, but I do want to mention one particular ease 
where a particular widow decided that she would apply for the Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Grant and 
was given it. But the workmanship involved was terrible, and I might add, that she spent good money 
trying to get a lawyer to win her case. Eventually she went to the Hon. Minister of Consumer Affairs 
department, the Consumer Affairs department in Saskatoon, and might report, after a lot of work, and at 
no charge to her, it was resolved to her satisfaction. For this she is certainly thankful. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I want to mention that a representative from the HUDAC (Housing and Urban 
Development Association of Canada) visited Saskatoon last summer and finally admitted what I and 
other MLAs had been saying right along, that some of the house construction that has been going on in 
Saskatoon and Regina, has just been atrocious. He finally admitted that all was not well with low cost 
housing in Saskatoon. I certainly ask the Minister in charge of the Housing Corporation to fully involve 
himself in that matter, and I know that he is doing so at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on another topic that I am sure will be a sore spot for 
Members opposite and this is in regard to political contributions. As you probably know, the Federal 
Government allows contributions to political parties to be used as a tax credit in the payment of income 
tax. Members opposite, a few weeks ago, started wailing and howling and frothing at the mouth and 
accusing us of asking our Members to take advantage of that program. I want to show you the contrast 
there is between our party and their party. One month before that the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald) was bragging to the whole province how they were collecting hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. In fact he publicly stated that anyone who contributed the $10,000 to the plate dinner, or was it 
$1,000? . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

57 
 

MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — $100.00. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Oh, it wasn’t? Oh, I thought it was. I am very sorry about that, Mr. Speaker, it 
must have been a $100 a plate dinner. Anyway, he publicly stated that anyone who came to that supper, 
the $100 a plate supper - the food prices in the world, Liberals aren’t aware of that - they would get a tax 
credit of $75. Well, I ask you, how two-faced can you get? You take advantage of a program, you rake 
in hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars from your corporate friends, and then you bemoan the 
fact that we take advantage of it on the basis of the $5 and the $10 that keep coming in to our party from 
working people in this province. 
 
I want to mention something in regard to what the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) said in 
the dying days of the last session. I believe he made the statement that one day he was walking out of the 
building at quitting time and that he was almost run over by the stampede of civil servants at quitting 
time. Well, I say, Mr. Member for Milestone, you were at the head of that group. You should have been 
at the tail end of it. And I really believe that you should publicly apologize for the slap in the face which 
you gave to the civil servants of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Denials will not save your skin, I know something that will save yours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the people of Saskatoon-Hanley, a grand bunch of people they are, 
and it was a pleasure to work with them. I am sorry that the constituency of Saskatoon-Hanley will be no 
more after the next provincial election. Incidentally, that constituency has a long and glorious history. 
Well, there are some dark spots in it. 
 
ME. LANE: — And you are one of them. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, we’ll let the people decide. They certainly won’t listen to you, Mr. 
Member for Lumsden. 
 
I want to mention some of the things that have occurred in Saskatoon-Hanley since this Government has 
been elected. I give you for example, gas in Grasswood. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I believe it is one of the only places in Saskatchewan where rural people enjoy 
the benefits of natural gas. 
 
I want to mention the river road running south from Lorne Street in Saskatoon to the Gardiner Dam and 
its incorporation into the highway system. I know the people in that area are very thankful. After all they 
were promised this by the previous Liberal administration, but nothing was ever done. I say that that 
road will eventually become very important because it will haul produce from the Outlook irrigation 
area 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

58 
 

into Saskatoon. 
 
I want to say that I am certainly happy having been nominated for the New Democrats in the new 
constituency of Saskatoon Centre. I believe it is going to be a challenge, and I certainly welcome this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look back on the record of this Government and when I look at what it plans on 
doing this Session, I feel a sense of pride in knowing we have the best labour legislation in Canada; I 
feel a sense of pride in knowing our unemployment rate is the lowest in Canada; I feel a sense of pride 
knowing that our education system is one of the best in Canada; that this Government has cleaned up 
much of the mess in teacher bargaining inherited from the previous Liberal regime; I feel a sense of 
pride knowing full well this Government helps consumers with their complaints directed at large 
impersonal business establishments; I feel a sense of pride in knowing this Government appreciates the 
history of this province and is doing something about the preservation of things historic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government has shown its concern for the people of this province. It has shown its 
concern for grand programs as well as small programs that are of benefit to Saskatchewan citizens. 
For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely happy to have had this opportunity to second the reply to 
the Throne Speech. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, we have just heard the poor man’s 
answer to Henry Baker. 
 
My first words in this Throne Speech Debate would be to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that once again this 
year we will give you our co-operation. I realize that in the past there have been from time to time, 
occasions when we differed but we have recognized that you have been fair and reasonable. I found it 
unbelievable when either the mover or the seconder rose in his place and shed crocodile tears about you 
leaving when in fact everyone knows that it was the Premier and that Government that decided that they 
would put an end to the career of the Dean of this House, by sending one of the Premier’s own little 
hatchet man, someone on the Premier’s payroll, to organize a convention in the middle of the last 
session when it was impossible for the Speaker of the House to be away and thus to put a finish to a 
career that has lasted longer than anyone in this House and a career that could have undoubtedly lasted 
much longer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I find their attitude as hypocritical and as sanctimonious in this regard as it is in 
most other things. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

59 
 

Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Motion on the 
Speech from the Throne and I should like first to congratulate John Burton who wrote the speeches. I 
see that John is now receiving $26,280 and he probably hardly noticed the difference when he got 
defeated as Member of Parliament. 
 
I have some interesting material on the mover and the seconder. They did as well as they could under the 
circumstances. I see here a write up of March 18th in the Star-Phoenix, 1974 on the backbenchers: — 
“Young MLA Eyes Cabinet Position”. This is about John Comer. It says: 
 

Given his first opportunity to prove himself in the future this young man has his eye on a Cabinet 
position. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all that I can say is that Mr. Blakeney had better hurry up and make him a Cabinet 
Minister because when Mr. Hill gets finished with him and Mr. Colver I don’t expect that he will be 
back here. I suspect that he will be back teaching school, as will the seconder of the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Mostoway. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I found it interesting when the Member for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway) chided the 
Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) for not having the nerve to run in Athabasca. If the Member for 
Hanley is so daring then we challenge him right now to come out of Saskatoon and come back and run 
as the seat is still there, the area is still there, now called Rosthern. I don’t know whether the NDP have a 
candidate there, but if you are such a fearless .. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He was at the meeting but he lost the nomination. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Oh, I see, it wasn’t his choice. They are running him in Saskatoon Centre in the 
Waffle territory and I should like at this time to bid farewell to Mr. Comer and Mr. Mostoway and also 
to Mr. Richards who I am afraid won’t be with us after the next election. 
 
There is one thing about listening to Mr. Comer and Mr. Mostoway, they will have jobs to go to as I am 
sure they can go back to teaching school. They are two of the best arguments that I have ever heard for 
keeping the teacher-pupil ratio low. When you listen to Mr. Comer and Mr. Mostoway I must agree that 
a teacher-pupil ratio of about one on one would be about as many children as should be exposed to their 
particular intellects. 
 
I should like to bring greetings to Herman. I was up in Mr. Rolfes’ seat and I found a very interesting 
thing. One of the candidates at a very lively convention stood up and suggested that they were going to 
put out a wanted poster on Herman and I thought, well that can’t be, they would never say a mean thing. 
I asked him afterward: — “What is this wanted poster and what has he done?” He said, “Nothing really. 
We are just putting out a wanted poster because we haven’t seen him in Saskatoon since he was 
elected”. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

60 
 

Well, Herman, you should go back. They miss you. I think you should go back and check your old job 
and see if it is still there. I think it is and I hope they change it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found that Mr. Comer talking about the North and the situation in regard to the forest 
industry very interesting. The NDP talked about it when we were the government and about us raping 
the forests. When they became the Government they said that they would change all that. We used to 
clear cut the forests. We would pick an area of maybe five, six or ten sections and clear cut it, they 
would cut all of the trees down. The NDP came in and said that they would change all that, they would 
select cut. So instead of picking an area of five or ten sections and cutting all the trees down, they now 
select an area of 10 or 15 sections and cut all the trees down. It is exactly the same thing, there has been 
no difference. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — It is amazing when I go to Prince Albert that the pulp mill is still there, still owned 
70 per cent by Parsons and Whittemore. It still smells, as I can still smell it when I go up there, but 
suddenly the NDP can’t smell it anymore. No, their sense of smell has suddenly disappeared. It is not 
polluting the river; it is exactly the same pulp mill, the same ownership, cutting the trees down the same 
way, everything exactly the same way only now the NDP have some control over it. If it had been such a 
disaster, why in three-and-one-half years hasn’t Mr. Blakeney or the NDP moved in to do something 
about it? I suggest that Mr. Blakeney and the NDP know that it is one of the best deals that was ever 
made by any government at any time in the history of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — In fact it was a 30 per cent share that we paid $1.5 million for. When you add the 
subsidy we gave to Sask Pulpwood, when you add the costs of the roads, you then recognize that this 
year the pulp mill will probably net $8 to $10 million and Saskatchewan’s share of that will be 30 per 
cent. You know now why the NDP haven’t touched the pulp mill, they haven’t done anything about it at 
all. I don’t think that they intend to do anything about it. 
 
Speaking of what has happened in our timber resources, I want to talk tomorrow about what has been 
happening since the NDP took over and Mr. Blakeney announced that there was going to be a brand new 
forest policy. They hired a group called Springate and Associates and they came back with a report that 
suggested tremendous overcutting of the soft woods in northern Saskatchewan. I wondered at that time 
why they did it, what vested interest they have in that kind of a move. I have found out since and I 
intend to talk more about it tomorrow. I have found out that they are the ones who recommended all of 
these saw mills and these plywood plants, and they were then handed the job of designing them. For 
these two jobs they were paid very handsomely, and now I find out that they have also been handed a 
contract to operate the plywood plant, if in fact it ever gets into operation. I say that what is happening is 
that they are not raping the forest; they are killing the forest. At least with rape there is some hope of 
another generation, but 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

61 
 

killing the forest as they are doing, I don’t think there is any hope at all. 
 
I brought a telegram into this House during the Question Period. I found it unbelievable that the Premier 
stood up and said that he never received a phone call from those northern people, though they phoned 
his office twice last week. He never received their telegram. Now if he didn’t, then I suggest he had 
better take a look at those high-priced civil servants he has gathered all around him or he had better get 
up in this House and admit the truth. If he hasn’t heard about it, it isn’t good enough. Two hundred 
children arc home from school . What is the story? 
 
The story is a very simple and a very ugly one. Up there at Ile-a-la-Crosse the NDP Government went to 
the native people and said: — “You can run your own schools, set up your own school board”, and they 
did that. They then took a look at the teachers the NDP had sent up there. Most of them were from the 
South, all of them from the South, the principal, Mr. Adams, a defeated NDP candidate in Qu’Appelle 
Moose Mountain, just in case the Premier has forgotten. Mr. Adams went up and he and a group of 
radicals that he brought in did nothing but cause trouble. So that school board, elected by the people of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, dismissed them. What did this NDP Government do? They were going to give 
democracy to northern Saskatchewan. Instead they walked in, dismissed the school board - the properly 
elected school board - put that school back under the iron hand of the Northern School Administration 
and reinstated every one of those teachers, including the principal. It has become so bad that once again 
those native people, in an effort to control their own affairs, have gone to the extreme limit of removing 
their children from the school. 
 
The Premier isn’t even interested enough to find out what is happening or, if he is interested, he chooses 
to ignore it. 
 
I found it very interesting when both the mover and the seconder talked about the drop in welfare in 
northern Saskatchewan. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, frankly I don’t believe them. If they have fewer 
people on welfare they have just taken them off welfare and placed them in some of those offices they 
have opened up in La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows and they are doing nothing, along with about 90 per cent 
of the other people they put on the public payroll up there. I believe that when the auditor gets a look at 
those books, in a year or 18 months from now, when he gets the facts, he will find that the statistics that 
are supposed to indicate fewer people on social welfare in northern Saskatchewan will be the same type 
of accounting that keeps a half million dollars in shoe boxes, the same kind of accounting for which they 
got their knuckles rapped by the auditor. I don’t believe there ore fewer people on social assistance in 
northern Saskatchewan than there were one year ago. And if they do, the facts and figures show that 
they have just taken them off and are claiming them on the public payroll. 
 
I also found it interesting that they mentioned Wilkie. We asked the Premier for a by-election. Here is 
the Premier’s most interesting statement. He said he went to Wilkie and did a study, and public opinion 
told him that the people up there don’t want a by-election. So I did a little investigation. I wondered 
whom the Premier was talking to because he certainly 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

62 
 

wasn’t talking to the 600 or 700 people who came out to our nominating convention at Luseland. He 
talked to the NDP president, he talked to the NDP secretary and they both said don’t have a by-election, 
you can’t afford to lose four out of five. And the Premier came back - Yes, you have already lost three 
out of four, I will remind you - Mr. Wiebe, one by-election victory. I shall introduce you to Mr. Guy, a 
by-election victory and in that one we tripled our majority and I ask you to remember that, from 12 to 
36. And also Mr. Malone in Lakeview when we took the majority up from a little over 50 per cent to 63 
per cent. Three by-election victories out of four. If you dare screw up your courage to call one in Wilkie 
we will make it four out of five. I find that your definition of public opinion very interesting. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is a sad and a sick document. If you look 
at it for one moment and I intend to consider this afternoon what it does and what it promises or what it 
doesn’t promise. You will find that it is a nothing Speech from the Throne. It indicates either that that 
Government is totally bankrupt of any new ideas, or they are so arrogant and so confident of election 
victory whenever they call it, that they figure that they can just stand pat. So they are about to let one 
year go by and do next to nothing. They are not prepared to meet the challenges and the responsibilities 
of this province as we go into 1975. 
 
What about the North, what did they promise them? More of the same, more bureaucrats. Oh, they 
boasted about the new mines, but what are the new mines that they boast about? The mine at Cluff Lake, 
which was started when we were the Government and the mine Gulf Minerals started when we were the 
Government. There hasn’t been enough mineral exploration go on in northern Saskatchewan since the 
NDP came back into power to account for anything. There hasn’t been one million dollars in total spent 
looking for new minerals in northern Saskatchewan since they were re-elected. It is dead, there is 
nothing going on, in fact then is one less mine than when they started. 
 
How about oil? Well, their record on oil is there for everybody to see. There is less oil exploration today 
than then was three years ago; less oil exploration today than there was even a year ago. Nothing new 
except SaskOil and what a sad story that is. 
 
SaskOil was just given another $5 million and they drilled one hole. I guess they came up dry so they 
can say they got a no-hitter going for them. I want to tell you something Mr. Premier, that I wouldn’t put 
Kim Thorson or Kim Thorson’s uncle in charge of a filling station. I don’t think that they could find oil 
in the Athabasca Tar Sands. I don’t think they could find oil in a well-stocked service station. 
 
They are going to buy some drilling rights and they are going to drill some oil, they are drilling now, and 
I am sure they are going to find some oil because they are going to drill it about two inches from a well 
that has already been producing. This is the best that they can offer to the people of Saskatchewan when 
we know, we are positive, there are tremendous reserves of oil yet untapped in this province if they 
would just set the 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

63 
 

rules so that they are reasonable and invite other people to come in and help us. 
 
When we come to potash we come to the saddest story of all. Not only have they stopped the present 
potash mines from developing and increasing their productivity in their production capacity but they 
have now made it impossible for anybody new to come in unless that company is controlled and owned 
by the Government or 51 per cent by the Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a most serious situation. To begin with we have been handed the opportunity of a 
lifetime in Saskatchewan. We have more potash here than any other place in the world. We have enough 
potash at just 2,500 feet alone to look after the needs of the world for 400 or 500 years. If we went into 
the deep horizons I don’t know how much longer than that that we could supply the world’s needs. We 
are not necessarily the only place with potash in the world. So in the face of this world demand we 
should be seeing potash mines doubling their capacity - and they are ready to do it - we should be seeing 
at least two or three new potash mines coming into this province. In fact, if our Government had used 
their brains and had not been tied down to their own narrow socialist philosophy we should be on the 
verge of developing an industry here that would make Saskatchewan an independently rich province in 
the future. Potash, if handled right, could do more for Saskatchewan than oil did for Alberta in the long 
run. 
 
What is happening? We are driving industry out of here, make no mistake that it is us that is doing it. 
They may say, but it is those dirty Yankees, we are driving them out. But it is interesting that Noranda, 
the Canadian owned and operated mining corporation with one potash mine already in Saskatchewan, 
turned their back on Saskatchewan and Canada and are now developing a potash mine, and a much 
inferior potash bed, in New Mexico, United States of America. 
 
About one week ago they dug for potash in the Province of New Brunswick and while one experimental 
hole doesn’t mean anything it is interesting to note they touched a 50 foot deep deposit running 50 per 
cent K20. Our deposits here run 10 to 15 feet and they run 20 to 25 per cent. They are considered the 
richest in the world. If that pans out in New Brunswick or if any of the other searches - and there is the 
greatest search for potash going on all over the world but Saskatchewan - run into major potash finds, 
then our chances will be gone. There are only so many people with the know-how and the desire to find 
and market potash. Once they invest in New Brunswick or in Africa or in Spain, or in the United States 
they won’t come here. We are keeping them out and we are driving them out. We are losing the 
opportunity of a lifetime and what does the operation do? Does it cause any great pollution? No! Does it 
disturb any farm land? No! Will we run out of potash? No! Not for so long it is not even worth thinking 
about. Will the world demand continue? Just as long as there are hungry people and that is the other part 
of the equation, the other part of the tragedy. 
 
This Government and this Premier wouldn’t even stop last Friday to talk about potash. They are not 
even now prepared to recognize and to realize and do something about the fact that thousands and 
thousands of starving people need our potash for fertilizer. Surely that came out at the World Food 
Conference. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

64 
 

Surely it is plain for everybody to see every ton of our potash shipped to those countries - and they need 
it in Africa, they need it in India and they need it in South America. Every ton of potash turned into 
fertilizer gives another 10 tons of food in those underdeveloped countries. We could he doubling our 
potash. We could be doubling our potash output and making a major contribution to the food supply of 
the world. I find it hypocritical, I find it sanctimonious and I find it dishonest, when … 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . when Mr. Messer goes over to Rome and he says the headline is “Messer 
Wants Them to Consider Beef in the Program to Feed the Hungry in the World”. Mr. Blakeney gets up 
very sanctimoniously and holier-than-thou and says, “Add to the food bank”. 
 
Did you ever notice these socialists, Mr. Speaker, how they are very generous with somebody else’s 
money or somebody else’s products? But when it comes to doing something themselves - oh no! They 
take a dog in the manager attitude. They won’t dig up the potash themselves and they won’t let anybody 
else. It’s bad enough that they are costing us jobs and development and a chance for a secure future. 
What is even more reprehensible is they are actually turning their backs on starving men, women end 
children all over the world right now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, Mr. Speaker, if you go over this Speech from the Throne, what do you 
find for the farmer? 
 
You find the promise of more land grab through the Land Bank, the so-called Land Bank by the NDP. 
Mr. Comer says, let anybody read that lease and he will see in there that there is an option to buy. He 
had better go back to school and read it. The option is not with the man leasing, with the farmer; the 
option is with the Government and they went cash, and they don’t intend ever to sell any of that land. 
 
What have we got for the farmer? Well they said, we are going to refund the farmer seven cents. But 
since they are going to refund the farmer seven cents on his gas, they’ve allowed the price of gas to go 
up in Saskatchewan by 15 cents. 
 
They talked about what they are doing in the North. What about justice? Well you look in the Throne 
Speech and you find that in regard to justice, they’ve promised more police. Granted they are going to 
be Indian policemen and that’s a step in the right direction. But what about rights? What about real 
justice? Well, let’s take a look at some of these rights in this province. I’m going to deal more with it 
tomorrow. I find it unbelievable that in setting up this so-called Human Rights Commission we’ve got 
the kind of situation where the NDP Government - big brother Blakeney is telling people what can go on 
in their own private homes. 
 
We have a situation in Saskatoon and Regina, and many other parts of the province, where some people 
will open their homes - in the past they have opened their homes, to students, for 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

65 
 

example. They are not landlords, they are not running a motel or a hotel, they are not public places 
which people can go in and stay, they are just people ready to open their homes to young students. 
They’ve always been able to decide if they want a young man, or a young woman, to decide who they 
want in their own home. But now they don’t dare advertise. They claim in the Human Rights 
Commission that you people have given them the power in the Act if they dare to discriminate. If they 
don’t take whoever shows up, they can be hauled before the courts. What do they do? They don’t 
advertise. Surely a man’s home is his castle, but not in Saskatchewan. What are the reasons they can’t 
find homes? It is because of this restrictive legislation. It is all right to guarantee human rights. And I 
say in normal public places, in normal boarding houses, people who take out licenses to rent rooms, 
motels, hotels, by all means there should be no discrimination as to sex, colour or creed, but surely if 
you carry this question of so-called human rights as far as you people have carried it you are now in 
ringing on the rights, the democratic rights of everyone in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, you carry it to such stupid extremes that it’s beyond belief. 
 
I have a letter here - two letters, written to the human Rights Commission. Elizabeth Kalmakoff, I guess 
she is some relation to Mike Kalmakoff, you’ve got the whole family on the payroll I guess, human 
rights officer. She writes to this particular operator of a food establishment (and I’ll show anybody the 
letter after). It says: 
 

Your advertisement reads in part “Waitress” - ‘Waiter’. The fact that the job title “Waitress’ is in large 
type is against the Human Rights Commission. 

 
They also get another letter at the same time and it says: 
 

Your advertising reads in part “Busboy” — “Busgirl”. The fact that the job title “Busboy” is in larger 
type compared to the alternative “Busgirl” may to considered as an expression of preference. 

 
This fellow was a little frustrated so he phoned up this Ms. Kalmakoff and he said, “I’m having trouble 
in my washroom, in my men’s lavatory. I want to hire an attendant, can I advertise for a man? She said, 
“Certainly not”. “You take whoever comes”. He said: — “My goodness, I’ll have the most interesting 
washroom in the whole Province of Saskatchewan”. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of funny, but it’s sick. It’s sick. When we have let a group of people in the 
so-called Human Rights Commission carry this thing so far, we are in trouble. It isn’t good enough for 
Mr. Blakeney and Mr. Romanow to just sit there and pretend they are not responsible - they are not at 
fault. It’s not good enough. 1 wanted to see something in the Throne Speech to protect people’s real 
rights and real freedoms in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

66 
 

MR. STEUART: — There’s another one I’m going to deal with tomorrow. It’s a bylaw suggested by 
the Housing Corporation. And that really is a dandy. That will show us something in Roy’s home 
district. That one shows that under the NDP, if they have their way, all cities will be required to pass a 
bylaw if they want to get any help under the Neighbourhood Improvement Program. If your little six 
year old kid of the wrong sex runs into your bedroom by mistake and snuggles into bed with daddy and 
mommy and old Roy moves in with his hawk eyes, God help it the kid is in jail. Of course, in the 
common cell, not sex by sex. If you think I’m kidding, I’ll read it tomorrow - a proposed bylaw put 
forward by a department of your Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did the pensioners get? It’s very interesting to see the reaction of the Rev. Bruce 
Wartman, the man who headed up the Commission. He said he was angry, he was dismayed. They 
didn’t get a promise, they didn’t get a promise of more money, which they need, they didn’t get a 
promise of a department, they were handed a bone. They were just sloughed off and said, “We’ll give 
you a couple of more commissions upon which you will be members”, and some kind of a half-baked 
government agency. They don’t like it and I don’t blame them. And they are going to strike back. 
 
Then we go into health. And I was very pleased to see where we are taking off utilization fees again this 
year. That’s refreshing. That’s the third year in a row that we have taken off utilization fees. I’m sure the 
Premier will stand up and say - ‘we’ll keep reminding the public for as long as we are here’. That won’t 
be long. But you know it’s interesting - they can remind us of utilization fees, but they can’t open the 
Base Hospital. They can’t open that $20 million or $18 million white elephant that they’ve got over 
there. You go to the Pasqua Hospital, you go to the City Hospital, you find waiting lists. What do they 
amount to? 1,500; 1,800; 2,000, they can’t get in. Mr. Smishek gets up and says - “We can’t find help”. 
No wonder they can’t find help. They can’t find help because they harassed the nurses because they 
wanted their own union. But it wasn’t a union that Mr. Smishek liked and there’s an old union man for 
you - ‘solidarity forever’, says Walter Smishek, as long as it’s our union and our solidarity. But let those 
little nurses have their nurses union - why are there 200 or 300 nurses that won’t come to work? Blame 
the NDP Government. Look at the way it treated them. That’s why they won’t come back. 
 
Look at the way you are treating the doctors - stalling them in negotiations. They thought they were 
dealing with gentlemen. I told someone the other day, you walk into negotiations with Walter Smishek 
and you remember this - don’t believe one word he says. He will get in there and he will say anything 
for effect, lie’s an old bargainer and he’s a tough bargainer and if you people try to go and deal with 
him, you doctors, on a basis of decency, on a basis that you will get equity or fair play - forget it. He is 
going to stall you until the election and then if he comes back in he’ll hold you up to ridicule, he’ll cut 
you down to size. You know what will happen, Mr. Minister of Health? The good ones will leave, and 
they are already leaving. You can’t build a fence around this province. You can stop people from buying 
land, you can take away their rights, but you haven’t got to the point you can keep them from moving 
out. The good ones are going. 



 
December 2, 1974 

 

67 
 

Well we are going to talk a lot about Federal-Provincial relations. We are quite ready to talk about 
Federal-Provincial relations because this NDP Government has been doing the bargaining and they 
made a bad, bad deal. Mr. Premier is crying about it, blaming everybody else. Here is a man who says to 
the people of Saskatchewan - “I know I tore up the lumber contracts, I know I seized oil rights, I know I 
broke my word with the Metis Society, I know I double-crossed the SGA employees, I know I haven’t 
kept my word with the teachers, I know that I’ve done all these things, that funny little deal with 
Intercontinental Packers but forget all that, because when I deal with the Federal Government I’m the 
soul of honour”. Now you may say, you know when we make a deal with Intercontinental Packers, we 
get taken, we don’t make a very good deal, we are not very good dealers, and the list of poor deals 
they’ve made is as long as your arm. Back here at home they are incredibly inefficient in their dealings, 
but they would have us believe that when they go to Ottawa, all of a sudden they are hard-nosed 
efficient dealers. All of a sudden their word must be taken above everyone else’s. Everyone else who 
was at that conference recognizes what happens to equalization grants when your revenue goes up, but 
not Mr. Blakeney. I say to him, if he’s got the proof, let’s have it. He’s an astute lawyer. Surely he didn’t 
go down and sign that agreement and deal with those terrible people in Ottawa.. his political enemies, 
that terrible Pierre Trudeau that you can t trust as far as you can throw this building, or Otto Lang who is 
going to do all those terrible things to the Wheat Board and the farmers. When you are dealing with that 
kind of people, Mr. Premier, as a lawyer you get it in writing, especially if you are dealing for $40 
million. That’s a lot of money, even though he is throwing it around, it’s a lot of money. Didn’t you get 
it in writing? Haven’t you got it on paper? You should hire a good lawyer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Don’t tell us that you just discovered those people down in Ottawa aren’t on your 
side. I’ve read every Throne Speech you’ve ever had. I remember you talking back in 1961, 1962, 1963, 
1964 all the way up. You knew they were that kind of people before you went down there. The truth is - 
you got taken. They didn’t break their word. You went down there - you got sucked in - we sent a boy 
on a man s job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I don’t blame them for talking federal affairs. If I had the record of arrogance, 
taking away people’s rights and freedoms, if I had a record of grabbing the land, putting a fence around 
this province, turning down development, if I had that kind of a record, Ii wouldn’t want to talk about it 
either. I would talk about the Federal Government, or the government in Timbuktu. I would do anything. 
And that’s what you are doing, anything but talk about your own record, and I don’t blame you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You’re not going to kid anybody. I want to tell you something, fewer and fewer 
people in this province every day trust you or your Government. And they’ve got every reason. 



 
December 2, 1974 
 

68 
 

The Public Servants don’t trust you, even the ones whom you parachuted in; those hotshot planners you 
brought from all over the country at those high wages. We’ve got the latest updated list of all the people 
in your office and on your payroll and all those people back of all your Ministers are running out and 
doing your political work. The real civil servants, the honest civil servants, the ones who are here and 
doing a good and keeping this Government going, they don’t trust you. How do you think we got 63 per 
cent of the vote in Lakeview? That must have shaken you, because a lot of those people over there work 
for the Government and they voted for us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Do the businessmen trust you? You like to stand up here and say you are in favour 
of the businessmen. You give him a fair deal. You’ll treat them decently. I say, you hate business and I 
say you have declared war on private enterprise. You say, oh no! you haven’t. But what does Mr. 
Thorson say when he is down East and he doesn’t think anybody is listening. What does he say about 
business. Well, the report says: 
 

Saskatchewan Industry Minister Kim Thorson, in remarks at the University of Toronto, on 
multi-national oil companies said: 
 
The time may have come f or Premier Allan Blakeney’s Government to nationalize the bastards. 

 
There it is - Toronto Star, June 6, 1974, he said it, he meant it, that’s exactly the attitude that this 
Government has about everybody in business in this province, large or small. 
 
The professional men don’t trust you, the teachers are losing their confidence in you, even Ed Schreyer 
isn’t on your side any more. I tell you, when you start losing those NDP’ers you’re in real trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is a sad, sick document and we are prepared to debate it for eight days, 
or eighty days. I guarantee on that side if you hear much mention of the Throne Speech it will be by 
mistake, because all you are going to hear is crying about the Federal Government. I remind the people 
of Saskatchewan, you’ve been the Government for 3 1/2 years, you’ve been the Government for 23 out 
of the last 30 years, if we’ve got a bad deal from Ottawa then you people had better be prepared to carry 
23/30ths of the load. You are bad dealers, you are poor negotiators. Old man Mendel takes you, 
Springate takes you, anybody that sits down takes you. Delta Holdings took you and you can’t even find 
them now. You are not good dealers, you are not a good government, and this Throne Speech indicates 
you are bankrupt of ideas. 
 
I will have a few more things to say on the Throne Speech, so, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 o’clock p.m. 


