
























































Hansard: December 10, 1974


 
 

341 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

9th Day 
 

Tuesday, December 10, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased through you to introduce a 
group of 50 Grade Twelve students from Miller High in the city. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Schuett, and are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 
 
I am very pleased to introduce this fine group from a school which is noted for its teaching in the 
sciences, together with their fine facilities. The building has won many awards throughout Canada for its 
unique structure. We are very proud that we have these facilities in our school system. 
 
Miller High is under the Separate School System and it serves this community well and particularly the 
area where I live. I welcome them this afternoon, I hope they have a pleasant stay and gain much from 
the proceedings today. A hearty welcome. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

SPECIAL ANNIVERSARY - BILL 42 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 
request special consideration of the House to make a very small presentation, if I might. Today is a very, 
very historic day in the Province of Saskatchewan, it is the anniversary of the passage of Bill 42. Today 
in Estevan there are special memorial services going on by the Oil and Technical Association in the 
community, on the radio and in the newspaper. If you notice the cake is shrouded in black to 
commemorate the burial of the private sector of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — On the cake it has written “Anniversary of a Tragedy, Bill 42”. I would hope that 
this might remind the Minister of Industry and Commerce, the man who introduced the Bill in the 
House, destroyed the industry in his own constituency, that perhaps he might reconsider and bring in 
some provisions that would improve the condition of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

342 

QUESTION 
 

EXPIRATION OF DCAP 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, I should like to suggest that 
even though Bill 42 may have choked the oil industry I hope that cake doesn’t choke the NDP. 
 
While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce or the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
Is the Minister aware, or is it a fact that the DCAP Program that was introduced in the House a year ago 
to save Kim Thorson, has a Government commitment that expires on December 31st? Is it the intention 
of the Government to extend the program beyond the 31st of December deadline? 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, when the DCAP Program was launched 
earlier this year in 1974, it was made clear that it was for the calendar year 1974. That is to say that 
those people who felt that they were eligible for advances of money under the program should apply. 
Something like less than 60 per cent I think of the people who applied to get on the eligible list actually 
took advances. The latest survey we have conducted indicates that nearly all of them are working. The 
understanding was that we would at the end of the year evaluate their experience by comparing it with 
the last three years and that they would not suffer financially on the basis of the average of the last three 
years, if, in fact their net incomes based on the work they were doing, fell below in 1974. As I say, the 
last survey we conducted indicated that most of these people were employed and were busy in the oil 
field supply and service industry in Saskatchewan. We want to wait until the end of the year until we can 
evaluate those results before making a decision about what is going to be done in the future. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question. From what I understand, is the Minister aware or not 
that the Oil and Technical Association indicates that their position is just as bad now as it was a year 
ago? Is the Minister also aware that some of these companies are already serving notice or preparing 
notices for the 15th of December, because the program expires on the 31st of December? The Minister is 
aware that the DCAP Program is based on the number of employees, the payout and that because it 
expires on December 31st many of the oil and technical service people in Saskatchewan will be 
receiving notice, termination of employment just 10 days before Christmas. I would appreciate if the 
Minister could indicate if he has any plans to meet with the Oil and Technical Association of 
Saskatchewan to reconsider whether or not this program will be extended or are they going to now leave 
the Province of Saskatchewan as their original intention was? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear that there has been no such request received 
by myself from the Oil Field Society in the Estevan area at least. Now whether or not they have made a 
similar request to my colleague, the Minister of 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

343 

Mineral Resources, I just do not know. But they certainly have not made any such request to me. 
 
I understand that one of the difficulties they have had recently is finding sufficient employees to keep on 
with all of the jobs that are before them. That situation I think may well have changed when the Turner 
Budget was brought down. I think all of the producers are now indicating that they have to reconsider 
whether or not they will continue producing at the same rates as before. Of course people in the oil field 
supply and service industry have to reassess their position. As I say there have been no direct 
representations made to me to suggest that these people in the oil field supply and service industry are 
anticipating any more serious disruption than they have experienced over the last five, six or seven years 
in the oil fields of Saskatchewan. 
 

INTERCON EMPLOYEE LAYOFF 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to mention something 
to the Minister of Industry before I ask my question; I notice him sampling the icing. It is made of equal 
parts icing sugar and ex-lax, we’ll do anything to get the Minister of Industry moving. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is he aware that notice 
was given to 89 employees of Intercontinental Packers in Regina and to some employees of Burns Foods 
Limited in Prince Albert and possibly to some employees of Intercontinental in Saskatoon of a lay-off 
during Christmas week, because the Hog Marketing Commission has agreed with the companies not to 
buy hogs during that week? These people, as a result, will be laid off and the possibility of them losing 
their normal pay for the Christmas holiday is very real. Was he informed of this by an employee or 
employees from the industry and is he prepared, if this is the case, to do any thing about it? This is a 
pretty sad Christmas present for these people if it’s a fact. 
 
Mr. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — No, I am not aware of any such circumstances. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — You’re not aware that you have received a phone call, you’re not aware that notice has 
been given to 89 employees here and that the Hog Commission has made a decision not to buy hogs. 
Well, then I will point it out that this is the situation and I would suggest that you look into it and find 
out what is happening because if it is fact, then the employees of the packing plants or a great many of 
them will lose. They tell me that it is a fact that they received their notice. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Leader of the Opposition should seek to ask a question and 
not give information. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I will finish the question, 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

344 

Mr. Speaker. I hope that he would inform this House that he will check into the Hog Marketing 
Commission to see that this is not happening, that these employees are not in jeopardy of losing their 
Christmas money and their work. 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s facts haven’t been all too accurate for the 
last two or three days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — I will take into consideration what he has said and pursue the matter to see whether 
there is any validity to the accusations that he has made this afternoon. 
 

AVAILABILITY OF COPIES OF FISHING REPORT 
 
Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, this is a relatively minor question in the 
manner of things but I should like to ask the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) if he 
is willing to make available copies of the Fishing Report which in a press release dated August 6th, said 
he was going to distribute widely. We have been trying constantly since to get copies of this. I have a 
letter dated October 15, from Mr. Schweitzer, his Assistant Deputy Minister, saying that copies will be 
made available to us as soon as they have sufficient supplies. It is now into the middle of December and 
we have yet to have one. Could I have an undertaking from the Minister that he will supply our office 
with a copy of this Fishing Report. 
 
Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the study was a joint 
federal-provincial study and copies have been forwarded to the respective Federal Ministers and I would 
presume that when they have had an opportunity to review that report and make their comments known 
that we would then be prepared to release the report. I have no objections to releasing the report. And as 
soon as the information is received from the Ministers certainly we will look at sending your office a 
copy. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement. This is once again a frustrating run around. Could we 
have some kind of indication of when that might possibly be, when are we going to get that report that is 
publicized in mid-August as a great product of the Saskatchewan Government and now in 
mid-December we are yet to be able to see a copy of it? 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

NEW ARRIVAL IN TCHORZEWSKI FAMILY 
 

Mr. A. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might advise the House of an event. I don’t 
know whether this should be announced by my colleague, the Minister of Health, who handles statistics 
or by my colleague, the Minister of Co-ops as the result of a successful co-operative endeavour. I wish 
to announce that my colleague the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski and his wife Shirley have a 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

345 

new daughter. She was born this morning and weighs seven pounds six ounces. The family now consists 
of one boy and three girls. I think all Members of the House will acknowledge that whether or not the 
Minister is an appropriate Minister of Culture, he certainly is doing his best as the Minister of Youth. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I think it is worth noting that he is also the Minister in charge of the Provincial 
Government’s participation in the International Women’s Year which probably accounts for the fact that 
the child was a female child rather than a male child. He is doing his bit in that regard as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture & Youth): — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier and the 
Members. The Members on this side already have a collection of cigars in our lounge but I should like to 
have one of the pages take over this box to the Leader of the Opposition. I know the Member from 
Milestone enjoys them and I suspect that a number of the others do as well. 
 
This morning I was not really aware that the birth date of our daughter was on such an auspicious day as 
the passing of Bill 42 but I am particularly proud of that as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

GAS CONSUMPTION AT KALIUM 
 
Mr. J.G. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry undertook last week to report to this 
House at a later time about the question of gas consumption at Kalium, is he at this time prepared to 
make that submission? 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry & Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I have an answer but I hesitate 
to take up the time of the House prior to the resumption of the debate on the Speech from the Throne but 
I will undertake to do it in the House tomorrow if the Member wishes or I can provide it to him 
privately. 
 
Mr. Richards: — If the Minister could table the information that would be quite satisfactory. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Comer (Nipawin) for an 
Address-in-Reply. 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): —Mr. Speaker, last evening 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

346 

before adjourning debate I talked very briefly about the record of this Government in the three and 
one-half years that we have been in office. I talked to some extent about the accomplishments of the 
Members opposite when they sat on the Treasury Benches between ’64 and ’71. In particular, Mr. 
Speaker, I talked about the latter years of their government. 
 
I suppose that in summing up what I said last night and I said that I would talk extensively this afternoon 
about education, in summing up what I said last night it could be best put this way. Every citizen of 
Saskatchewan can take pride in the achievements of the last three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of education every parent, every teacher, every trustee, 
every student can take pride in the achievements in education in the last three years. 
 
In 1971 when we became the Government, the New Democratic Party promised to move education out 
of the decline and out of the controversy of the Liberal years. We called a halt to the practice of pitting 
teachers against the public, the old Liberal tactics of divide and rule that brought our school system to its 
knees in 1970 and 1971. 
 
Let me say first of all, Mr. Speaker, that New Democrats, that this Government believes first of all that 
education is an investment, it is not an expense and that it is not a frill. In view of this philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker, we promised to end the starvation diet of low grants, mandatory controls. In doing so, we 
abolished the teacher-pupil ratio and replaced it with a system of unconditional grants based on actual 
enrolments. These grants may be spent as the school board sees fit. 
 
We raised the school grants from $77 million in 1971 to a total of $120 million — an increase of 55 per 
cent in only three years. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we raised the Property Improvement Grant to 
$160 on homes to $200 on small business to $300 on farms. 
 
I would remind the Members opposite and the people of Saskatchewan that the most the Liberals ever 
paid towards school costs was 48 per cent of total school costs. When you add the 55 per cent of total 
school costs in direct grants to the increase in the Property Improvement Grant, the New Democratic 
Party Government has raised the grants to 73 per cent of basic school costs today. 
 
Do you know what this means, Mr. Speaker? This means that the proportion of costs carried by the 
property ratepayer has been cut in half, in only three years. 
 
In addition to examining and bringing up to date the financing of education we have introduced a 
number of new programs assigned to improve the quality of education. 
 
We have introduced a new kindergarten program. That new kindergarten program has enrolled 80 per 
cent of the children of eligible age this year. Kindergarten is an option, at the discretion of the school 
boards, at the discretion of parents and with full grant support, 92 of the 113 jurisdictions have 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

347 

introduced the program. Kindergarten in Saskatchewan is not merely a downward extension of Grade 
One, but it is a program built on attitudes toward learning, attitudes toward life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have begun a new physical education program which puts new emphasis on personal 
development instead of competitive athletics. Daily exercise is a basic need, just like food, and this new 
program aims to teach students good physical health habits, beginning at the earliest grades, in fact we 
are beginning the program from kindergarten to year six. 
 
Community colleges are another exciting development in Saskatchewan education. The Saskatchewan 
community college concept is attracting attention right across Canada as a new way of taking education 
to the adult population, taking education to the adult population where they live and where they want 
and when they want it. In the first year of operation the four college regions delivered 719 courses to 
over 10,000 people. Because of the success of our experiments that are pilots in the four college regions, 
nine new regions are being established and this year will bring this service to all of southern 
Saskatchewan, including Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
A new program in consumer education, a proposal for a course in family life education is being 
developed. Introduction of Saskatchewan Studies Agriculture is taking place and this program, an 
appreciation of agriculture, an appreciation of farming, will be attractive and of interest not only to our 
rural students, but in addition to our urban students as well. And the exciting features of the new 
program Saskatchewan Studies Agriculture is the fact that we will have one on the farm component. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have introduced the Innovative Projects Plan, a plan to encourage teachers and school 
trustees and to encourage students to experiment in education in the school. 
 
Driver education has been made available at no charge and we have increased the in-classroom time and 
the in-car time. One of the new emphases in this program is Alcohol and the Driver. 
 
SaskMedia, an educational communications corporation has been established and SaskMedia will begin 
producing and distributing new materials, new learning materials to our schools and to our community 
colleges this year. 
 
A special program to train teachers of Indian ancestry has been established in conjunction with the 
University of Saskatchewan. These teachers will come out of the College of Education with a certificate 
which will enable them to teach in any school in this province. In addition to that, for another first in 
Canada, three school trustees have been elected to a fiscally responsible board from Indian reservations 
in this province. In the Govan School Unit, the reservations of Day Star, Gordon’s and Poor Man have 
each elected a trustee to the fiscally responsible Govan Unit Board. 
 
Saskatchewan’s first student bursary program has been set up and provides for up to $850 in 
non-repayable grants to students on the basis of need. Over 3,000 students received bursaries this year. 
 
Canada’s first free dental care service for children went 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

348 

into operation in our elementary schools this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a series of fall conferences was sponsored in 1973 and we held them again in 1974 to 
discuss issues and to generate interest with teachers, students, trustees and parents in education. I am 
pleased to report that several thousand people attended each series of conferences and they have been an 
outstanding success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP Government has put an end to seven years of bitter controversy over teacher 
salaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — We replaced area bargaining with The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, an act 
that works so well we were able to reach two provincial contracts in only two months of brass-tacks 
bargaining. 
 
The contract in 1973 brought parity to teachers in Saskatchewan. The 1974-75 teacher contract provides 
a built-in cost of living guarantee, retirement at 55 with 50 years of service, pension increases up to 40 
per cent, with future increases tied to the Consumer Price Index, a minimum pension of $8 per month for 
up to 35 years of service, and several other benefits. 
 
I say in this House, Mr. Speaker, that the contract negotiated for teachers in this province, the 1974-75 
contract when it is viewed in total has become the envy of every other employment group in this 
province. 
 
The Saskatchewan University Commission has been established, commissioned to coordinate and 
rationalize university education in the University of Saskatchewan and in the University of Regina. 
 
An impressive record, Mr. Speaker, in education in the last three and one-half years. Such an impressive 
record, Mr. Speaker, that the record in education by this Government is apparently a serious cause for 
concern in the ranks of the Liberal Party. 
 
I have here a news clipping from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of last Saturday reporting on the Liberal 
convention. I am sure the reporting is accurate, it might not be in the Leader Post, Mr. Speaker, but most 
certainly the reporting will be accurate in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. This report has a headline — 
“Heated Discussion Surrounds Education Paper”. It seems the Liberals are badly split over The Teacher 
Collective Bargaining Act, which I just talked about, it seems that the Liberal position paper basically 
endorsed the NDP legislation. Anyway, the Liberal trustees at the convention got into such a fight that 
one delegate suggested that they debate the problem elsewhere. Another delegate said he was “alarmed 
at the confrontation”, and said, “the party could lose the next election if agreement was not reached”. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this debate over The Teacher Collective Bargaining Act is really very unusual. It’s 
unusual because the record shows that the Liberal MLAs opposite in this Legislature voted against the 
new bargaining legislation to a man. However, when they took their stand at their own party 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

349 

convention, the teachers present refused to back them up and there were some teachers there, I 
understand, and I’m going to comment on what those teachers are going to do in just a minute. And they 
now have, obviously, within their ranks, a very serious split over the issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time the Liberals have had to hide their true colours cause they are 
afraid of losing votes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the Leader of the Opposition, the Liberal leader (Mr. Steuart) made a 
speech in the Turtleford constituency and in his speech, Mr. Speaker, he promised a liberal government 
would tie provincial school grants to programs instead of to enrolment. Now I commented on his 
proposal when I spoke to the Saskatchewan School Trustee Convention in November. I said in that 
convention that this is exactly what Mr. Steuart did when he was Provincial Treasurer. When he was 
Provincial Treasurer he tied grants to the teacher-pupil ratio and he applied budget reviews. We all know 
what that Liberal policy did to morale in our schools and how it brought cut-backs particularly to our 
small schools, in our small town schools. It turned out that many school trustees agreed with my 
comments, as they were later to report to me. Apparently many of the Liberals at the convention agreed 
with the comments that I made and they remembered the Liberal years under Mr. Steuart’s budget 
review and teacher-pupil ratios. 
 
It’s interesting when the grants resolution came up for debate what happened in the convention, Mr. 
Speaker. In the convention the people ran for cover and what did they produce, they produced a 
resolution that is little more than a “me-too” of our NDP policy. In this same news report headed 
“Heated Discussions Surround Education Paper”, they report a list of other “me-too’s”, me-too 
resolutions, supporting grants for small schools that our NDP Government brought in last spring, the 
NDP action on consumer education courses, the proposal for four-year teacher training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the New Democrats are quite pleased, and certainly I am quite pleased, to see 
Liberals endorsing things that we have already done in this Government. I know many, Mr. Speaker, I 
predict many educators who once were Liberals, in fact many teachers who attended that convention last 
weekend will be voting NDP in 1975. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, there are two other major issues which this Legislature must deal 
with. One of them is the Liberal plan to abandon rail lines, remove the freeze on freight rates, promote 
inland terminals and in particular the plan to eliminate the Crow’s Nest Pass agreement. 
 
Now the Liberals say they aren’t doing these things, Mr. Speaker, but I say their actions speak louder 
than their words. They have already announced the end of the freight rate freeze, and the abandonment 
applications will start coming in on January 1st. Secondly the Liberals have given grants to the inland 
terminal at Weyburn and thirdly, Otto Lang is promoting abolition of the Crow’s Nest rates. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

350 

Now the Members opposite call these federal issues, but let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, when the rural 
economy in Saskatchewan is under attack, when our rural communities are under attack, that is a 
provincial issue and the New Democrats will not let the Liberal Party opposite or the Members opposite, 
or the Liberals in Ottawa ignore it. 
 
Loss of the Crow’s Nest freight rates alone could mean an extra 50 cents shipping charge on every 
bushel of Saskatchewan grain and the cost to Saskatchewan farmers and their trading centres would 
mean hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
Let me just give you an example. In the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood the average 
shipment over the last three years was slightly over 20 million bushels a year. That means a cost of $10 
million in the Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency. Let me break it down to one community, the 
community in which I live and which I farm, Semans. Semans has a shipment of 1.5 million bushels. 
There are 400 people in the community of Semans. That means a loss of nearly $2,000 for every man, 
woman and child in the village of Semans. Where would this money go? Every penny of that money 
would go directly into the profit margin of the CPR, and according to Otto Lang so they can provide 
good service. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals promote this nonsense even though their 
record clearly shows that the CPR takes its railway profits and invests them in other ventures, such as 
real estate, trucks, airlines and so on. We all have seen the television ads on the football broadcasts. 
Abolition of the Crow’s Nest rates will not mean better service, it will only mean more profit. It is 
obvious that this Liberal policy would be disastrous to Saskatchewan. 
 
Liberal resource policy is no less disastrous than their farm policy. The Liberal resource policy is a plain 
and obvious attempt to force Saskatchewan to drop its oil and potash royalties so that Ottawa and the oil 
companies can take more. Mr. Speaker, it is a direct challenge to the policy of the New Democratic 
Party to the policy of this Government to use Saskatchewan resources for Saskatchewan people. This 
Liberal resource taxation policy has nothing to do with sharing the resources nationally, if Ottawa were 
truly interested in sharing, why do they tax royalties paid to the province, but not royalties paid to the 
private companies? 
 
I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that Ottawa already takes $6 out of every $11 on a barrel of oil, while 
Saskatchewan takes between $2 and $3.50. The Federal Government already gets the lion’s share and 
they now want to force Saskatchewan out completely. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan citizens and I include 
many Liberals and Conservatives, all Saskatchewan people are asking why the Federal Government is 
so determined to take western resources, but shows no interest in sharing the industrial development of 
Ontario and Quebec. Mr. Speaker, many supporters of the Liberal Party wonder why their leader and 
MLAs who sit opposite support a federal tax that is killing the industry, looting the West of its resource 
heritage, a tax that is obviously designed to benefit the East at the expense of the West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true, Saskatchewan citizens are familiar with Liberal politics, they know that strange 
things happen, but even Liberals cannot accept the total lack of any principles that their own leaders are 
showing. I can tell the Members 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

351 

opposite these are provincial issues, these are provincial issues because our people are concerned, they 
are concerned about the lost rail lines and Crow’s Nest rates, they are concerned about scarce resources, 
concerned about the loss of $40 million in equalization payments that are their rightful due, concerned 
about paying higher power, higher gas rates to subsidize this federal taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP Government has given sound, it has given reasonable leadership on these vital 
issues. I am proud to be a member of this Government, I am proud to stand with Allan Blakeney, I will 
support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter this Throne Speech 
debate and to compliment my colleagues, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Comer) and the Member for 
Hanley (Mr. Mostoway), for doing an absolutely first-class job in moving and seconding the Speech 
from the Throne. I believe that they carried out that job as well as any mover and seconder has done in 
the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech debate has once again pointed out to the people of Saskatchewan the 
absolute inability of Liberals to offer any positive solutions or alternatives to the problems of 
Saskatchewan as we enter the latter half of the ’70s. All that this Speech from the Throne has produced 
from my friends opposite are the same old tired out clichés and speeches. The Leader of the Opposition 
had a new wrinkle. He tried to describe the Speech from the Throne as a “sad, sick document”. I believe 
those were his words. I am sure that few in ‘Saskatchewan would agree with him. But I can tell him that 
his reaction to the Throne Speech is nothing compared to how sad and sick the Liberals are going to feel 
after the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, today I want to deal with the overriding issue of natural resources. The 
highlight of the recently concluded Liberal convention in Regina was a speech given by the Prime 
Minister of Canada on this very topic. In fact the one thing that stood out in the Liberal convention was 
the degree of domination by the Prime Minister and his federal cabinet colleagues of the provincial 
Liberal Party at the Regina convention. Most of the press coverage referred to the Prime Minister, Mr. 
Lang and the Federal MPs. Now I am not going to talk about the other obvious conclusion of the 
convention, namely the almost total lack of policies to meet the challenges of the ’70s. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — One of my colleagues says ‘nothing’, but that is not quite true. There were some 
vague generalities of, “shedding a right wing image and becoming centre of the road”. Then just to 
prove it, a resolution to ask machinery companies to provide fully stocked parts depots for farmers was 
defeated, despite major farm support because, according to the newspaper 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

352 

reports, delegates felt such a resolution was right out of the NDP handbook. 
 
Someone should tell Regina Liberals that it wouldn’t be the first time that Liberals took something right 
out of the NDP handbook. It took them a little while to realize the worth of NDP programs, but this is 
not the first instance of it. 
 
The convention was full of generalities and if it hadn’t been for my friends in the Star-Phoenix, with 
their headlines and editorial sections, the Liberal Convention probably would have gone without notice. 
Here’s a third page story in the December 9th Star-Phoenix, in which the headline has no bearing on the 
actual substance of the story. Headline says, “Liberals Favor Agricultural Freedom for Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I notice that the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the Members 
opposite applaud that. 
 
Take a look at what kind of freedom they are in favour of, Mr. Speaker. According to this newspaper 
report, they are in favour of the freedom of doing away with the Canadian Wheat Board and marketing 
agencies. That’s the freedom they are for. Oh, the Members look quizzically; well, just take a look at the 
same newspaper story. It reports that a heated debate took place on the floor of the convention. Here’s 
the quote: 
 

The marketing board debate promoted by a convention decision to allow hog producers a vote on 
whether they wanted to retain the Hog Marketing Commission featured a verbal clash between a 
Liberal MLA and a party candidate for the next provincial election. Colin Thatcher, a candidate in 
Thunder Creek riding, argued that producers should be allowed to opt out of marketing boards if they 
want. Tom Weatherald, Member for Cannington said the suggestion would require a change in the 
concept of marketing boards and he was not in favour of it. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh but the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) sided with the candidate, Mr. Thatcher. 
Then Mr. Thatcher, according to the newspaper, said this: (Listen to this, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
saying it all along, but this comes right from Mr. Thatcher). He said that the marketing boards must have 
a monopoly. 
 

The idea that marketing boards must have a monopoly in the marketing of products in their area, Mr. 
Thatcher said, was dispelled last summer when Justice Minister Otto Lang, Minister in charge of the 
Canadian Wheat Board allowed free market selling of grain on the domestic market. 

 
Mr. Thatcher then said and I quote: 
 

I’m shocked at the arguments put forward by Mr. Weatherald. I thought they were outmoded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

353 

Mr. Romanow: — And then, Mr. Speaker, what do you think the Liberals did? The Liberals passed the 
resolution which, in effect, has taken away the principle of orderly marketing and put an end to 
compulsory producer participation in marketing boards. This was the resolution that was passed, and it 
confirms what we on this side have been saying to the farmers of Saskatchewan — the Liberals in 
Saskatchewan and in Ottawa are opposed to the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If there’s anything that should call the farmers of this province to arms in the next 
provincial election campaign, it is the desire to make sure that the majority view of Mr. Thatcher and his 
fellow Liberals is not ever accepted in the Province of Saskatchewan again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, there was total confusion also in this convention about whether or not 
governments should be in the oil business. Some said that they should be in the oil business; some said 
they shouldn’t be in the oil business. Those who said they should be in the oil business said that they 
should because Saskatchewan has a serious problem with declining oil reserves; we have enough for 
only ten years or so. But in the end, Mr. Speaker, even this notion was rejected by the new look, 
non-right wing Liberals. It was rejected. Why? On the very sound, logical argument that, and I quote the 
newspapers, “It’s Socialism”. That’s why it was rejected. 
 
I got a charge out of one resolution in particular which did pass. It called on Liberals to become partners 
with private enterprise. Government and private enterprises to become partners. I thought to myself, 
goodness, this is a new look Liberal party. But when I read carefully I saw that the article said the 
motion passed only after it was amended to read that the government would be allowed to become 
minority partners. 
 
The Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) says, right. I suppose they mean minority partners like in 
the Athabasca pulp deal, where the taxpayers put up most of the money and the risk, but were only 
minority shareholders. I guess that resolution works somehow on the convoluted Liberal logic that a 
little bit of socialism is all right. It’s like a little bit of pregnancy in their thinking, not the same as being 
the actual mother or actual father. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to talk of a Liberal Party and a Liberal leadership that is bankrupt of 
ideas and totally dependent on slick expensive advertising as the sole means to power in Saskatchewan. 
That’s not the important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What needs to be talked about is the speech of the Prime Minister and that all 
important issue of resources for the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

354 

Mr. Speaker, there are three basic issues, three basic questions that need to be answered. Who has the 
right to determine how our natural resources are developed? What is the extent of Saskatchewan’s 
obligation to the rest of Canada in respect of our resources? Finally, are these issues provincial election 
issues? Let me try to deal with these questions. 
 
First, who has the right to determine how natural resources are to be developed in Saskatchewan? Put 
another way, Mr. Speaker, do Saskatchewan residents have the right to determine for themselves the 
manner in which Saskatchewan oil, potash and minerals are to be exploited? Now, until the recent 
Federal Budget, it was generally accepted that the people of a province can decide what taxes should be 
levied against those who profit by the development of our natural resources. That was above dispute. For 
example, when the Liberals opposite were in office here in Regina, they decided that little if any 
taxation of resource development companies should be carried out. Now, in 1971, the people threw that 
philosophy out and elected this Government to put an end to that program of giveaways to eastern 
Canadian and multinational corporations. Bill 42 is in keeping with that 1971 mandate from the people, 
because it says on a fundamental question, that windfall profits on oil must come to the people and not 
to the corporations. And similarly in the case of potash, our policy says that the benefits of that potash 
must go primarily to the owners. Again, that the benefits must go to the people of the province and not 
to the multinational and eastern Canadian corporations. 
 
But when the Liberals were in office these benefits were allowed to go because of their policy of no 
taxation on resources. There was no Federal Liberal budget attacking their right to tax corporations. 
There was no attack by the Federal Liberals then, but now all of a sudden once the New Democrats are 
elected in Saskatchewan, the people of this province begin to witness Federal Liberals’ policies which 
say for the first time to the people of this province that we do not have the right to fix the charge for the 
use of our own resources. 
 
Last Friday the Prime Minister of Canada and his provincial Liberal leader here in Regina, told the 
people of this province that we must reduce our royalty charges. According to Liberals, Saskatchewan 
people are, to quote the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart), too greedy, and we must accept less for 
our own resources. We were told that more should go to the corporations and more should go to the 
Ottawa central government. Ottawa Liberals now tell us that what is in the best interests of this province 
and our resources will be developed and determined by Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just when Saskatchewan resources are in high demand and this province could capitalize 
on that, Liberals once again have asked Saskatchewan people to take less. 
 
Who has the right to determine how natural resources are developed? Well, I say that in the next 
election, Liberals will be clearly told by the people of the province that it’s the people and their 
provincial government that have the right to determine who controls resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the second 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

355 

question is, what is the extent of Saskatchewan’s obligations to the rest of Canada in respect of our 
natural resources? Let’s be absolutely clear about this. This Government is committed, like all 
Saskatchewan people, to this great country, Canada. As Saskatchewan citizens many of us look to a 
strong central government as a vehicle to attain social and economic equality for all people, for all 
Canadians and for all regions of Canada. 
 
Now with respect to our oil revenues or other natural resource revenues, have the people of this province 
lived up to those commitments to this country? Well, I say the answer to that is clearly yes. The now 
famous March agreement between the Prime Minister and our Premier and the nine other Premiers of 
this country, said that an $11 barrel of Saskatchewan oil would be divided in this fashion: Four dollars 
would go to the oil companies, because that was a fair return for them; two dollars and fifty cents 
thereafter would go to the Province of Saskatchewan in the form of royalties, back to the people of this 
province; and, everything over $6.50 would go to the Federal Government to be used to keep the price 
of oil in eastern Canada at the same level for all Canadians. Put another way, Saskatchewan residents 
gave up anything from four to six dollars for every barrel of Saskatchewan oil pumped from the ground 
so that our fellow Canadians in other regions would not be unduly squeezed. That was Saskatchewan’s 
contribution and a generous contribution it was, Mr. Speaker, when you consider this resource has only 
about ten years to go in this province. 
 
I’m sure that no one in Saskatchewan would accuse this Government of being greedy, to quote the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Liberals, if we asked from Ottawa for a few concessions in return for 
Saskatchewan and for our region, western Canada, in return for this price and this loss of revenue. 
That’s what the Premier was doing in January; and that’s what he was doing in March, in Ottawa when 
he was meeting with the Prime Minister. For all the millions in lost Saskatchewan oil revenue to help 
keep the prices level in other regions of the country, is it wrong, I ask you, Sir, that freight rates should 
be changed so as to ease the rank discrimination that we suffered over the years? This is what we asked 
in exchange for the lost millions to eastern Canada. Is it wrong to ask for a comprehensive agricultural 
stabilization bill to end the economic yo-yo for our farmers? In exchange for the millions lost to eastern 
Canada is Saskatchewan wrong to ask that there be no change in equalization payments, Mr. Speaker? 
Well, according to the Prime Minister and his provincial leader in Regina it is wrong for Saskatchewan 
and the West to get this break. They told us so last Friday at their convention. Last Friday the Prime 
Minister was here “to set the record straight”, to use his words. Not only would we lose everything over 
$6.50 a barrel by the agreement in March, but the $2.50 in royalties which come directly to the province 
would not be computed and it would now be computed in the equalization fees for the Province of 
Saskatchewan. We thought they wouldn’t be computed, but now they are going to be computed. 
 
The Prime Minister is clearly and unequivocally supported in this position by his provincial Liberal 
Party. Quite obviously, Mr. Speaker, party loyalty comes first to the Liberals in matters of equity for the 
West and Saskatchewan. 
 
This country must recognize that ever since Confederation, 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

356 

Saskatchewan and the West have more than fairly sacrificed our natural resources and our development, 
yes, our development, in the interests of central and eastern Canada. No one has complained. We must 
acknowledge, however, that it is time that the Province of Saskatchewan deserved a better break from 
confederation. We want our central Government to promote our family farmers, to boost our small 
towns and villages, to help our small businessmen, not to go on a wild scheme of rail line 
abandonments. Is it wrong for Saskatchewan to so ask, especially in exchange for our non-renewable 
resources as the Premier is doing in this resources fight? 
 
Liberals opposite say that it is wrong so to ask. Well, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan 
will support Premier Blakeney in his contention and will reject the Prime Minister’s views on this very 
important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the third question is, are these issues provincial election issues? 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the spectacle in the last several days of Liberals practically down on their 
hands and knees pleading with the electorate that these are not provincial election issues. The Liberals 
say that we want to fight the next provincial campaign on federal matters. Well, that may be so, Mr. 
Speaker, but the real truth is that the Federal Liberal Party is now preparing to fight in our provincial 
election by this resource stand. 
 
I remind the Members of the House that even before the Turner Budget, Federal Liberals had started 
their campaign politically against this Government. Witness some of these headlines: October 7, 1974, 
Star-Phoenix — “NDP May Thwart Federal Policies — Lang”; October 26, Leader Post, “Federal 
Ministers Lash NDP”. (You recall, Mr. Speaker, they lashed when they sat down for their $100 a plate 
dinner here at the Regina Inn); October 28, Moose Jaw Times Herald, “Federal Ministers Concerned 
Saskatchewan Won’t Co-operate”; and now, of course, the Prime Minister of Canada in Regina last 
Friday “to set the record straight” for us, Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask who has made this a provincial election issue if not the Federal Liberals themselves 
in their haste to try to defeat the Blakeney Government in Regina? But I welcome that, because there 
can be few more important provincial issues. 
 
Not so, say the Liberals opposite. They want us to fight on so-called provincial matters. Somehow the 
future of natural resource development is not a provincial issue; somehow the load of millions in 
equalization is not a provincial issue; somehow increased taxation of power corporation users in not a 
provincial issue; somehow Liberal resource giveaway to eastern Canadian and multinational 
corporations, resources that belong to our province and our people, is not a provincial issue; somehow, 
Mr. Speaker, using resources to get more industry for Saskatchewan and the West is not a provincial 
issue. Does anybody believe the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister of Canada? It’s not the 
only issue, that’s for sure. 
 
I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that our health programs, hearing aid, dental care, removal of 
premiums— especially when it’s contrasted with theirs on deterrent fees and hospital closures — that 
will also be an issue. I can tell 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

357 

the Leader of the Opposition that our plans to try to save rural Saskatchewan with Land Bank and 
FarmStart, especially as contrasted with their do-nothing programs in farming, Operation Lift and rail 
line abandonment, that too will be a provincial issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that our labour legislation as contrasted with 
the Liberals’ Bill 2, that that too will be an issue in the next election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that human rights issues as contrasted by 
the seven years of iron-fisted rule by the Liberals opposite, that too will be an election issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But I also want to tell the Leader of the Opposition that resource development and 
Liberal policies on resource development, Liberal policies in Regina and in Ottawa will be a major issue 
in this campaign, make no mistake about that! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Why did the Prime Minister of Canada, together with his Federal Cabinet 
colleagues, inject himself directly into provincial politics when he came to speak at the Liberal 
convention last Friday? Well, I’ll tell you the answer because it is simple. Ottawa Liberals want a 
passive and submissive Liberal Party in power in Regina. The provincial Liberal Leader has already told 
all of Canada that he will not oppose the Prime Minister on this resource issue. Wouldn’t it be terrific for 
the Prime Minister, wouldn’t it be terrific for Mr. Lang, the Minister of Justice, wouldn’t it be terrific for 
the Minister of Energy and the Minister of Transport, to have a provincial government in Saskatchewan 
headed by the provincial Liberals that would be Ottawa’s “little sir echo.” In the next few months, 
Saskatchewan voters will see one of the most concerted efforts by federal Liberals against Premier 
Blakeney and the New Democrats that this province has ever seen as we approach the election. 
 
The provincial Liberals can’t do anything on this; they have no independent stand other than to say, 
don’t debate it. People don’t know where they stand on this issue. They have no independent stand from 
that of their Prime Minister. Their policy is simply one of ‘me too’. Is that what Saskatchewan voters 
want for their province — a party and a government that says, ‘me too’ to Ottawa and the Liberals? Is 
that what Saskatchewan and the voters want, a party that says, ‘me too’ to rail line abandonment? Is that 
what Saskatchewan voters want, a party in Regina that says, ‘me too’, to the abandonment of the 
Canadian Wheat Board as the Liberals passed in resolution? I don’t think they do. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

358 

We are on the verge of fantastic new opportunities for this province and for the West, and resources are 
the key to the development of those new opportunities. But we must manage them wisely and carefully 
so as not to pollute and not to squander. We must give the best possible returns to our province. This is 
vital for our future. Is this a provincial election issue? Mr. Speaker, you bet your life it is a provincial 
election issue, because, as far as I am concerned as a young Canadian living in Saskatchewan, I want to 
know that this province will realize its great potentials for the first time. And Ottawa Liberals have made 
this the issue in the campaign. Only the people of Saskatchewan will determine if they want Premier 
Blakeney to continue his fight, to strengthen the future of Saskatchewan and in the process strengthen 
this great country, Canada. And I say that they will give him that mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, because the Speech from the Throne points this way, it has my 
unqualified support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C.P. Macdonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to follow the Attorney General and 
the Minister of Education in this debate. 
 
One of the most interesting parts of both of their remarks was their great concern about the great Liberal 
convention held in the Regina Inn last weekend. Well over 1,400 Liberals came to Regina from every 
corner of the province to determine Liberal policy and programs. Contrast that to the NDP convention of 
a few weeks ago where 750 or 800 were dragged in. You know they were really concerned about the 
press coverage. You know, Mr. Speaker, the reason there was no press coverage for the NDP was 
because they closed their panels, in secret consultation. The NDP doesn’t want debate or difference, or 
controversy in their convention and they shut the doors and locked then on the Press. The Liberal Party 
is open, as always, opened the doors to the Press and the public and welcomed them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, it was really interesting to hear the Attorney General trying to sell, 
again, to the Canadian public or the people of Saskatchewan the same as the NDP have for 40 years, that 
those terrible Liberals under Otto Lang are trying to do away with the Wheat Board. You know they 
tried it in the federal election; they tried it all of April, May, June and July and the people of 
Saskatchewan gave them an answer. We know the Wheat Board is stronger than ever; we know that it is 
selling more grain than at any time in history; we know that we are getting higher prices; we know that 
Otto Lang is going to have elected a democratic board; we know that Otto Lang has strengthened the 
Wheat Board. They rejected them in the federal election and they will reject that concept right now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Another thing he said: you know that terrible Prince Albert Pulp Mill and won’t it 
be interesting when the 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

359 

Saskatchewan Forest Products come up and we ask the public of Saskatchewan how much money they 
paid of the taxpayers for that 30 per cent share. The NDP say $1.5 millions and then we say to them, 
how much money has the Prince Albert Pulp Mill made in the last three or four years? The 
Minister-in-charge will say $35 million or $40 million, or $50 million, because those arc the estimates 
that we are getting from people in the timber industry. That already for the $1.5 million investment that 
Prince Albert Pulp Mill is almost paid for and that percentage of the whole $65 million and for $1.5 
million the people of Saskatchewan got 30 per cent. 
 
It was rather interesting to listen to the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). He stood up and he 
talked about that Liberal convention and he said, “You know the Liberal policy and The Teacher’s 
Salary Act was, me too.” Well, I want to tell him that the teachers of Saskatchewan don’t think it is “me 
too”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The teachers of Saskatchewan think the present Teachers’ Salary Act is a disaster; 
it is the only group of employees with a mandatory two-year agreement in Saskatchewan; it is the only 
group of employees that are limited in the scope of bargaining the seven mandatory items unless 
mutually agreed upon. It is the only one in the Province of Saskatchewan, in one of the most viable 
issues, education, that is changing every day that will not even let things be discussed on the table. It has 
caused a walkout in Regina; it has caused the hostility and the anxiety and the frustration of teachers and 
trustees. They recognized that it was a bad Act. I ask the teachers and trustees to examine those policies 
that were passed at that one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — But the most interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, I think where the people of 
Saskatchewan will be disappointed in the Minister of Education is that he didn’t stand up and talk about 
HRDA (Human Resources Development Agency) and explain to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
civil servants of Saskatchewan how disgusting it was that he summarily dismissed the entire department 
because they dared to stand on their feet and object to the Minister of Education and his policies in 
northern Saskatchewan. Why didn’t you tell us that? Instead he is standing up like a parrot and bragging 
about the so-called accomplishments of the NDP. Today the civil servants in this province are voting as 
to whether or not they are going on strike and I suggest it is the attitude of the Minister of Education 
when two years ago he summarily dismissed on the excuse of reorganization, a host of employees in the 
Department of Education. Then a few months ago he summarily dismissed an entire department or 
agency of government because they had the nerve to stand up and disagree with government policy. 
Why didn’t the Minister of Education talk about those things? That’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
and that’s what the civil servants in this province want to hear. 
 
I want to talk now and I am glad to follow the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) also when he stands up 
and talks about the resource industry. He said, you know the Liberal Party and the Liberal Government 
was so passive. I wonder if the people 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

360 

of Saskatchewan think Ross Thatcher and the Liberal Government were passive in dealing with Ottawa 
four years ago. There was more strength and leadership and independence in a Saskatchewan Liberal 
Government than any provincial government in the Dominion of Canada. And let me tell you the public 
of Saskatchewan know it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But it’s a new party now Cy. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Yes, you bet it is, but I’ll tell you the independence of the Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party is just as strong and vibrant as ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is now on the verge of a provincial election and Allan Blakeney, Roy 
Romanow, Gordon MacMurchy and that crew over there are searching for an issue to cover up the 
failure, the arrogance, the lust for power of three and one-half years of government. Is it any wonder that 
they don’t want to talk about the Land Bank, the compulsory Hog Marketing Commission, the 
destruction of the oil industry? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are you going, Roy? 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Sit down and listen, you might learn something. They have created an atmosphere 
of fear and suspicion and apprehension among the people of Saskatchewan. The question posed the NDP 
is, how do we divert the voters of Saskatchewan from the mess they have left in this province? The 
Throne Speech is their answer. Attack the Federal Government; attack the concept of confederation; 
resurrect the bogey-man of western alienation. I suggest it is a dangerous course for Canada and a 
dangerous course for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Once again the cloud of federal-provincial relations is the theme of the Throne 
Speech and the entire emphasis of the NDP attack. 
 
The Federal Budget has all of a sudden become the focal point of this attack. Let me quote from the 
Leader Post of November 13: 
 

Premier Allan Blakeney said the new Budget could and probably will have grave consequences for 
Saskatchewan. Speaking primarily about resource taxation and equalization provisions in the Budget, 
Mr. Blakeney said they represent a direct violation of an interim oil policy agreement made between 
Ottawa and the provinces in March. 

 
And I ask the Members to remember, the agreement made in March. 
 

According to provincial government officials the agreement stipulated Ottawa would not levy taxes 
against oil royalties paid to the provincial government nor would there be any reduction in 
equalization payments in Saskatchewan. 

 
I say to Premier Allan Blakeney and to Saskatchewan people that 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

361 

those statements are false, misleading and deceitful. 
 
Let me take them one at a time — first, equalization payments to Saskatchewan. Let me begin by 
quoting from the speech of Premier Blakeney in this Legislature last Wednesday, December 4th, 1974 
and I quote: 
 

The Budget changes the agreements on equalization reached in March. These changes do not affect 
Ontario, do not affect Alberta, do not affect British Columbia. They mean more money for Manitoba, 
Quebec and the four Atlantic provinces. Only one province loses by these changes — Saskatchewan. 

 
Now I ask all the Members of the House and the Press to return to the report to the Legislature of Allan 
Blakeney on March 28, 1974, the day following his return from the federal-provincial conference on 
March 27th, the day after the meeting in Ottawa. Let me quote his statement on equalization payments 
and the amount that he obtained for Saskatchewan and it is a quote directly from Hansard. I asked the 
Press to look it up: 
 

And while I cannot predict what this benefit may bring to Saskatchewan since I do not know where 
our income will stand during the next fifteen months, including oil income, as measured against the 
Canadian average, our very rough estimate is that the benefit will mean that we will preserve our 
entitlement to perhaps $100 million of equalization payments which we would otherwise have lost. 

 
I repeat, “Preserve our entitlement to $100 million of equalization payments”. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — No, that we otherwise have lost . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Let’s listen very carefully, don’t get excited, Mr. Premier. Don’t get excited let me 
read the report of Mr. Trudeau in the House of Commons on March 28th, simultaneously, as the Premier 
was standing up in the Legislature of Saskatchewan. And let me repeat what he said: 
 

While the revenue taken into capital funds would not be subject to equalization the Federal 
Government will of course pay equalization respecting any oil revenues that go into general funds. We 
calculate our added equalization payments will likely be something over $100 million. 

 
In Regina, Allan Blakeney says $100 million, in Ottawa Trudeau says $100 million. Now last March, 
the Premier did not deny that equalization payments would drop or change. This is the principle of 
equalization. They are measured on the national average and vary from year to year. 
 
No one can question that grain income, resource income has risen dramatically and our equalization 
payments would vary accordingly. His argument was not the change in equalization payments, but that 
he personally had made a good deal for Saskatchewan in preserving $100 million and a protective 
shelter 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

362 

for fifteen months from any dramatic drop due to vast oil revenues accruing to Saskatchewan. 
 
He returned to the acclaim of the NDP. Member after Member stood up and talked about $100 million in 
equalization as a good deal for Saskatchewan, bragging about the good deal made in Ottawa. He, Allan 
Blakeney had preserved equalization payments to Saskatchewan at $100 million. Now, six months later, 
the tune has changed. It was a good deal in March, it’s a bad deal in December. What was a personal 
victory in March, is a double cross in December. What was good for Saskatchewan in March, is a 
disaster in December. What was good negotiation in March, was a slap in the face in December. What 
was good for Canada in March, is now an attack against poor little Saskatchewan by those terrible 
Federal Liberals in December. 
 
Some very important questions arise for Members of this House. Is Allan Blakeney telling the truth? Is 
the NDP jeopardizing confederation for cheap political gain? Is the Premier of this province deliberately 
distorting the facts on the eve of an election? Is the NDP frightened of their own record and deliberately 
manufacturing a phony issue? The Prime Minister of Canada has challenged the Premier on his 
statements. He states, as does Allan Blakeney, that the agreement on March 27th provided 
Saskatchewan with $100 million in equalization payments. Both appear to agree on that fact. He also 
states that the Budget brought down by John Turner increases those equalization payments to $107 
million, approximately. Not $40 million less, but $6 million more. In addition, he says the protective 
shelter will be in effect for three years instead of fifteen months. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read that in 
the report for the House of Commons of the Prime Minister last Wednesday: 
 

Indeed, to protect the province absolutely from any decline in equalization payments would have made 
a mockery out of the equalization system. Finally, I should note that the benefits to Saskatchewan 
from the Budget proposal concerning equalization will apply for three fiscal years, whereas the March 
understanding would apply for only fifteen months. 

 
This, in itself, Mr. Speaker, could mean millions of dollars in equalization payments for Saskatchewan 
over the additional 21 months. But the effect is to improve our position, not to reduce it. I challenge 
Allan Blakeney to stand up in this House and deny these figures. I challenge the NDP to put forth these 
figures for the scrutiny of all Canadians to contradict their statements. Allan Blakeney had made a direct 
attack on Canadianism for the cheap political benefit of the NDP provincial election. I say it is a cheap, 
unwarranted attack, a distortion of the truth and that Canadians have a right to know the truth. 
 
Now let me turn to Premier Blakeney’s second area of attack on the Budget and its effect on 
Saskatchewan, “the disallowance of royalties as a deduction in computing Federal corporation taxes”. 
Isn’t it interesting that the Attorney General, who just sat down, talked about what the Saskatchewan 
Government lost, he talked about the greed of the Saskatchewan Government in wanting their share on 
100 per cent surcharge, but he never once mentioned the Saskatchewan private section of the oil 
industry. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

363 

First, let me say that I believe this is a deliberate attempt by Allan Blakeney to camouflage the real issue 
in Saskatchewan — Bill 42 and its impact on the Saskatchewan oil industry. I want to begin my remarks 
by reviewing what has happened in Saskatchewan. 
 
December 10th is a significant day in the history of Saskatchewan. It is the anniversary of the passing of 
Bill 42 by this Legislature, one year ago. Today in Estevan and southeastern Saskatchewan, the oil and 
technical workers are commemorating that anniversary in a memorial service by reminding all of the 
people of that area just what has happened since that historic date. By radio and newspaper advertising, 
they are reminding the people of Estevan that their friends and neighbours are no longer living in their 
community. They are warning the people of Estevan that if things do not change immediately many 
more will be leaving their city to find work in other parts of Canada and the United States. They are 
reminding the people of the greed, arrogance and vicious attack on their industry that has destroyed 
future oil exploration and development in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill was a clever, diabolical scheme of the NDP to take over the oil industry in Saskatchewan. The 
plot was so clever that they couldn’t be accused of expropriation, they just confiscated it by excessive 
taxation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — For the desire to satisfy their political philosophy, they have jeopardized the 
energy supply of Saskatchewan citizens for years to come. With only six or seven years supply and little 
or no exploration to find new reserves, it could well cost the consumers and citizens of Saskatchewan 
millions of dollars in increased prices in years to come. The most damning indictment against Bill 42 is 
that fact that it is one of the most anti-Canadian, anti-Saskatchewan pieces of legislation ever introduced 
in this House. For a party that preaches anti-American investment for years, Bill 42 deliberately drives 
Canadians and Saskatchewan citizens out of the oil industry and leaves it to the multinational 
corporation. 
 
Let me prove my point. Somebody over there says, “Oh’. Go talk to the little Saskatchewan oil men. 
First, it treats all investors equally. The multinational corporation which has most of the production and 
the lion’s share of the revenue is treated in exactly the same fashion as the small struggling 
Saskatchewan oil man with one well. The Minister for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) knows that is true in 
his area. Second, the large corporation that has the vast majority of the production has had its returns cut 
to a minimum, no question. Its profit is reduced to such an extent that it is discouraged to explore and 
develop in Canada. 
 
They are now avoiding Saskatchewan like the plague but they will continue to produce with little or no 
exploration other than the 33 cents incentive and some of them are not even taking that up. But the small 
Saskatchewan company that wants to explore is now, in many cases, in a net loss position with a cash 
flow so small it cannot generate the capital required for any new drilling. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

364 

Let me give you some examples. The American capital that originated the oil industry in this country 
used tax dollars that could be written off their American corporation tax. The Canadian investor used his 
own personal savings and borrowed capital from the United States or other sources that have now 
completely dried up. Do you know that Canadian banks are even refusing production loans in 
Saskatchewan because of the political climate and the low cash flow. There is no differential in royalty 
rates for the high production wells of 100,000 or 200,000 barrels a year of the large corporation or the 
small marginal well that is often faced with high operating costs because of water and other difficulties. 
They are exactly the same. It is quickly and surely driving them out of Saskatchewan. The 33 cent 
holdback to encourage drilling supplies enough revenue for the large corporation or the large producer 
to drill a well completely at the cost of the 33 cent holdback. Some large companies have built up a 
revenue for drilling of hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 
The small operator, without large production, must take the incentive grant — one-third cash grant — 
but they lose their 33 cents incentive. They then must go out and borrow the other 66 2/3 per cent. This 
capital is not available and they can’t even drill if they so want. It is vicious discrimination against the 
small operator, the Saskatchewan companies, the Canadian companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — But the most significant aspect, Mr. Speaker, is the greed. The NDP is actually 
forcing many small operators to operate at a loss and prohibits them from closing down because of 
severe penalties included in Bill 42. 
 
Let me give you an example. Most Saskatchewan wells’ production is 50 barrels a day or less. It costs 
approximately $60,000 to drill a well at 4,000 feet in the Mississippian zone. It then increases the cost of 
that well to $100,000 to put it in production. Now let us take the royalty structure and apply it to this 
small marginal well, producing 1,000 barrels a month, like hundreds of Saskatchewan wells. I checked 
with the Department of Mineral Resources yesterday and I asked them to calculate the royalties paid and 
the revenues. The revenues 1,000 x $6.50, it would vary of course depending on the type of oil, revenue 
$6,500. The regular royalty — $850.00; surcharge $2,603; road allowance $65, for a total of $3,518. 
The operating costs anywhere from $500 to $1,000, particularly the marginal wells with a heavy water 
problem. This leaves the operator $1,900 before taxes. He has paid no interest on his borrowed capital, 
none whatsoever. How can the operator pay for his investment? How can he achieve a cash flow to 
permit him to continue drilling in Saskatchewan? How can he pay the interest on the borrowed capital? 
This would leave him completely bankrupt. 
 
Let me just table a document for a small oil producer in Saskatchewan indicating his rate of return on a 
small well in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is unbelievable. It was given to me by Monaco Petroleum of 
Calgary, which owns 17 per cent of a well in southeastern Saskatchewan — 220 barrels a month. Total 
cash flow $1,331; total royalties — $734; operating expenses $596. Do you know what this leaves the 
oil company, 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

365 

$94 a month. Do you know how much he gets for his 17 per cent of that well? $15. Now if anybody 
wants to call Mr. White of Monaco Petroleums, he would be glad to discuss it with any Cabinet 
Minister, or any member of the Press. 
 
Let me table another report from another oil company. I am not going to tell you who this oil company 
is, but I should like to tell you this: this is not a document that is secret to the NDP. This is the whole 
context and this is only the summary, to show that out of production of 68,000 barrels, with a total 
revenue of $349,000, from the 1st of January to the end of June, a $5.12 average per barrel, they lost 
$13,000 in operating costs plus depreciation, $61,000. Here is the total document with a letter to the 
Department of Mineral Resources in Saskatchewan. If you want to go to the department, you can get this 
report indicating the detailed accounting of extraordinary transportation costs because of no pipe lines, 
all extra for each individual well subject to the scrutiny of the Department of Mineral Resources in every 
case. Here’s another man with 68,000 barrels producing at a loss in Saskatchewan. 
 
As one operator put it, “I don’t care about the Turner Budget, the NDP gets it all anyway”. What is the 
result of this kind of greed and this deliberate attempt to drive the Canadian out of the oil business in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have here the CPA — Nickle’s Daily Oil Bulletin. Do you know what it says, the 
estimates for 1974 in comparison to 1973. For the development footage drilled in thousands of feet — 
1973 — 1,444; for 1974 — 519. For exploration footage drilled in 1973 — 339 in thousands of feet, 
compared to 274 in 1974. The oil business has all but dried up in Saskatchewan. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what they have replaced this with. I have an interesting story 
to tell you and this story involves SaskOil. They introduced their own Crown corporation, SaskOil. They 
have given them $10 million of the taxpayers’ money, interest free to bid against an oil company with 
their own money. But you know there is an interesting story coming out of the oil patch that illustrates 
the inefficiency and stupidity of SaskOil. It tells the story far better than I can. Most of all, SaskOil is 
trying to convince the people of Saskatchewan that it is a good investment, they have got to get a 
producer, they have got to get a well. So the story goes like this: 
 
SaskOil drilled a well at Midale on land 3-10-6-10-W2nd. You people go and check into that. This well 
was drilled on land offset by production in three directions by producers taking oil from the Midale 
zone. It should have been a sure winner. This zone was reported dry by SaskOil. They then tested the 
underlying Frobisher zone which flowed oil. Blake Koecheritz of SaskOil called Regina to receive some 
instructions. These were: don’t stop the flow. Get a publicity crew out to the wellsite with cameras for 
public consumption. The well was allowed to flow for three to four hours against every good oil field 
technical practice. As a result, the pipe became stuck and a $20,000 testing tool was stuck down the 
hole. The additional cost to recover the pipe was estimated at $2,500 a day or anywhere from $17,000 to 
$25,000 because the rig stayed on that for seven days. The rig broke down and they had to go to Calgary 
for equipment. It is the most expensive piece of 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

366 

advertising that the NDP or SaskOil will ever do. 
 
You know the NDP are talking about SaskOil coming to Crown corporations. I object. I tell you if they 
do I am going to move a motion to bring Regent Drilling, A & A Coring, Johnson Testing, the 
superintendent, the tool pushers, the mud suppliers for that well and bring them before the Crown 
Corporation Committee and let them tell the story. And I am very, very anxious to see if the NDP will 
support that motion and the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, it is a typical example of Government in efficiency and the 
intervention into the private sector of this economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk again about the DCAP program. Mr. Speaker, this DCAP program that 
comes to an end this month tells in a nutshell the disastrous story of SaskOil and Bill 42. In addition all 
of us are aware of what is happening to the Saskatchewan Oil and Technical Workers Association. 
Skilled professionals, drilling equipment, technical personnel are leaving Saskatchewan daily because of 
a lack of activity in the oil patch. It well could take 20 years to restore the service industry to the oil 
fields in this province. In addition the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are laying out hundreds of thousands 
of dollars in this infamous DCAP program. The program the NDP imposed on Saskatchewan in order to 
save what remained of the service industry and most important to save Kim Thorson’s neck. To add to 
this tragedy this DCAP program comes to an end December 31st. I have learned that other service 
companies are already registering in North Dakota, other companies are preparing to give notice to their 
employees because of the uncertainty of the future of this program. 
 
Another discrimination against the small operator and Canadian companies is that the well drilled two 
years ago suffers the same fate as the well in operation for ten years in the royalty structure. Ten years! 
In other words, a well drilled ten years ago could have achieved payout five or six years ago and a well 
drilled two years ago may never achieve payout because of the capital invested under the current royalty 
structure. This does not take into consideration the risk involved. The same producer may have drilled 
five dry holes and have hopes of recovering his investment from the producing well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for a moment let me turn to the Federal tax proposals. I will not advance the 
argument of my colleague, the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) to justify their position. I thought he 
put it in a nutshell. Suffice it is to say, the Federal Government, through tax incentives, encourages the 
development of the Canadian Oil Industry and make no mistake, that is a fact. It was paid for at the 
expense of all Canadians who received little tax revenue during the development period and the people 
who screamed the loudest about the rip-off were the NDP. The provinces, on the other hand, collected 
hundreds of millions through royalties and other tax forms. The Federal Government is now attempting 
to collect some of that money back when prices have risen to the current high level. 
 
The NDP have deliberately attempted to shut out federal 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

367 

taxation by their 100 per cent surcharge. The result has been a constitutional conflict. But let us be clear. 
No one questions the right of the Federal Government to tax corporations. No one questions the right of 
the provinces to tax resources. What is the question, is the right of using 100 per cent royalty as a device 
to provide the Federal Government with a drastically reduced percentage of corporate income. While the 
debate goes on, the industry is caught in the middle and is now suffering an operating loss in 
Saskatchewan. Let me quote from some research done by another oil company which indicates that they 
are losing as much as 13 per cent a barrel, 19 per cent a barrel, over 20 per cent a barrel in all the pay 
zones in the Province of Saskatchewan — Reed Lake, Steelman, Weyburn, Workman, Parkman — and 
everybody knows that when the Federal Budget provisions are applied every oil producer in 
Saskatchewan, big or small, will be operating at a loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Federal Budget did soften its approach. The Alberta Government has indicated it will 
take some new initiatives. The NDP in Saskatchewan have been silent. No new initiatives have been 
offered the industry. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the NDP do not care if the oil industries go belly up. 
This is their plan and the sooner the better. And, Mr. Speaker, I call on the NDP to sit down with the 
industry and provide assurance that they will not suffer because of the greedy dog-in-the-manger 
attitude. 
 
Now let me turn very briefly to the third provision in the Federal Budget, the taxing of natural gas at the 
going market price. The Budget introduced this provision to prevent provinces from escaping the new 
royalty provisions by converting royalties to profits. In other words, controlling the wellhead price of 
gas to the provincial marketing agency at an artificially low price and then selling it on the export or 
domestic markets at a high price. By low wellhead prices and high retail prices, the provincial marketing 
agency would eliminate the new royalty provisions in the Budget. 
 
The Budget allows the Federal Government to tax these gas companies at what they consider the true 
value of the product. I say this measure was not designed to prohibit the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation from selling cheap gas to Saskatchewan citizens. I also say that if the net effect is that it 
does force up the price of gas to our customers, I will oppose this measure with all my vigour. Dave 
Steuart has already expressed this feeling of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party on this issue. He has told 
Ottawa in no uncertain terms that we will oppose this provision. He has asked the Federal Government 
to clarify the position of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, for the only time that I can ever remember, I stand on the same side as the 
NDP. But I will also say that we as a Saskatchewan Liberal Party will continue to fight to prevent this 
provision of the Budget from having derogatory impact upon Saskatchewan gas consumers. And not 
only that, after watching Allan Blakeney’s performance for the last few months in the oil resource 
industry field I suggest he leave the negotiations to Dave Steuart and then we will protect the consumers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

368 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, my time is up and I am sure that you can see by my remarks that I 
will oppose the motion and support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure in joining this 
debate. I should like first of all to compliment the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply, the 
Member for Nipawin and the Member for Hanley. I think that they did a very workman-like job in this 
and they are a credit to both their constituencies in the work and the thought that went into these two 
good speeches. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was here when the Leader of the Opposition was leading off with his remarks and 
he said that the Government of Saskatchewan of these times is ashamed of our record. Well, I should 
like to say a few things today if I may, Sir, about that record. 
 
You know I have spent a little time going back through Hansard somewhat and one thing I noticed in the 
1971 Speech from the Throne Debate, Mr. Thatcher, the Premier at the time could scarcely contain his 
good humour about this “New Deal for People” book, the booklet that was being distributed throughout 
Saskatchewan by the New Democratic Party at the time. Well, I may say, he laughed and laughed. He 
said that it could be “Allan’s Manifesto” and he went to great lengths to point out just how it could not 
be fulfilled, it was just absolutely ridiculous, it was a laugh. Well, I want to tell the Hon. Members 
opposite and the people of Saskatchewan know very well that it is no longer a joke. We have fulfilled 
those promises in that “New Deal for People” that we promised, that is to all intents and purposes they 
are fulfilled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — This in itself is a record of which I am proud. 
 
One thing that I am especially proud of, Mr. Speaker, is in regard to what we have done in the 
Department of Agriculture. You know the farmers of this province know that this Government is going 
to do what it can to help the farmers of Saskatchewan. They have confidence in us because they can see 
what is taking place. 
 
Our Land Bank has helped retiring farmers to get a fair price for their land and has also helped young 
farmers to get started without having the land grabbed up by the larger land owners, where it was going 
before we had the Land Bank. There was just no way when an older farmer wanted to retire. The only 
ones who could buy land from him were those people who were financed, the larger farmers. The bigger 
farms kept getting bigger and the older farmers were selling out and there was just nothing to stop this 
trend. But the Land Bank has stepped in and to the extent that they have acted they have been quite 
successful in helping the transition of the land from the older generation to the young farmer starting up. 
 
I want to say that the FarmStart program has also helped 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

369 

young farmers to get going into livestock, not just encouraged them but has actually helped them. This 
has helped to keep the young farmer on the land and keep more young farmers going into farming. 
Instead of just having to add farm to farm and acre to acre they have been able to increase the production 
from the land that they have. This, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, has been quite an item and I think it will 
be more of an item in the days ahead in getting these young families to stay on the land. 
 
It is going to mean a lot not only to the farming section of our province but also in regard to the smaller 
urban communities. The reason for being of the smaller communities is to be of service to the farming 
community about them and as this community loses population the need for a viable small urban centre 
in that district dwindles. But by keeping these people on the land it keeps the reason for that centre to be 
there and it helps it and encourages it. I am sure that this is going to have a very good effect not only just 
now but in the years ahead. 
 
I am proud of the fact that we came through with the hog stabilization program. The last figure that I 
have been able to obtain on this is that we have put some $14 million into it. Now that is money, Mr. 
Speaker, that is money. We also have put money into the Intercontinental Packing Plant in order to have 
a packing plant that would be operating when some of the rest of them would be going out of business. 
Some of the rest of them were shutting themselves down with lockouts against their employees, but 
Intercontinental kept on and we have a packing plant that we can put some reliance in in this province. It 
is worth a good deal to the hog producers of this province to have that sort of thing. 
 
Now we have cash advances on calves. I understand that the total figure is likely to be some $35 million 
worth of loans and the interest forgiveness may add up to something over $5 million. 
 
Now back in the days when I sat over on that side of the House, the Liberals over here talked a great 
deal about the benefits of farm diversification. They hammered on it and I agreed with them. I still agree 
with them. I have just been speaking now about the benefits of farm diversification, and the Liberals 
were very strong about this when they were on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. They encouraged the 
farmers to go into diversification. They encouraged them to set up hog enterprises and then the price 
went and what did they do? They said, ‘Too bad boys, too bad.” And the farmers were left holding the 
bag. The young farmers who had been encouraged to go into this business found themselves with no 
support and the governments sat and wrung their hands. 
 
One thing about this Government, Mr. Speaker as someone was suggesting the other day, that we should 
put our money where our mouth is, we did. And don’t you ever think for a minute that the farmers of 
this province don’t appreciate it and they know that this Government is prepared to not only encourage 
them to go into livestock and encourage them to do these things, but will stand behind them when they 
get into some difficulties. This, I think, has been proven to the farmers of this province, maybe more 
than anything. The Stabilization Program and the cash advances for calves are showing the farmers of 
this province that this Government is really interested in them and is prepared to work for them and to 
help them. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

370 

I think that this Government also has a very enviable record insofar as its assistance to municipalities 
and I should like to spend a little time this afternoon, speaking about that. 
 
I wish to address myself to the rise in the cost of living and its effect on our municipal tax rates. I have 
heard some comment across the floor that this Government has done nothing to alleviate the impact of 
inflation on our communities and the ratepayers. I should like to deal at some extent with this 
accusation. 
 
I will not deny that the municipal tax rates have been going up, they certainly have been. In 1965, when 
the consumer price index for Regina and Saskatoon showed a rise of some 2.7 per cent over the previous 
December, the 1965 municipal tax rate average for the province showed an increase of 3.6 per cent over 
that of 1964. The general tax rate rise was somewhat higher than that of the consumer price index. 
 
In subsequent years, the percentage increases in the consumer price index — Regina and Saskatoon and 
in the municipal general tax rate average rose at approximately the same rate. In 1971 the consumer 
price index figure was 3.29 per cent and the tax figure was 3.94 per cent. In fact, from December 1967 
to December 1971, the consumer price index — Regina — Saskatoon, rose by 10.56 per cent and the 
municipal tax rate average rose by 10.65 per cent, just about identical, the rise in the tax rate and in the 
cost of living. The tax figure in 1972 was, as in 1971, a little higher than the consumer price index — 
4.96 per cent as compared to 4.14 per cent respectively. However, in 1973 the December consumer price 
index was 6.5 per cent higher than in December 1972 while the tax increase was held to 4.44 per cent, 
substantially lower than the general trend. For the first time in years the tax increase was only 4.4 per 
cent as compared to 6.5 per cent for the consumer price index. 
 
Again, in 1974 we have only estimates, but the indications are that the consumer price index will be 
some 11.3 per cent higher than last December while the municipal general tax rate would appear to be 
about 4.5 per cent higher than last year. 
 
Now they say we have done nothing for inflation as far as the municipalities are concerned, but I am 
telling you that you are getting the best deal ever in regard to the payment of municipal taxes at these 
times because they are one thing that in Saskatchewan is not going up with the general inflationary 
trends in the province. Much credit for this, Mr. Speaker, has to be given to the municipal councils for 
keeping mill rate increases relatively low in comparison to the consumer price index and in the face of 
drastically increasing costs of items necessary to their functions. 
 
In regard to the rural municipalities, the sub grade construction costs, for instance had increased by 14.2 
per cent, from 23.3 cents a cubic yard to 26.6 cents, between 1967 and 1971 and jumped another 21 per 
cent to 32 cents a cubic yard from 1971 to 1973. Bids received in 1974 are as high as 61 cents a cubic 
yard, 89 per cent higher than last year. 
 
Gravel hauling rose by 5.7 per cent between 1967 and 1971 and then leaped up another 31.2 per cent 
between 1971 and 1974. Screening costs rose 150 per cent between 1971 and 1974 although they had 
only risen 20 per cent between 1967 and 1971. I can go on to say that the price of a 150 horsepower 
motor grader 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

371 

is now 120 per cent higher than in 1961; it is 85 per cent higher than in 1971. 
 
The cost of road construction has also risen. The average cost for a mile of grid road has increased by 
6.94 per cent between 1971 and 1973, but at the same time the municipal mill rates increased only by 
4.4 per cent. I think this is a real credit to our rural municipalities in holding down mill rates in spite of 
the tremendous costs with which they were faced. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the Provincial Government, too, can share to a certain 
degree in this credit. Rural municipalities have been assisted through an increase in the amount of 
money available in the Equalization Grant Fund. This has been in the order of $2.5 million given out to 
municipalities over the last few years for Equalization Grants. Last year, 1973, this was increased by 
another half a million. We also, last year, put another $2 million into the main Farm Access Road 
Program, which was an extra $2 million over and above what had been given in other years, which I 
believe was a real benefit to the municipalities of the province. 
 
We are not on the air now, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think there is any objection to my saying that I am 
sorry that the Hon. Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and the Hon. Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) are 
not in their seats because I have a few words that I thought might be of some interest to them. 
 
One thing that we did do something on was snow removal costs. The winter of 1973-74 threatened the 
RMs’ mill rates with increases as much as 20 mills and the Provincial Government stepped in with 
special grants of over $2.5 million. The RMs paid the first two mills and the Provincial Government 
shared 50/50 in the remaining authorized snow removal costs. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, I was not with you a good part of the session last year. I was ill and was 
not able to be here, but when I did come back it was brought to my attention very forcibly the costs in 
regard to snow removal that had been sustained by many of the municipalities throughout the winter. It 
was brought to my attention by MLAs and by reeves and councils of the municipalities. It was 
impressed upon me that there had been some very large expenditures by the municipalities in this 
regard. I discussed the matter with my colleagues, my people in the Department and they felt that 
probably we should try to do something about it. Frankly, we drafted a proposal, and Mr. Clampitt of the 
Municipal Road Assistance Authority and myself went to the Treasury Board and the Budget Bureau 
with it and the Budget Bureau said that they really didn’t think that this was such a good idea. Well, 
money didn’t just grow on trees and they turned thumbs down on it. I don’t know but I did a little bit of 
battling in the Treasury Board on it and it came to Cabinet and the Cabinet agreed with me on it. The 
Government did decide to go for this $2.5 million program to help out the rural municipalities on snow 
removal. 
 
I felt pretty good about this. I started getting letters from the rural municipal reeves and the councillors 
and I thought that I had really done the right thing. I had had a little battle to get this money for them but 
I was glad of it and I knew that they appreciated it and I felt pretty good about it. That I found out later, 
Mr. Speaker, that I was somewhat in a fool’s paradise. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

372 

You know I hate to reminisce too far back because it sometimes dates you a little. But when I went to 
school we had a reader which was known as the Royal Alexandra Reader. Now if any of you people 
were around then you will know what I am talking about, it didn’t happen yesterday. We had this reader 
and they had some pretty good stories in there. 
 
One they had was about this king who had built a great cathedral and he was very proud of his 
accomplishment in building this big cathedral and he determined that he himself and he alone was going 
to build this cathedral and he did. He didn’t allow anybody else’s money to go into it, he spent all the 
money and built this cathedral himself. When he had it finished he had this bronze plaque put on it that 
said this great cathedral was built by king so and so and he was pretty proud of it. 
 
But when he went to bed that night he had a dream and he saw an angel come down and rub his name 
off this plaque and instead the name of some woman was put on. This happened for three nights in a row 
and he became very perturbed, in fact he was wroth and he said, “Why is this woman’s name put on that 
plaque instead of mine?” He had the police out after her and they found her. She was a poor widow. 
They brought her in trembling before the king. He said, “What have you done here? Why is it that your 
name is being put on that plaque instead of mine?” She said, “I am sorry sir, but, I but gave a wisp of 
hay to the oxen as they were hauling the blocks.” The angel thought that she had done this out of the 
goodness of her heart and not for the desire of praise and so on. So her name was on the plaque instead 
of the king’s. 
 
Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, I kind of found myself in somewhat the same position in regard to this 
snow grant. I thought that I had done a great thing and I had done fairly well. I was quite proud of 
myself. But lo and behold, I found that after all it was not I who was responsible for it but two humble 
backbenchers from the Opposition side. 
 
I have a letter which is addressed to, “Dear Reeve,” from Room 259, Legislative Building, June 26, 
1974. 
 

As you are no doubt aware the Minister of Municipal Affairs, E.I. Wood, announced last week that 
Rural Municipalities would be eligible for additional snow removal grants. 

 
I was very pleased with the announcement because through talks with RM officials I had come to 
realize how heavy the cost of snow removal had been for many municipalities due to the unusually 
large amount of snow received this winter. For your information, I am enclosing a newspaper article 
from the March 28th edition of the Prince Albert Daily Herald. At that time I urged the Provincial 
Government to consider the snow removal grant which they had just now announced. My request 
followed a similar one made by Gary Lane, MLA for Lumsden constituency earlier on in the winter. 
Mr. Lane as you know is the Opposition spokesman for the Department of Municipal Affairs. This 
letter is to let you know that Opposition Members of the Legislature are interested and concerned with 
the problems of rural municipalities and are prepared to do what they can to help to have them 
resolved. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

373 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — 

If you feel that either I or Gary Lane can be of assistance to you in the future please contact us at 
Room 259, Legislative Building, Regina, or by telephoning 525-1531. Yours sincerely, Jack Wiebe, 
MLA, Morse Constituency. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — This letter came to my notice from far in the northeastern part of the province. It was a 
long, long way from Morse constituency that this letter was found. I want to apologize. As I said before, 
I am very sorry these Members aren’t here because I want to apologize to them sincerely for not giving 
them all the due credit that was coming to them. The fact is, as you know, I was not in the Legislature 
last winter. I excuse myself, I didn’t know that they had made these speeches, bow hard they had 
worked and how they had done these things. I just went ahead and did it anyway. I must apologize to 
them now. 
 
I also have a clipping from the Prince Albert Daily Herald. I see that after all it was not I who was 
responsible for this and that I had done a good thing, but it was these humble hard-working Members of 
the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, this Government has not forgotten the urban centres of our province. In 
1974 we implemented a new urban package of assistance to cities and towns, $4.3 million has been 
distributed through equalization and police grants. This is the first time equalization grants have been 
paid to our urban communities. The revised formula for calculating police grants ensures that those with 
the higher costs receive the most help. 
 
Unconditional $10 per capita grants have been paid to our cities, towns and village. This is the first time 
grants with no strings attached have been paid to any of our urban municipalities. In 1974, $6.1 million 
was paid out under this program. 
 
For the Community Capital Fund $47 million was set aside to provide each urban community including 
hamlets with up to $75 per capita over a five-year period to help finance needed municipal capital works 
projects. 
 
The $3 million allocated to the provincial municipal works incentive program has also contributed to 
both rural and urban municipalities and community organizations in maintaining and developing needed 
community services without imposing undue hardships on the local ratepayers. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that through these things we have in no uncertain terms assisted 
the municipalities in holding down their tax rates. There can be no doubt that without this additional 
provincial assistance municipal services would have to have been severely curtailed or much larger rate 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

374 

increases would have had to take place to maintain the level of services. 
 
The city of Regina for instance, has had the smallest percentage increases in its general mill rates since 
1964 in the last two years, .03 per cent in 1973 and 2.09 per cent in 1974. Of the 11 cities, 9 have had 
smaller percentage rises in their general mill rates than the percentage rise in the consumer price index 
for Regina-Saskatoon. One city, Mr. Speaker, Swift Current has even registered a decrease in each of the 
last two years. 
 
Another area in which we are providing assistance to the people of Saskatchewan is in the payment of 
property taxes. Members are all familiar with the old Homeowner’s Grant and with the new up-to-date 
model the Property Improvement Grant. The Hon. Minister of Education has had a few things to say 
about this today but I should like to enlarge upon it a little more. Some say that this is a Liberal program 
and all that we have done is change the name. 
 
Let’s have a look and see what has happened since it was brought in in 1966. By using population 
estimates as submitted by the municipalities and contained in the Department of Municipal Affairs 
Annual Report and the total annual grants made by the Property Improvement Grant program and by the 
Homeowner Grant program we can arrive at a per capita grant figure for comparing with the average per 
capita municipal tax levy for the province. 
 
Back in the days when we sat over there and I had the privilege of sitting over there, the Members on 
this side, talked about tax reduction, after ’64 particularly. In the years after 1964 they hammered on 
this, they made a real case of it. They were going to reduce taxes. They were working at it hard, 
especially before they had Black Friday in 1968. After that they didn’t talk quite so hard about it. Up 
until that time they really pounded hard on it. 
 
In 1966, they didn’t do at all badly with their Homeowner Grant program. In that year the per capita tax 
levy went up by $13.58 and the Homeowner Grant per capita payment was $8.85. That only left a net 
per capita property tax increase of $4.73. They were talking about tax reductions. While they were 
giving that $50 Homeowner Grant in that same year, the per capita payment was $8.85, the per capita 
tax levy went up by $13.58. This is right, Sir. That’s the way it was. That was the first year of the 
program. They did better that year than some other times. 
 
Just let me read for you, if I may, I hope I am not taking too much time, Mr. Speaker, but I should like to 
read to you from the Speech from the Throne in 1967, they had something to say about this. They said: 
 

My Ministers were happy to provide a large measure of relief to the taxpayers in the past year through 
the Homeowner Grant. This assistance will be continued in the year ahead. You will also be asked to 
approve legislation broadening the categories of citizens eligible for this plan. 

 
That was in 1967, that was the second year. It was a big deal! 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

375 

In 1967 the year they were talking about, the property tax per capita increased by another $13.82. What 
did the Homeowner grant do? It went up by 37 cents. You lost a little population, so the Homeowner 
Grant went up by 37 cents. They were talking about what they were doing for the people of the 
province. Per capita taxes went up by $13.82 but the Homeowner Grant went up by 37 cents. 
 
In 1968 per capita property tax was up by $12.77. The per capita grant up also 9 cents. They really kept 
pace with the taxes. You have heard of the two-bit boys in Ottawa but it looks as if the Provincial 
Liberals were running a five and dime store. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — The per capita property tax in 1969 up by $14.70, per capita Homeowner Grant up 19 
cents. Boy! You sure held the line on the taxes. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, my honourable friends opposite started getting ready for an election. In 1970 the 
Homeowner Grant was increased from $50 to $60. This made a difference. That year the per capita 
property tax increase over 1969 was only $3.40 that year. But unfortunately the Liberal’s $10 increase in 
the Homeowner Grant couldn’t quite match it, the per capita grant increase was $1.88. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Getting better! 
 
Mr. Wood: — Getting closer! Even in the year the property tax increase was only $3.40 but the 
Homeowner Grant went up by $1.88. 
 
In 1971 we had a little more pre-election campaign. The Homeowner Grant was increased by another 
$10. I should just like to read a little to you about this. This is from the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s 
speech — well at that time he was the Provincial Treasurer — this was on February 26, 1971. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to an area of major concern to this Government, the plight of the 
local taxpayer. We all know every year more and more demands for services are being made upon all 
levels of government. The problem is particularly acute for local governments that have little 
alternative but to increase property taxes. Our government has taken positive action to take the local 
tax load off property and place it on the broader provincial tax base. This budget will take another 
large step in this program. 

 
In 1966, your government first introduced Homeowner Grants as a direct method of reducing the 
property tax burden for thousands of our citizens. Hear, hear! said Some Hon. Members. 

 
In 1970 we increased the maximum grant from $50 to $60. During the five years since the inception of 
this program a total of $45 million has been distributed to urban and rural home owners. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to inform the Members of this House that in 1971 we will increase this grant an additional 
$10 to make the maximum grant $70. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

376 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wood: — It says here, “Some Hon. Members, Hear, hear!” I quote again.] 
 

As a result the total annual grant will rise to $12.8 million, an increase of $1.9 million over 1970. 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was a pretty good speech. I remember being quite impressed by it. The effect on 
the per capita grant together with the population decline, increased the per capita grant through the 
Homeowner program to $2.36 that year. But the increase in the per capita tax was $8.39. It was a really 
good speech but it didn’t do very much about keeping up with the rising cost of taxes. It seems as 
though the Liberals would have to try again to bring property tax relief to the people of Saskatchewan, 
but fortunately they didn’t get a chance. 
 
In 1972 the New Democratic Government introduced the Property Improvement Grant program. We 
called it PIG for short, so as far as the name was concerned it wasn’t all that much different from the old 
HOG program. But one thing about it, we put some money into it. We also changed the program, 
extending it to owners of business property and to farm lands. We also guaranteed to pay one-half the 
taxes on a principal residence to a maximum of $78. What happened to our per capita figures? Well, in 
1972 the per capita tax figures increased by $6.86. The Property Improvement Grant per capita grant 
increased by $7.20. For the first time we actually reduced the net per capita tax. It was the first time it 
was actually more than what the tax increase was. 
 
The program was further improved in 1973, so that although the property tax per capita rose by $10.87, 
the per capita grant went up by $12.90. Again a decrease in the net per capita property tax burden. In 
those two years we finally got to the point where we were able to give out more money in the Property 
Improvement Grant than what the rise in property taxes was. 
 
Let me remind the Members present that these beneficial changes were not implemented immediately 
prior to an election, as it was done with the Liberals. It was not an attempt to buy votes, but rather 
immediately after an election in keeping with the promise that was made to the people of Saskatchewan 
during the election campaign. It was keeping a promise rather than trying to influence people before an 
election campaign. 
 
Now some of the Hon. Members opposite might say that the figures I have used are not valid, since the 
Homeowner Grant and the Property Improvement Grant are not paid on a per capita basis but only to 
certain property owners. I wouldn’t agree with them. I think that the figures are very valid for 
comparative purposes. But I am willing to use some others. 
 
The maximum grant under the HOG program was $70 in 1971. The maximum grant under the PIG 
program in 1974 is $160 for a principal residence, $200 for a business and $300 for a farm. I have some 
more. The total payments in 1971 under the HOG program were $12,331,000, total payments under the 
PIG program in 1972 were not $12.3 but $18.7 million. In 1973, $30,164,000 and in 1974 this year we 
have some $32,924,000 budgeted. We can’t say yet whether this is going to be enough or how it is 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

377 

going to work out but that is as near as we can say at the present time. 
 
In 1971 the Homeowner Grant program paid grants on just 133,000 applications. The extension of 
grants to businessmen and farmers under the PIG program has resulted in an additional 50,000 
applicants from the property owners of Saskatchewan. The average grant paid is also rather interesting. 
In 1966, the $8 million paid to 171,000 applicants resulted in an average grant of $47.74. By 1971 the 
Liberals had managed to get the average grant up to $67.89, an increase of $20.15 over five years, an 
increase of 42 per cent over five years. In 1972 the average grant paid under the Property Improvement 
Grant was $84.60. In 1973, $129.57 and in 1974 it is expected to be about $140, an increase of $72.11, 
or 106 per cent over the 1971 Homeowner Grant and in three years, Mr. Speaker, not five. 
 
I want to say that this assistance that I’m speaking about here in regard to the Property Improvement 
Grant is over and above the assistance to municipalities which has helped hold the tax levels so that they 
themselves are not increasing as quickly as the cost of living in Saskatchewan. I would just like to dare 
anyone to say that this Government does not and has not moved to ease the burden of municipal taxes on 
the property owners, and we have a record to be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud at this time to be able to stand up and say that I do support this Motion 
that is before us. 
 
Hon. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my remarks I want 
to thank the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply for their contribution towards getting this 
particular debate off to a good start. It is always a pleasure to hear a Throne Speech kicked off in that 
fashion, off to a good start, and which I think will come to a good end, in due course. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan celebrated the 200th anniversary of Saskatchewan’s 
oldest community, Cumberland House. This year was also the 100th anniversary of the invention of the 
telephone by Alexander Graham Bell. Quite fittingly converging on these two dates was the completion 
of a program to convert the last community in Saskatchewan from manual to automatic dial telephones. 
To mark the occasion a well-attended public ceremony was held in the community of Cumberland 
House on September 18, 1974. The official ribbon-cutting was carried out by Chief Tom Settee on 
behalf of the community of Cumberland House. The first local telephone call was placed between Mr. 
Jim Carriere, Local Community Authority Chairman and Mr. Leon McAuley, member of the Northern 
Municipal Council. I had the opportunity to make the first long distance call to the Premier in Regina to 
report that the system was complete and in working order. 
 
At the ceremony, Mr. Speaker, a novelty key chain was given out to those in attendance. Fortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, there are just enough of them left to allow each MLA in the Legislative Chamber to have 
one as a remembrance of this most important occasion to which I have referred. A Page will be 
distributing them to you in just a few moments. It is very fitting and appropriate that this little key chain 
has on it a compass. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

378 

Appropriate I say at this time, because the Liberal convention has just concluded and it is obvious there 
is still a need for more direction in the Liberal Party. 
 
I am sure the little compass will add to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I should like to report, the compass works. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — If the Leader of the Opposition will observe that particular item it will indicate to 
him that he’s not the centre of the universe. You can’t look at all sides, without having to go around it. 
 
It was stated in the Throne Speech this year, Mr. Speaker, that before the end of 1974 Sask Tel will have 
completed phase one of a microwave radio system designed to connect all of the major settlements in 
northern Saskatchewan to a reliable modern communications system. 
 
I feel that Sask Tel should be congratulated for its pioneering effort, against significant odds, to put this 
system in place. The start of the initial phase began in the fall of 1971. Phase two of the program will be 
the utilization of this system to provide regular long distance telephone communications, including 
service to Uranium City over an all-Saskatchewan route. Other communities not presently hooked into 
the system will be added next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have now been in this Legislature for 10 years. Over that period of time I have found my 
political life to be exciting, frustrating and rewarding at different times. In all honesty, I must admit, Mr. 
Speaker, that the last three years have been the most satisfying by way of accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — From the people of Saskatoon and my constituency, I have received support and 
co-operation. I feel that good communication has been established and progress is being accomplished. 
 
Saskatoon MLAs in response to their constituencies have been firm in their conviction that closer 
contact could be established with the Government of Saskatchewan. The direct outcome of this approach 
by the Saskatoon MLAs is that there exists in Saskatoon a new Cabinet Office and a new Industry and 
Commerce office. Both have significantly improved the government-to-government communication and 
co-operation and also have enhanced the government-to-citizen communication. 
 
After consultation with the city of Saskatoon, the province and the city agree that a provincial office 
building will be built in the city of Saskatoon at a site which is happily the number one choice of both 
parties. 
 
The citizens of Saskatoon felt that they should have easier access to the resort area at the South 
Saskatchewan Dam. Saskatoon MLAs are pleased to see that the Lorne Avenue extension grid road will 
be taken into the highway system beginning this year. This will give the Saskatoon population easier 
access to 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

379 

that resort area. 
 
In co-operation with the city of Saskatoon an agreement has been signed and work has commenced on a 
50-metre Olympic Indoor Swimming Pool which will be used jointly by the Kelsey Institute of Applied 
Arts and Science, the city of Saskatoon and, of course, the public of Saskatoon. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has made representations to the Saskatoon MLAs for larger Centennial 
Auditorium grants. These representations to the Saskatoon MLAs, and thence to the Government, have 
been successful in raising the grant to the Saskatoon Centennial Auditorium to the same level as the 
grant to the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — From 1971 to 1974 grants increased successively; 30 per cent, 33 per cent and 25 
per cent. 
 
The city of Saskatoon, along with other centres in Saskatchewan, was faced with a used tire disposal 
problem. Saskatoon MLAs were pleased to receive representations from the city of Saskatoon on the 
matter. After study and evaluation the Government of Saskatchewan has purchased a portable tire 
shredder and put that equipment into service, initially in the city of Saskatoon. The portable equipment 
will be moved from centre to centre in Saskatchewan for a similar use. 
 
The purchase of the portable shredder has solved a significant disposal problem for all Saskatchewan 
communities. This machine will have an impact on the communities of Saskatchewan similar to the 
highly successful New Democratic Party program to collect and salvage older automobiles. In both 
cases, an environmental problem will be solved and the end product of the process will have use made 
of it. It is my understanding that the Department of Highways will undertake experimental road 
surfacing projects with the resultant ‘tire crumb’. 
 
I noted, as had other New Democratic Party MLAs, that there was a considerable demand for some form 
of transit assistance for cities. The Saskatoon MLAs received some representation on this matter. 
Needless to say, we are all pleased that a ‘Transit Assistance for Cities’ program has been put in place to 
be administered by the Department of Highways and Transportation. The basic components of this 
cost—sharing program are: 
 

- acquisition of rolling stock; 
- transit operation; 
- transit construction; 
- transit related studies; 
- demonstration projects. 

 
This type of assistance is significant and meaningful for our urban centres and I am pleased to know that 
the good communication between the Saskatoon MLAs and the city government has hastened the 
putting in place of this program. 
 
I am pleased to note that on top of previous significant increases, there are improved educational grants 
for the operation of Saskatoon schools. For example: in the public system in 1973 there was a $1.8 
million increase on $7.4 million of the previous year; in the separate school system there was a 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

380 

$176,000 increase on $3.9 million of the previous year. 
 
These significant increases in education grants, along with large increases in the Property Improvement 
Grant, from $144 to $160 in the last year, will contribute meaningfully to the operation of the Saskatoon 
school systems and check the rise in mill rates. 
 
Saskatoon MLAs and others have heeded the call of all Saskatchewan urban communities for financial 
assistance from the deplorable situation they found themselves in at the end of the seven long, lean, 
gaunt years. 
 
The New Democratic Party’s response was the urban package. What did this package mean to 
Saskatoon? 
 

(a) $10 per capita unconditional grant equals $1,264,000 in 1974. Nothing comparable up to this time, 
  Mr. Speaker. 
 
(b) An equalization and police grant means $535,000 in 1974; compared to $196,000 in the year  
  previous. 
 
(c) The community Capital Fund from 1974-1979 will mean $9.4 million to the city of Saskatoon.  
  This was new and nothing comparable existed prior to 1974. 

 
Saskatoon MLAs heard other calls for attention from the Saskatoon community, Mr. Speaker and these 
calls were answered. 
 

-  Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program. This very popular sensible program paid out 1,042 grants  
  between September of 1973 and September of 1974 in Saskatoon. 
 
-  The House Building Assistance Grants. This grant program of up to $1,000 has proved to be very  
  popular in that part of my constituency which is expanding with new housing. Within the last two  
  years these grants have been raised twice and the income eligibility level has been lifted as well. 
 
-  The Nursing Home situation in Saskatoon was rather acute, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to note, as  
  are other Saskatoon MLAs that there are additions, replacements and new beds announced in the  
  order of 245 for Saskatoon City. 

 
I have many senior citizens living in my constituency. This improved situation, along with increased 
subsidies to private guests in special care homes, has been thoroughly appreciated. 
 
Upon reviewing the statistics, I find that the industrial development in Saskatoon has been encouraged 
and has responded strongly in the period 1971 to 1974. The statistics show that there have been 15 
expansions and 15 new projects for a total increased employment of 1,577 and a capital investment of 
$18.1 million. Other announcements that have been made recently, Mr. Speaker, were not yet included 
in this list. 
 
Last week, on Tuesday, I had two choices, Mr. Speaker. I could listen to the Leader of the Opposition 
(Mr. Steuart) speak in this debate or I could go to Saskatoon for a public opening. Needless to say I 
chose the latter because I had heard everything that the Leader of the Opposition had had to say before, 
and having been in Saskatoon for this particular event I was quite pleased that I had gone there. I 
attended the official signing 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

381 

ceremony in Saskatoon where SED Systems agreed to provide satellite earth stations and equipment for 
$1.2 million to TeleSat Canada. I know that all Hon. Members will join me in complimenting this 
home-grown Saskatchewan industry in its most recent accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, there are many, many other programs, grants and assistance which 
have been made available to Saskatoon constituencies as a result of good communications that exist 
between this Government and the people. Let me list a few to illustrate the point: 
 

- the abolition of medicare and hospital personal premiums; 
- increase in the minimum wage to $2.25, this year; 
- gasoline tax reduction in May of 1974; 
- the hearing aid program; 
- the dental program; 
- the very popular Family Income Plan; 
- Senior Citizens’ Pavilion grant of 20 per cent; 
- $6,800 grant towards the Fairfield Senior Citizens’ Association. 
- a grant to the city of $11,400 for the paving of tennis courts and community rinks; 
- $31,377 grant to the city of Saskatoon for the extension of their campground and new service 
 building; 
- last, but not least, Mr. Speaker, our senior citizens are waiting, but I suggest not waiting in vain, for 
 a prescription drug plan which will be started in 1975. 

 
This listing, Mr. Speaker, illustrates some of the accomplishments that can be made when MLAs are 
prepared to listen to their constituency and are in the happy position of having a Government which has 
a sympathetic ear for the needs of the people. 
 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, is an inviting city. So much so that I note that the Leader of the Opposition 
invites himself up occasionally. This is good and I, in no way, want to stand in the way of the Leader of 
the Opposition coming to my constituency, as he did, to speak at the end of November, 1974, at the 
Kelsey Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences. I find that each trip made by him, or someone closely 
associated with him, has a direct beneficial result on the voting pattern as far as I am concerned. 
 
You will recall when the Premier spoke in this debate, Mr. Speaker, he reminded the House that the 
Leader of the Opposition had made a “guaranteed commitment” that in August, 1974, freight rates for 
Saskatchewan would be equalized. We are all aware that a ‘Steuart commitment’ was not realized. The 
purpose of the Premier’s comment was to illustrate that there was a difference between a ‘commitment’ 
and a ‘Steuart commitment’. As a result of the Leader of the Opposition’s visit to my constituency, as 
reported in the Star-Phoenix, November 28, 1974, I should like to report to the House that there is even a 
softer commitment than a ‘Steuart commitment’. I believe it would have to be determined as a ‘Steuart 
leaning commitment’. Let me read the article wherein the Leader of the Opposition is referring to the 
Churchill River Basin Study being done by this Government. The report states: 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

382 

He would lean 70 to 80 per cent against such development. In fact, the chances of the Churchill River 
Development would be almost nil if we were the government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that the people of Saskatchewan will not trust the ‘Steuart commitment’; 
leaning or otherwise, where he is, in fact, one of the principal authors of the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
deal. 
 
Let me refer to the report of the Associated Consultants International Incorporated, which was presented 
to the previous administration prior to the signing of the Meadow Lake Pulp Mill deal. The first sentence 
in the section of that report dealing with water is as follows: 
 

It is unfortunate that information on water flow and quality in the Beaver River is so sketchy and 
actually non-existent at the probable mill site. 

 
In the section of the report dealing with effluents a sentence reads: 
 

The effluent treatment system proposed is one of the most commonly used in pulp mills in North 
America. 

 
It was common knowledge at that time, Mr. Speaker, that pulp mills were heavy polluters of our 
environmental system. 
 
Keep in mind that reports prior to the signing of the Meadow Lake pulp mill deal contemplated raising 
the level of Doré Lake and using Durocher Lake as an effluent holding pond. The Van Luven Report 
stated that many of its statements were opinions rather than facts. Also that apparently the Beaver River 
has no assimilation quality in winter. 
 
Another point in the Associated Consultants International report stated: 
 

The volume of mill effluent would be a very substantial portion of the flow in the Beaver River during 
low flows in winter and dilution would be minimal. 

 
Keep in mind that a 1,400 ton per day mill has an effluent discharge equivalent to a city of 
approximately 280,000 people. All this, Mr. Speaker, no environmental studies, no public hearings, 
signed sealed and delivered by those who sit opposite. 
 
The plain facts are, Mr. Speaker, that an ever-diminishing circle of people believe the Leader of the 
Opposition and his seatmates when they talk about protection of the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same Star-Phoenix report of the Leader of the Opposition’s visit to my constituency 
was quoted as saying that the oil industry in this province: 
 

was crippled long before we heard from Mr. Turner and his budget. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, it is reported went on to blame the New Democrats for the state of the oil 
industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. The observation that the oil industry in Saskatchewan was 
crippled before the Turner budget is correct. However, the conclusion made by the Leader of the 
Opposition is 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

383 

erroneous. 
 
Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to review the facts. In 1967, under a Liberal Government, the expenditures on 
exploration for oil and gas, in millions of dollars, began to drop off. From $44.7 million in 1967 to $19.2 
million in 1971 — a drop of $25.5 million. Whereas, Mr. Speaker, between 1971 and 1973, under a New 
Democratic Government, the trend has been reversed showing in 1971 there were $19.2 million, in 1973 
there were $22.7 million, a modest increase of $2.7 million expenditure. 
 
During that period, the net income of oil companies showed substantial increases: Imperial Oil from $95 
to $136 million; Shell Oil from $45 to $61 million; Gulf Oil from $44 million to $53 million; Canadian 
Pacific Investment, income from oil and gas, going from $10 million to $13 million. 
 
Some more facts to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, are that the cutback in the export of Saskatchewan crude 
began in November, 1973 whereas Bill 42 was not brought forward in the Saskatchewan Legislature 
until December. Cutback in export of Saskatchewan crude was the result of the federal export tax, not 
the action of the Provincial Government. The National Energy Board set the quotas. In November and 
later in December, some refineries taking Saskatchewan crude, decided they would rather take less of 
our crude and more from Alberta in order to fulfil their quotas. Mr. Speaker, why? The answer is quite 
simple. The National Energy Board in setting the export quotas was not concerned with the source or 
quality of the crude oil, but only with the total number of barrels leaving Canada. Therefore, it is logical 
to assume that oil companies seeking crude from Canada where the export tax was uniform will take 
crude which is lighter and sweeter in place of heavy and sour crude. It is unfortunate indeed, that the 
Federal Liberal Government was unable to recognize the damage they were doing to the Saskatchewan 
oil industry with their export tax. 
 
Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to reinforce the point I have made by reference to a news item dated October 
31, 1974, headlined “Alberta Blames Ottawa for Heavy Oil Trouble.” The first paragraph reads as 
follows: 
 

The whole, heavy oil industry in Alberta is in serious jeopardy because of the Federal Government’s 
export tax, Bill Dickie, Mines and Mineral Minister said Wednesday. 

 
Another news item dated November 9, 1974, confirms the point that I have made and the observation 
made by the Minister of Mines and Minerals in Alberta. It is entitled, “Ottawa Cuts Heavy Crude Export 
Tax” and the first paragraph reads: 
 

The Federal Government announced Friday a further 60 cent reduction in the export tax on the lowest 
quality crude oil produced in western Canada. 

 
The point of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the Ottawa Liberals made the mistake. The Saskatchewan 
Liberals, as their resident apologists, then proceed to blame it on the New Democratic Party. Mr. 
Speaker, we know the credibility level of the Ottawa Liberals. We know the Saskatchewan Liberals’ 
credibility is even lower. I predict that in this Throne Speech Debate it will be clearly indicated that the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party are apologists for the Federal Liberal fumbling. They will 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

384 

not, in any meaningful way, stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The rest of the article as reported in the Star-Phoenix of the Leader of the 
Opposition’s visit to my constituency is made up of sorrowful wails about the oil companies that were 
affected by Bill 42. The Leader of the Opposition is concerned about such companies as the Ashland Oil 
Company; Canada Permanent Trust; Guarantee Trust Company; Montreal Trust Company; Canadian 
Pacific Railway; Scurry Rainbow Oil Limited and others. The Leader of the Opposition certainly can’t 
be expressing concern about individual Saskatchewan small holders since we specifically took the 
trouble to exclude them from the application of Bill 42. 
 
With regard to the Federal Budget, it is clear that the people of Saskatchewan have been shafted by the 
Federal Liberals in a number of areas. It has been said time and time again by the people in this House 
and elsewhere, that companies should be allowed to deduct from their gross income the amount they pay 
in provincial government royalties before paying federal corporation tax. The Turner Budget will 
continue to allow royalty payments as deductions if the royalty payments are made to private mineral 
owners such as the CPR or to a foreign government, but not for the Province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to know where the Saskatchewan Liberal Party stands on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I also want to know, Mr. Speaker, where the Saskatchewan Liberal Party stands 
as regards the Federal Government’s attack on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and indirectly, on 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Liberals across the way, Mr. Speaker, like to stand up in this House and say they started the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It is a matter of record, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation was started by the CCF. What existed prior to that time was a Saskatchewan Power 
Commission. The amount of power poles and power lines in existence under a Liberal Government prior 
to 1944 wouldn’t cast a respectable shadow on the ground. Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan wants to claim some credit for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, then let them stand 
up in this House and defend the Corporation and defend its customers against a direct, frontal assault 
from the Federal Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, through their chosen political 
instrument, the New Democratic Party had the foresight to buy up large quantities of gas under long 
term contracts at low prices. The whole theory behind that approach was to allow the people of 
Saskatchewan the benefits of a public gas utility. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Liberal Party will make no meaningful contribution 
towards the defence of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation or its customers because they 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

385 

are philosophically unable to bring themselves to that position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It is quite evident, Mr. Speaker, that the only issues that the Saskatchewan 
Liberals will talk about with regard to the recent actions of the Federal Government, are the smoke 
screens in the Federal Budget. Across the way, Mr. Speaker, they have talked about tax cuts and tax 
concessions in the Federal Budget which will benefit the ‘little people’ of this province. Let’s examine 
that budget, Mr. Speaker, to see if there is something there of benefit for the people of Saskatchewan or 
whether it is just a smoke screen to cover the real issue, which is resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who holds the wealth of Canada? In 1970, 58 per cent of the wealth of Canada was held by 
eight per cent of the people, almost 93 per cent of the wealth was held by 50 per cent of the people. Will 
the Turner Liberal budget enhance this Canadian imbalance? 
 
There is nothing in the budget for the poor pensioner, or others on fixed income. There is less than $1 
per week for workers on low income. Mr. Speaker, let me give you some examples of what can be 
obtained from the Federal Budget in the way of tax relief. Suppose, for the sake of example, we have 
three average Canadians at different income levels. We’ll call them Tom, Dick and Harry. 
 
Tom earns $8,000 a year to support himself, his wife and two children. In 1974, the only tax saving he 
will make is the basic $50 per year for a total of $100 for 1974 and 1975. 
 
Meanwhile, Dick, on an income of $14,000 and the same size family probably lives in an apartment, 
he’s unable to afford a house. Therefore, he cannot save anything under the Registered Home 
Ownership Savings Plan. Let’s say he has savings that earn him $100 per year in interest. In 1974, he 
will save $133 and in 1975 he will save $183, for a total of $316. 
 
Now we come to Harry. I think Harry must be a Liberal. He and his family live in an apartment. He 
earns $40,000 a year. He has an investment portfolio and he gets about $2,000 in interest dividends 
which he can write off in part, because of the Federal budget. He also decides that he will move from his 
apartment and buy a house so that he can take advantage of the Registered Home Ownership Savings 
Plan. In the taxation year, 1974, because of the Turner Budget, Harry will save $1,120. At the same 
time, Harry decides to take advantage of the Capital Cost Allowance provided in the budget by investing 
in an apartment block. A further provision takes effect in 1975, which is the eight per cent reduction 
ceiling. Total savings $4,492. 
 
It is clear, Mr. Speaker that Tom, Dick and Harry, respectively, save $100, $316, $4,492 in a two-year 
period. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this accentuates the imbalance that already exists in Canada. 
Therefore, it is safe to assume that the Saskatchewan Liberals in attempting to portray the Turner Budget 
as a good budget for all the people are merely attempting to disguise the real intent of the Turner 
Budget, which is the resource issue. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

386 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to finalize my comments on the Federal Budget by quoting from a letter from the 
Saskatoon Board of Trade in which they refer to the Federal Budget proposals of Mr. Turner in the 
following way: 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Who said that? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Saskatoon Board of Trade. 
 
It is bad news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal Party is doing its level best to patch over the shortcomings with 
a massive advertising campaign, which is evident to us all on radio, TV and newspaper. I have seen a 
newspaper report in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated September 18. That article reports on the 
Saskatoon Eastview Liberal Nominating Convention. In the article among other things, it is reported that 
Mr. Steuart said: 
 

Right now we are riding high, 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — 
 

Right now we are riding high, Mr. Steuart told a responsive audience of 75. 
 
This is hardly in accordance, Mr. Speaker, with what I’ve been reading which says: 
 

Redberry, 650 energetic supporters, Maple Creek, 900 supporters, Wilkie, 650 supporters, Shaunavon, 
800 plus, 

 
although I understand that the hall in Shaunavon when fully packed will only hold 400. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if the Saskatoon Eastview Liberal 
nominating convention appears in one of those similar type ads very shortly indicating that hundreds of 
eager people attended the nominating convention. I would be sadly disappointed if the advertising skills 
of McLaren Agencies were unable to perform the miracle of the fishes and the loaves. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, there is a second reason for the massive advertising campaign being undertaken 
by the Liberal Party and it’s this. When the next election comes they will not be able politically to carve 
up constituency boundaries as they did prior to 1971. At that time, the Liberal Party never batted an eye 
at such inconsistencies as Saskatoon Mayfair having in excess of 16,000 voters whereas the constituency 
immediately adjacent had 6,000 voters. Grafting the voters from the old constituency of City Park 
University onto Saskatoon Mayfair in order to accomplish this gerrymander, brings to mind a story I 
once heard, Mr. Speaker. It was about the young boy who asked his politically astute father to explain to 
him what political plums were. The father, without hesitation, remarked that political plums are the 
result of clever graft . . . ing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

387 

Mr. Brockelbank: — In the case of the 1971 gerrymander, Mr. Speaker, the resultant fruit from the 
graft would appear to be rather bitter fruit for the Liberals as it rightly should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity, while speaking today, to discuss the 
growth of printing with the Saskatchewan weekly newspapers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — When the New Democratic Party came to power in 1971, we found that the 
previous administration had kept a black list of weekly newspapers. The Wakaw Recorder, Mr. Speaker, 
was on the list. Since that time, Mr. Speaker, the black list has been disbanded. The Queen’s Printer 
price list has been increased and all Saskatchewan weekly newspapers benefit from the opportunity to 
do Government printing in increasing amounts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The period 1971-72 as compared to the period 1973-74 shows an increase of 
better than $25,000 to the weekly newspapers of Saskatchewan. I might say, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
attempt to increase the economic activity in smaller Saskatchewan centres and it certainly does enhance 
the “Saskatchewan Option.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned some of the abuses of the previous Government such as the Meadow 
Lake Pulp Mill, which is an abuse of the environment; the gerrymander which is an abuse of the 
democratic system; there are other minor abuses, which are indicative of the attitude of the Members 
opposite, which I find distressing. For example in 1973, New Democratic Party Members, on average, 
mailed 9,900 pieces of mail, whereas Liberal MLAs on average mailed 38,556 pieces of mail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — At Government expense. One mailing alone, by the Leader of the Opposition cost 
$8,506.02 in postage. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, it was a little pamphlet: entitled “Cause for 
Concern.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I maintain that it was a gross abuse of the mailing privileges of this Legislature 
and was strictly a political document. This particular document invited the recipients to get involved in 
the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, it stressed Liberal philosophy, it was authorized by the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party. It may be that Liberal MLAs’ reports to their constituents have to be authorized by the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party before they are sent out. Regardless of this, that piece of mail obviously 
went to all constituencies in the province, not just those represented by Liberal MLAs. 
 
In 1974, Mr. Speaker, we saw a repeat performance. On 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

388 

average the mail sent out by New Democratic Party MLAs cost $588, whereas mail sent out by the 
Liberal Party MLAs cost $1,277, more than double. I might say that this abuse has been corrected since 
that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the abuses that I have discussed this afternoon the most serious and damaging in my 
mind was the gerrymander. I am seriously concerned that the Members opposite do not really accept an 
Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission. Their attack on the Commission in the last session is a 
clear indication that the democratic principles which led our party to the establishment of the 
Commission would soon be abandoned were the Government to change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may have gathered, I will support the motion because the Throne Speech, as well as 
outlining accomplishments, effectively pinpoints what I believe to be the key issue of the day. The 
resolution of that issue is in doubt. Now is the time for all Members of this Legislature to examine their 
consciences and make a decision which will be in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister who has just taken his seat has 
a lot of gall when he talks about the abuses of mailing privileges, that we sent out 30,000 pieces or 
whatever it was, as a cause for concern. He didn’t mention the 500,000 pieces of mail sent out from the 
Minister of Agriculture’s office, a half a million pieces of NDP propaganda, straight propaganda. The 
Minister knows very well it was propaganda because in the Public Accounts we asked for a copy of all 
the different things that were sent out from the Minister of Agriculture’s office, and it was pure 
propaganda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — It is a funny thing that we have heard from Member after Member on the NDP 
side, useless statistics and I think about the most useless statistics that I have heard in this House were 
the ones that the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) used yesterday, when he told us about the 4,600 
complaints that he solved and that he has a file on each one and he has them recorded for posterity and. 
he solved every one of them. What a useless collection of facts for this House. It seems that facts are 
more important to the NDP Members than actions or people or whatever else. I couldn’t help noticing, 
the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) wanted to speak about Valley View Centre and that there 
wasn’t any problem at the Valley View Centre. It didn’t matter that Dr. Clarkson’s report severely 
criticized it and it didn’t matter that Mr. Potter, from the Premier’s Research and Planning office, had 
severely criticized it. You name it, they have criticized that Department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The different directors, and 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

389 

there have been about four in the last two years — well interim directors and replacement directors — 
they are coming and going and you can’t keep track of them. Everyone of them as they go out adds his 
criticism to it and the problem is that the Minister of Social Services doesn’t understand what is going 
on. He proved to me that he doesn’t understand what is going on. He came in here with a handful of 
statistics and he says, “Oh, it is not like you say,” there are 46 of this and 83 of that, 37 here and 85 
there. And these facts aren’t important. The facts are that people are unhappy. The facts are that the 
Valley View Centre is the worst employer in Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — That exact statement comes to me from a member of the Labour Standards Branch 
in Moose Jaw. Valley Centre is the worst employer in Moose Jaw! It is a fact that employees wait two 
and one-half months for pay for the work they do at Valley View Centre. It is a fact that they wait about 
two months, in some cases, for their pay when they have quit their .job at Valley View Centre or 
resigned for some reason or other. The same thing wouldn’t be allowed by any other employer in 
Saskatchewan. They would be prosecuted. Officers in the Department of Labour Standards Branch 
would gladly prosecute if they could get the permission of the Attorney General. They have told me this 
to my face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The Minister doesn’t understand, he doesn’t understand human feelings, human 
problems, he understands statistics and statistics don’t mean one thing to the people at Valley View 
Centre; they don’t mean one thing to the senior citizens of this province; they don’t mean one thing to 
the people who have been fired from HRDA they don’t mean one thing to the manipulation that is given 
to the native groups in this province. Statistics don’t mean a thing. 
 
Speaker after speaker as for instance the Member for Nutana in the back row, whatever it is, came in 
here with a list as long as your arm of statistics, meaningless figures, dollars this and dollars that. Why 
don’t they talk about people? People are what count not this dollar and that dollar. It is people. You 
people don’t seem to realize the significance of what is going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, before getting into my speech, I wonder if we could call it 5:50. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:50 until 7:00 o’clock. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was branded by Dave Steuart as being a nothing 
speech and I think that when one considers what message there is in it, for Saskatchewan people, that I 
would agree that it is a nothing speech. But the debate that has been going on for the past week is 
revealing, there is a message for Saskatchewan people if they had followed the debate. The Throne 
Speech Debate shows conclusively that the 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

390 

NDP have not learned a thing; they have not learned their lesson from the mistakes that they have made 
since June 1971. 
 
Their mistakes have been very costly for the people of Saskatchewan and I regret this, but there is a 
saving grace. Their failure to learn is going to make it much easier to remove the Blakeney Government 
from office in the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Why hasn’t the Blakeney Government learned a lesson from past mistakes? They 
haven’t learned because like other NDP Governments and socialists generally, they are arrogant, they 
believe themselves to always be right. Arrogance seems to be an integral part of socialist philosophy and 
it will also be their downfall. 
 
Premier Barrett is a good example. He has come under fire from every segment of society in British 
Columbia. He came under fire from his own supporters during a recent convention in September of this 
year. People, both in and out of his Party, are critical of his policies and his legislation. Premier Barrett 
is in trouble. So what is he going to do about it? Is he prepared to re-examine his policies? Is he prepared 
to make the changes that the public are demanding? Is he prepared to listen to the people? No, he isn’t. 
He has a different and arrogant alternative. He is prepared to convince the public that the public are 
wrong; that he alone is right. And his alternative, and he announced this at the September convention in 
British Columbia, is to spend public money, taxpayers’ money, to convince the public that the NDP are 
good. A less arrogant man would be prepared to examine his record and admit mistakes in light of the 
overwhelming public criticism. And the same example applies to Premier Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Blakeney faces the same public criticism in Saskatchewan. He had made the same mistakes, the 
same basic mistakes. There is a difference between Premier Blakeney and Premier Barrett that is that 
Premier Blakeney and his Government have been spending huge fortunes of public money for personal 
NDP propaganda since the very first day that he was elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — You know it is interesting to listen to NDP Members as they speak in this Debate. 
Every one of them have talked federal issues. 
 
We had a federal election about four months ago and until that election campaign the same Members 
opposite were talking the same issues as they are in the Throne Speech. In that federal election the NDP 
got beaten. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — They took a real slap in the face. The results of that election, especially here in 
Saskatchewan, are a real kick in the head to the NDP and it is one that they may not recover from. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

391 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The NDP were turned out for two reasons; they were on the wrong side of the 
issues and they were unbearably arrogant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — In Saskatchewan the NDP fought the election on the Federal budget of May 1974. 
That was a budget that was even tougher than the present Federal budget regarding the taxation of the 
resources. The NDP fought that election on the performance of Premier Blakeney as he went to Ottawa 
regarding the resource taxation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The people of Saskatchewan gave you the answer, but the Blakeney Government 
doesn’t listen to that answer. They come back into this Legislature with the same worn out speeches, the 
same worn out issues that were repudiated by the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The Blakeney Government continues to make the same mistakes. 
 
The Federal NDP also continue to make the same mistakes. Mr. Broadbent has picked up the exact same 
tired tirade as was used by the former leader David Lewis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — You know David Lewis suffered a personal defeat and he suffered a personal 
defeat because he was unfair to the public. He distorted facts; he encouraged dissension wherever he 
could; he was less than honest with the people. David Lewis could have made a contribution to 
Canadian society. I think he is bright and I think he has ability but he got caught in a trap, he became a 
little man and he received a just reward when the election results became known. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Broadbent has shown that he can fill the shoes of David Lewis very well. 
Nothing has changed, just the name. I watched as Mr. Broadbent gave his analysis of the Federal budget 
one month ago. And like his predecessor he was less than honest. 
 
His analysis was totally unfair, untrue and misleading. From this observation I should like to suggest to 
you Members opposite that when you get a chance next summer to choose a new federal leader, choose 
Mr. Broadbent, he is the right man for the NDP. I encourage every one of you to give him your support. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

392 

The Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I doubt if any New Democratic Party will ever learn that the people don’t like to be 
lied to and that people respect fairness and honesty; that people are capable and willing to make their 
own decisions and conclusions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — You know even in defeat Mr. Lewis continued to insult people. Mr. Lewis, in 
defeat, told us that the NDP were beaten because of Conservative policies and a lot of other things. He 
found all kinds of excuses for losing, every excuse, that is, except to admit that the NDP lost because of 
their policies and their stance and their philosophy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — And his crowning glory had to be that he was sure that the majority that was 
received by Mr. Trudeau would make the man arrogant. That was an insult by David Lewis . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wonder if we shouldn’t adjourn until you have your applauding over so we can get 
on with the speeches. I cannot hear what is being said by the speaker at all, there is too much noise. It is 
not only the applauding but there are interruptions. 
 
Mr. C.P. Macdonald: — But, Mr. Speaker, this is a good speech. 
 
The Speaker: — Well, then let me hear it please. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — What a contrast! David Lewis in defeat compared to a real man like Ross Thatcher 
in defeat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Ross Thatcher at least had the courage to stand on his feet and accept defeat. He 
accepted the blame for the defeat. He acknowledged that he had made mistakes and that the people had 
spoken. Ross Thatcher was a man who truly recognized the democratic right of people and this is a 
lesson that could well be learned by Members opposite. 
 
I am sorry the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) isn’t in his seat because I have a few words to say to 
him. I should like to say a few words about the resource issue then and the confrontation tactics taken by 
Premier Blakeney. 
 
The course of action taken by Premier Blakeney, in my view is totally unrealistic and totally 
unacceptable. I am convinced that our Premier has deliberately taken this unacceptable position for two 
reasons. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

393 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — First, he believes that this can be a good issue in the next provincial election. He 
feels that he can fool a lot of people. He knows that the resource issue is a complex issue and that the 
NDP can count on the fact that in general people don’t understand the facts of resources. 
 
The Blakeney Government feels that a fight with Ottawa is a good political issue in Saskatchewan. It 
doesn’t matter that Saskatchewan will be the long-term losers because of this stance; and it doesn’t 
matter that our oil industry will be destroyed in the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — What matters to Mr. Blakeney is that he should be re-elected whatever the 
consequences to Saskatchewan. 
 
The second reason, of course, for the position that is taken by Members opposite is that they see this as a 
good possible vehicle eventually to nationalize another segment of our business community. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a happy ending to this confrontation on resources; there is a solution to this impasse 
that Mr. Blakeney has created. That solution is to elect a Dave Steuart government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — You know this solution is going to become very obvious to Saskatchewan people 
and the issue that was developed by Mr. Blakeney is going to be turned against him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Solutions to problems can only be found by sitting down and negotiating and 
having a reasonable attitude. Dave Steuart will do that. He will get a good deal, the best deal for 
Saskatchewan people. The electors of this province know it. They know that the NDP have found 
themselves in a position from which they can never again meaningfully negotiate with the Federal 
Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Saskatchewan people are not so stupid as the NDP would have us believe. 
Members opposite haven’t learned that and they never will, but you will get another lesson in the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I will say a few words about the Plains Health Centre or the Base Hospital or 
whatever you call it. One of the NDP’s few successes is changing names in institutions in this province. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

394 

That building, the Plains Health Centre or the Base Hospital, is becoming a monument to NDP 
inefficiency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — We see a lot of examples of the ineffectiveness from the Government opposite. We 
have seen them make a shambles of the North; we have seen that they are completely unable to deal 
with native problems; we have seen them make stupid mistakes with the business sector as they did with 
the Intercontinental deal. They can’t deal with Ottawa. They can’t even operate a small agency like Core 
Services. But now we have to watch as the Blakeney Government fumbles and stumbles with the Base 
Hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — That building has been in construction going on nearly three years and yet the 
Minister of Health can’t get it open. The opening date was set for August 1972, over two years ago. The 
hospital is still empty. To be totally honest the hospital isn’t exactly empty. About three weeks ago, Mr. 
Harvey Fox the Executive Director of the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre told us that there were 8 
or 9 patients recovering from minor surgery in the Plains Hospital. Eight or nine patients in a $20 
million hospital. Mr. Speaker, that hospital is a scandal. Why isn’t it open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The NDP have had a lot to say about hospital facilities in Regina. If you go back as 
far as 1967 they were very critical at that time about the quality of hospital facilities in this city. They 
promised us some great things. What has happened with the hospital premises in Regina after three and 
one-half years of Blakeney Government? They complained about the Regina General and the Grey Nuns 
Hospitals and after they formed the Government the Minister of Health commissioned Dr. Clarkson to 
do a study. Dr. Clarkson reported two years ago that these two hospitals were in a mess, a sorry mess. 
That they must be extensively renovated or preferably be rebuilt. What action has Mr. Smishek taken in 
two years? Nothing. He has authorized a few minor renovations so that the fire inspector wouldn’t close 
the hospital down completely, he has kept the doors open. After three and one-half years we have no 
Base Hospital and the two old hospitals continue to deteriorate. Many of us remember the NDP election 
ads showing an empty bed sitting out on the plains of Saskatchewan. This was supposed to somehow 
represent the Liberal approach to the Base Hospital. I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you would be willing to 
show us an election ad today of a $20 million pile of concrete and steel sitting on the plains still empty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Smishek is still not able to get a Chief of the Department of Medicine for that 
hospital. He has obtained an Executive Director of the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre, Mr. Harvey 
Fox, an accountant, not a medical person, an 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

395 

accountant, to run the Base Hospital. I doubt if Mr. Smishek can obtain competent medical people after 
the way medical people have been treated in this province. The Minister of Health is also going to find it 
difficult to obtain adequate nursing people to run the hospital. We just learned recently of a large 
number of resignations that will take place effective the end of this year. I am not a bit surprised. Last 
spring when this Government was hassling the nurses, I was told by various nurses that they would see 
the fight through with the Blakeney Government and then they would be leaving as fast as they could. 
Can you blame them? Whom has the Minister of Health got as the Medical Director at the Plains 
Hospital? We find that Dr. Ken Hodgins is the Assistant Executive Director (Medical). I suppose this 
appointment is because no one else could be obtained. Dr. Hodgins is spread so thin in the Department 
of Health that he can hardly be expected to do the job. He is the head of the Cancer Commission and has 
medical responsibilities at Wascana and Pasqua hospitals as well as at the Plains Hospital. 
 
I say to the Minister of Health that this isn’t good enough. I say to the Minister of Health that he isn’t 
doing good enough. It is time to get moving. It is time to replace that Board of Governors that he hired 
and replace the Board with people who can get the job done. The Plains Hospital stands as a monument 
to the ineffectiveness of the Blakeney Government, a monument to the inability of this Government to 
run the affairs of Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe the Minister of Health should stick to six-bed hospitals or eight-bed hospitals, maybe that is his 
style. The $20 million Plains Hospital is now handling eight beds so maybe that is as far as we are going 
to go, maybe that is the limit. With a six or eight-bed hospital you can fly by the seat of your pants. If 
that is the limit of your ability then maybe that is what you should stick with. 
 
The announcement on November 21, 1974 that three new hospitals would be built, two with eight beds, 
one with six beds is an example of flying by the seat of your pants. The Minister of Health established a 
rural hospital committee under the chairmanship of Justice Hughes. And he asked Justice Hughes to 
study three particular cases as well as the general situation. This is a third report, all three reports have 
told the Minister of Health exactly the same thing. The Minister of Health ignored these findings that 
were incorporated in the Hughes Report, and announced that hospitals would be built at Elrose and 
Lampman. The Minister doesn’t have any estimates of the costs of these hospitals but they are going to 
be built. We haven’t been given any reasons why they should be built. It could be because two 
Government Members are in danger of losing their seats, and that to me is a typical NDP reason. 
 
The Justice Hughes Committee gave reasons for not building these two facilities. The main reason is 
that the hospitals would and I will quote: 
 

Not be capable of delivering the quality of care required by the acutely ill patients. 
 
I wonder if quality is a concern to the Minister of Health. The report also said as did the two previous 
reports and I will quote again: 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

396 

Had planning in the past been tuned to integration and co-operation between communities rather than 
to factors which have led to fragmentation, then perhaps the problems of today would be less than 
what is the case. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — May I add that Justice Hughes made alternate suggestions that he felt would better 
benefit the health care of people in Elrose and Lampman. I found it rather hypocritical that it in the same 
issue of the Leader Post that the announcement of the new hospitals was made. There it is: “Hospitals 
Announced”, and in the same issue. I should like to direct you to the headline. “Efficient Services Urged 
to Control Hospital Costs”, made by the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — He announces two new hospitals that were recommended against and he sits with 
an empty $20 million hospital and then glibly urges controlled hospital costs. I tell the Premier that his 
Department of Health needs to be shaken up a little bit. 
 
As I said to the Member for Nutana South, that I would speak about deterrent fees, and I will. I have 
heard so much about deterrent fees from Members opposite that I wouldn’t want to sit down without 
mentioning them. 
 
We used to have a utilization fee and it was fondly nicknamed a deterrent fee by the NDP Members 
opposite. I don’t object to their nickname of ‘deterrent fees’. Now we have a prescription drug plan and 
it incorporates a dispensing fee. I arc sure that Members opposite won’t object if I use their nickname 
and call it a deterrent fee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — It was very interesting to see the Saskatchewan Medical Association support the 
concept of a drug plan. And at their recent convention they passed a resolution opposing the “tax on the 
sick’’ or deterrent fee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Let me finish, Premier Blakeney. I would like to quote from October 24, 1974, and 
I am sure Members opposite will recognize what I am quoting from, Dr. David Road, a good friend of 
all I am sure, one of the community clinic doctors. 
 

Referring to the Saskatchewan Medical Association’s opposition to this tax on the sick, Dr. David 
Road of Regina, said the deterrent fee will most adversely affect those with high drug costs, the aged, 
the young, the persons with long-term diseases. 

 
That’s what was said at the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

397 

It is very interesting to note that the very next day the Saskatchewan Medical Association withdrew their 
opposition to the deterrent fee. I will tell you why. Dr. Bill Davis of Regina commented and I am going 
to quote him, why they withdrew their opposition to the deterrent fee. 
 

Dr. Bill Davis, in Regina, in referring to the dispensing fee said, we are indeed commenting on patient 
responsibility in the use of medication. We should also believe in the responsible use by patients of 
medical services. If we mean it in one area we should mean it in another. 

 
Yes, the Saskatchewan Medical Association does agree with the deterrent fee. They have removed their 
opposition, they do agree with the deterrent fee. They have pointed out that we should be consistent. A 
tax on the sick is just as relevant for services as it is for drugs. We should be consistent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — If you want a deterrent fee on drugs then let’s have it on services also. That is what 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association says. This may be the only time in history that the NDP and the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association agrees. You both agree that sick people should be able to participate 
in their own healing process by being able to pay deterrent fees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one more thing and that concerns labour relations. I 
found it amazing that they weren’t even mentioned in the Speech. There is no mention in the Throne 
Speech in a year when there have been more work stoppages than in any other year in history. By the 
end of this year we will have about 300,000 man days lost because of work stoppages. This is about four 
times higher than the previous record for man days lost in Saskatchewan. And yet there is no mention of 
it in the Throne Speech. Isn’t it funny that not one Member opposite has found it necessary even to 
mention 300,000 man days lost in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Department of Labour has been very busy in the past year, it has been a full-time job just to keep 
track of the strikes that were occurring in Saskatchewan. It should be made clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the Blakeney Government is directly responsible for a lot of the work stoppages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The Government opposite must accept largely the blame for the fantastic losses in 
the construction industry. They must accept blame for the nurses’ strike, for the teachers’ withdrawal 
and of course many work stoppages have occurred among different groups of civil servants. Civil 
servants have lost respect for the process of collective bargaining with the Blakeney Government. They 
all know and, in fact, civil servants will tell you quite openly to bargain with the NDP is a game of 
charades. They will tell you that they can get away with just about anything they want by playing this 
little game, study sessions, strikes or 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

398 

whatever. Civil servants now assume that this charade is the accepted manner and form of bargaining 
with the NDP. Examine the record, they are right. In light of the disastrous record in Saskatchewan and 
the inability of the Department of Labour to deal effectively with labour relations, I am going to suggest 
that the Department of Labour embark on a program that is similar to that of the Department of 
Highways. It would be a kind of phone-in information service. I suggest that they call it 
‘phone-a-strike’. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — It would be a really useful service. You could phone in to find out whether you 
could send your kids to school or whether you could deliver hogs, whether you could deliver wheat, 
whether you could get some construction done, whether the Government liquor stores would be open. 
You name it, you could find out by phoning in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Find out where a strike was, when it was and I think that the Department of Labour 
in view of its failure to assist in the process of labour relations, this would be one of the most helpful 
things that they could do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious that I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry & Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to join in this 
Debate on the Speech from the Throne. May I offer my congratulations to the mover and the seconder, 
both of whom acquitted themselves well in this Chamber and I am sure made their constituents proud of 
them in the presentation they made in launching this Debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan finds itself in a very difficult position, lacking any 
consistent philosophy, lacking any record of performance to be proud of. They are busy going around 
the province to see if they can find any individuals or groups of individuals who are unhappy or 
discontented. And of course, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t far to look in our society, there are such people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — There are such people. The Liberals are apparently taking on the role of championing 
the causes of people who have difficulties and problems in our modern society. 
 
Never mind that some of these difficulties and problems are a direct result of the lack of performance of 
the Liberal Party when it was in office in Saskatchewan. Never mind that some of the difficulties that 
the people of Saskatchewan are facing today are a direct result of the actions of Federal Liberals in 
Ottawa in the last Turner Budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

399 

Mr. Thorson: — I wouldn’t want to join in any partisan debate of that kind without first of all setting 
out very clearly what our present economic situation in Saskatchewan is. Let me remind the House of 
some of the economic facts of life for people in Saskatchewan. And particularly as we compare 
ourselves to the rest of Canada. We are often wont to say in this province that agriculture is our main 
industry. It is interesting to note that according to Statistics Canada, this province has 37 per cent of the 
productive agricultural land in Canada. It has only 4.3 per cent of the population of Canada or did have 
in 1972. With more than 4 per cent of the population in that year, we had just over 3 per cent (3.3 per 
cent) of the personal income earned in Canada. That is in 1972, Mr. Speaker. Right after the last seven 
years of Liberal rule in this province. 
 
We produced a total in actual goods of 4.3 per cent of the value produced in Canada that year. We had 
more than 13 per cent of primary production. In electric power production even though we had 4.3 per 
cent of the population we produced in kilowatt hours only 3.8 per cent of all the electricity produced in 
Canada in that year. 
 
Construction in Saskatchewan in 1972 was valued at only 3.1 per cent of that produced in Canada as a 
whole. Even though again as I say, Mr. Speaker, we had 4.3 per cent of the population. Our 
manufacturing represented only one per cent of the value of all produced in Canada in 1972. 
 
Against that background of those real economic facts, we are trying in this province, by implementing 
the New Deal for People with our Government, to diversify our economy, to increase its wealth 
production, to increase the incomes of Saskatchewan people in non-agricultural jobs as well as 
agricultural jobs. I want to draw the House’s attention particularly to some of the success stories so far 
as the industrial sector is concerned by mentioning some of the companies that have either established 
new operations or expanded operations in recent times in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Liberals, of course, I don’t know why they want to decry the situation in the province by pointing 
out all of the difficulties and the failures and therefore never point with any pride to the successes of 
some of the people who are in private business in Saskatchewan. Pyramid Mobile Homes at North 
Battleford is producing trailers and expanded recently; Univision at Biggar; Homco Industries at 
Estevan. Saskatchewan Forest Products is building its plywood plant now in production in Hudson Bay; 
Canasphere has established a new operation at Moose Jaw; Canada Packers is expanding its operation at 
Moose Jaw with a new plant. In Regina Degelman Industries have continued to expand despite all of the 
prophecies and predictions of the Opposition a couple of years ago. IPSCO has expanded; Westank 
expanded; North American Car is establishing new facilities in Regina, and of course Intercontinental 
Packers has opened a new plant in Regina. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, looking at Intercontinental Packers and its activities in Regina and in 
Saskatoon, I am sure the House will be pleased to know that while in the year ended in June of 1973 
they employed about 960 people in their Saskatchewan operations; in their year end of June, 1974 they 
had about 200 more people employed, about 1,144, more than 200 more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

400 

Mr. Thorson: — Now looking at Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, firms like Waldman and Paul Lenkurt 
Electric; Western Roto Thresh, Fleury Industries; and here is one the Members opposite will be 
interested in: Smith-Roles still carrying on producing goods and employing people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Looking at some of the smaller things there is Cypress Cheese at Swift Current; Swertz Bros. at 
Weyburn; Morris-Rod-weeder, of course, at Yorkton continues to expand as does Leon’s Manufacturing 
in Yorkton. Then, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so, we ought to in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! I should like to draw the Members’ attention to Rules of Decorum within 
our Rules Book, it says: 
 

When a Member is speaking no Member shall interrupt except when there is a Point of Order. 
 
Furthermore we have Members speaking other than from their own seats. I don’t think the decorum is 
good. It’s the last of our Debate, let’s have a little more quiet please. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we all ought to take some pride in the initiatives and the 
accomplishments of the people who are manufacturing farm machinery in Saskatchewan in many places 
outside of the cities in Saskatchewan. I have mentioned some of them like Degelmans in Regina. Also in 
Regina there are firms like Rite Way and Sakundiak who have expanded recently and are employing 
more people. But outside of the larger centres there is Beline Industries at Kindersley; Bussiere and Sons 
at Vonda; there is Friggstad at Frontier; there is Mel-Cam at Imperial in Saskatchewan; Shulte Welding 
and Machine Company in Englefield; Doepker Industries at Annaheim; Anderson Manufacturing at 
Southey. All of these, Mr. Speaker, are relatively small firms but all succeeding in their own way in 
making a worthwhile contribution to the provincial economy and we all ought to be proud of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1968 in this province according to Statistics Canada, the total number of people 
employed by manufacturing firms was 15,600 and that was an all-time high for Saskatchewan up to that 
time. In the next three years the numbers of people so employed in manufacturing industry dropped by 
more than a thousand to 14,500 and that’s where we stood when the Liberals left office in 1971. In the 
next two years employment in manufacturing firms increased by 2,000 so that it stood at 16,500. And I 
want to say a little bit more about that later on and the contribution that it is making to the stabilization 
of population in Saskatchewan. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Liberals very often like to squirm around this issue of 
the population in Saskatchewan by misstating some of the facts. Just so that there can t be any doubt lets 
look at those facts about population again. 
 
In 1968, in June of that year according to Statistics Canada the province’s population had reached 
960,000, its highest level in all of the history of the province since 1905. From there on it had some of 
the sharpest declines in percentage of total population each year until 1972. So that in 1969 we dropped 
to 958,000 which was only a .2 per cent drop. The next year we 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

401 

dropped to 941,000 which is a 1.8 per cent drop. In 1971 our population had declined again to 926,000 a 
1.16 per cent drop. It continued to decline so that in 1972 we were down to 916,000, a decline of 1.1 per 
cent. In 1975 it declined by only 8,000 people, a decline of only .9 per cent. The most recent figure 
available for our population estimate by Statistics Canada in June is, of course for this current year 1974, 
in which our population is estimated to be 907,000 compared to 908,000 that it was in 1973. 
 
It is interesting to note that we have gone from a position in Canada where we represented over five per 
cent of Canada’s total population in 1961 to a position where we are now down to only about four per 
cent of Canada’s total population. But in most of those years, Mr. Speaker, and especially in those years 
of sharpest declines in population, the Liberal Government was in office in Saskatchewan and in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Macdonald (Milestone): — Check . . . Moose Jaw down . . . 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, now, Mr. Speaker, I think that it is quite clear that the decline in population 
occurs most severely in those areas that are most influenced by agriculture conditions especially when 
they turn against the people engaged in farming and that is the largest factor in the decline in population 
in Saskatchewan. But it is not true to suggest, as our friends opposite often do, that this is all the result of 
New Democratic government or only occurs when New Democratic governments are in office because 
the record is quite the reverse of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think it is also clear that the principal reason for this turnaround in the province’s population 
where we can look forward to a stabilization and if some current trends continue, a reversal in the 
decline of population in the next couple of years, that turnaround I think has clearly been because of the 
expansion in the province’s employment opportunities and especially non-agricultural employment. In 
fact, the employed labour force in this province rose to 345,000 in 1973, an increase of approximately 
8,000 workers during that year. It continued that expansion in 1974 and will likely be at an even greater 
rate of increase when all the figures are in. 
 
At the same time our unemployment rate continues to be the lowest in Canada as it was in 1973 and in 
1972. In fact shortages of skilled labour are responsible for slowing the rate of expansion which the 
province could otherwise realize. The average labour force is expected to increase by 4,000 people in 
1974 and by a similar number in 1975. A large number of young people have entered the labour force in 
1974 already and undoubtedly will continue to do so in the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, total investment in Saskatchewan involving all construction, machinery and equipment in 
1973 rose to $1.5 billion which was a 14.5 per cent increase over 1972. Expenditures for construction 
increased by 19 per cent. Outlays for new housing counted for the largest increase of the new 
construction, manufacturing, trade firms and financial and commercial sectors also increased. 
Investment in new machinery and equipment alone was 12 per cent above that in 1972. New machinery 
purchased by farmers which amounted to almost $250 million in 1975, increased 52 cent over 1972. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

402 

In 1973 agriculture again played a leading role in the economic performance of the province. Everyone 
knows that the cash receipts in agriculture increased for both field crop producers and livestock 
producers in that year. Farm prices for agricultural products rose by 54 per cent in 1973. Farm input 
costs also increased but this was the first year since 1961 than the price index for farm products showed 
a greater increase than the index for the cost of production. 
 
It is in the manufacturing industry particularly that we have to look to provide alternative employment 
opportunities because even when the incomes increase in agriculture, to the extent that we depend upon 
grain production, we are employing fewer and fewer people as the technology improves. Well, 
manufacturing activity particularly in the area of processing farm output showed encouraging signs in 
1973. The level of employment in manufacturing reached an estimated 16,500 as I said in 1973. That 
surpassed all previous peak levels of employment in industry. Shipments of food and beverages 
manufactured in Saskatchewan accounted for 45 per cent of the value of shipments of all manufactured 
goods. About three-quarters of the food processing industries are based on agricultural production, The 
value of shipments of goods manufactured in Saskatchewan exceeded $800 million, an increase of 24 
per cent over the value in 1972. In 1974, manufacturing has steadily expanded. The value of shipments 
for the first half of 1974 exceeded the previous year’s total for the same period by 28 per cent. 
Employment in manufacturing through 1974 and 1975 may very well increase at a between 1,000 and 
2,000 jobs per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increases in personal incomes in the province during 1973 was reflected in consumer 
expenditures. Retail trade rose by 14 per cent to a total of $1.46 billion in 1973 with automobile dealers 
and department stores experiencing exceptionally large gains. Additional expenditures for services in 
1973 were indicated by increased employment in trade, financial firms, real estate and business and all 
personal service firms in Saskatchewan. The employed labour force in these service industries during 
1973 increased by approximately 11,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think those hard economic facts give us all reason to be encouraged about our present 
economic situation and economic prospects in Saskatchewan/ 
 
In a moment I want to turn to some of those storm clouds that were mentioned in the Speech from the 
Throne but let me take a few moments to set out how the people in southeastern Saskatchewan, in my 
home area at Estevan and the surrounding district, have benefited by the programs of this Government 
since 1971. I want particularly to call attention to some of the items that no one dreamed were possible 
in that area of Saskatchewan when the Liberals were in office. In the city of Estevan alone we have had 
things like a new addition to the Regional Nursing Home, an addition to St. Joseph’s Hospital, we have 
had established through the efforts of the local Kinsmen Club the “Workinship” for the handicapped, 
supported by contributions of local people, and by grants from the Department of Social Services. We 
have had such things as Meals-on-Wheels, Day-Care Centre, Low Rental Housing expansion, Winter 
Works programs for various kinds in community facilities such as the golf club and so on, that wouldn’t 
have been possible without the programs of this Government. Grants for tourist booths, both to establish 
them and to operate them. We have seen an increase in the contribution of 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

403 

the Department of Highways under the assistance to the urban municipality in paving, particularly the 
thoroughfare known as King Street in Estevan which leads to the Comprehensive School and also leads 
to the new shopping centre which was opened in Estevan in 1974. We have seen a business 
representative office established and we have seen new job opportunities open up in coal, in power 
production and in service industries in the city of Estevan itself. 
 
In the area around, natural gas service has been taken to the village of Macoun and the village of 
Torquay. Dial telephones have also been established in those two centres. At Bienfait a new covered 
swimming pool has been established (again with the efforts of local people) and with the very 
substantial grant from the Provincial Government to assist them in establishing that facility as a tourist 
facility and recreational facility in Bienfait. We have seen Drop-in Centres established at Bienfait for 
senior citizens and another one established at Lampman for senior citizens, again with the assistance and 
the grant from the Department of Social Services. And, of course, as my friend from Moose Jaw who 
just took his seat noted, the Government has announced that it is prepared to assist in the construction of 
a new hospital at Lampman to replace the one that was originally built there in 1918. 
 
Some of our programs, Mr. Speaker, are particularly beneficial to people. I call them grants to citizens. 
The Minister of Municipal Affairs pointed out how beneficial these have been when he spoke this 
afternoon. Our Property Improvement Grant now goes to homeowners and to farmers and to small 
businessmen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — It’s interesting, because I recall very well at the by-election in Estevan in 1971 all of 
the talk that went around about how the newly elected Government in Regina was going to abolish the 
Homeowner Grant Program. We didn’t abolish it, except, Mr. Speaker, to replace it with something 
better. It is better because it covers more kinds of property and because the rate of grant has increased 
each year since we have been in office. It has assisted materially in helping people continue in their own 
homes, in their own businesses and on their own farms and to help meet local taxation which the 
municipalities levy. 
 
Grants to people also include the Senior Citizens’ Home Repair grants, and several hundreds of people 
in my area of Saskatchewan and several thousands of people throughout the province benefited from 
that program. 
 
But it isn’t just grants to people, Mr. Speaker. This Government has made outstanding increases in 
grants to local governments to assist them in keeping up the level of services and keeping down the tax 
rates. 
 
School boards have all noted increases in their grants in my area since this Government took office. 
 
Rural municipalities have increases in grants for roads. But the urban communities, Mr. Speaker, have 
taken on a new hope and new confidence about the future as a result of the new programs grants and 
assistance which were introduced in this year by the Provincial Government to benefit people in those 
urban centres. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

404 

The equalization grants, so that there is an equity in the revenues that are available for local purposes to 
local communities; the $10 per capita unconditional grant to be paid annually to urban communities and 
the Community Capital Fund of $75 per capita to allow investments in new and worthwhile community 
facilities over the next five years. All of these, Mr. Speaker, have resulted in a continuation or an 
improvement of services without the necessary increase in local taxes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have done that because we believe in the principle of taxing according to ability 
to pay, because we did not believe that the ownership of property in Saskatchewan necessarily indicates 
ability to pay. We have obviously tried to encourage homeowners and farmers and small businessmen to 
continue owning their property; we have tried to make sure that provincial resources are available to 
assist local communities and local people in the communities where they live. We have thought it 
appropriate, if there are to be any increases in tax, to do it in the income tax, because that is based on 
ability to pay. In fact, since this Government took office that is the only area of taxation where anyone 
can say we made any increases at all, and those have been fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — But we have removed things like deterrent fees, the tax on the sick, we have removed 
some of the nuisances like the ‘hot dog’ tax and we have removed the “poll tax” — the per capita tax 
which was charged by way of a premium for medical and hospital services in previous years in 
Saskatchewan. All of that is founded in the firm belief that we should collect revenues according to 
ability to pay and that we should distribute provincial resources and benefits to people and to local 
governments so that local services can be maintained and improved without a crushing burden of 
taxation. Now this is a far cry from the record of the previous Liberal Government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon my friend the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) was good 
enough to raise some questions about people in the oil field supply and service industry in 
Saskatchewan. I want to take this opportunity to say something about their particular situation and the 
Disruptive Circumstance Assistance program of the Government which applies to them directly, and 
then I want to draw the attention of the House and the Member for Milestone to some of the background 
which causes these people to find themselves in some difficulty and in some doubt. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 1974 when we announced that there would be a program of 
cash advances and under certain circumstances outright grants to people in the oil field supply and 
services industry, we indicated that firms which received their major income from contracting with or 
providing goods and services to people who explore for oil or produce oil, would be eligible for the 
program. Some 48 firms in Saskatchewan in total have received advances of money under that program 
so far. Thirty-three additional firms, Mr. Speaker, put their names on the list indicating clearly that they 
were qualified and eligible, but did not ask for any funds. Ninety per cent of the firms which have 
received advances of money, so far, according to the survey we conducted within the past month, were 
still working in Saskatchewan. Ten per cent of them indicated that they were unable to do all of the work 
that was available to them because of labour. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

405 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we indicated at the time that if the average net income of these firms, per employee, 
was less in 1974 than the average annual net income on that basis for the three previous years, then there 
would be an outright grant to make up the difference. But primarily the program was aimed at providing 
immediate cash in the spring of the year so that people could maintain valuable staff members and meet 
their pay roll and so that they could pay for outstanding expenses such as licences for trucks and things 
of that kind. I think the fact that 90 per cent of these firms are still in Saskatchewan indicates that it was 
a worthwhile program and they are needed and they are working here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Opposition, for their own political purposes, choose to say that the 
difficulties in which these people in the oil field supply and service industry find themselves and the 
uncertainty is somehow entirely the fault of the Provincial Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now that’s not true. It is true that in the spring of this year there was a reduction in the 
regular maintenance and service programs of producing oil firms. That is true. It is also true that in this 
year, 1974, we have witnessed, not for the first time by any means, but we have witnessed a decline in 
exploration activities in the oil industry in Saskatchewan. But that decline, Mr. Speaker, has been going 
on since at least 1969. Each year, starting in 1969 and continuing right through to the present there has 
been a decline in the footage drilled and in the number of wells drilled in Saskatchewan for exploration. 
That has been going on for at least five years, Mr. Speaker, throughout this province. That much is true. 
 
What about the oil industry, Mr. Speaker? What about the revenues they have received? Well, let’s just 
recall some of the events in 1972 which led to an increase in the price of oil, and we must think that’s 
very modest today, but it led to an increase in the price of oil commencing in November, 1972 and going 
to August of 1973, of something like 95 cents a barrel. So that at the end of 1973 or in the fall of 1973 
the average price in Saskatchewan, weighted average price, was under $3.40 a barrel, whereas in the 
year before it was about $2.43 a barrel. As a result of those price increases, Mr. Speaker, of course the 
revenues for the oil industry increased, just out of the production in Saskatchewan, even though that had 
been declining also since the late 1960s. But the revenues now clearly were increased in 1973 as 
compared to 1972. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, let us just remind the House that the oil industry in 
Saskatchewan since 1964 had never made less than $60 million over and above all of its expenditures in 
this province in each year. Some years it was in excess of $100 million. Now why all this fretting and 
crying about the producers of oil in Saskatchewan on the part of the Liberal Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
Why are they crying about that? Why should they cry about an industry which in its 25 years in this 
province has taken out $800 million more than it has spent in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said on another occasion that that kind of conduct, making that kind of money and then 
cutting down its economic activity in the province, is, in the eyes of many people, completely improper 
and illegitimate. I said on another occasion 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

406 

that when the oil prices continue to climb and climb we are going to get increasing attention by public 
agencies and governments and increasing intervention in the oil industry on behalf of the public by 
government agencies. And that’s been true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when I introduced Bill 42 in this Chamber a year ago, when I 
spoke on second reading on December 12, 1973, I said there were three outstanding issues and I want to 
remind the House of what we were looking at at that time. It was against that background, remember, 
Mr. Speaker, of increasing prices for oil, of increasing net revenues for the oil industry in this province 
and a continual decline in its exploration and production activity in this province, I said at the time that 
we introduced Bill 42 that there were three issues. 
 
One was financial. I asked the question — “What will be done with the profits from oil?” and “What 
will Canadians have to pay for oil?” The second issue, Mr. Speaker, was constitutional, a matter of 
federal-provincial relations in Canada. The questions I put were: 
 

- What are the rights of the provinces in resource development? 
 

- How can we develop a national energy policy? 
 
The third issue that I referred to a year ago, I characterized as a matter of political philosophy. Will 
energy, in the form of oil, be treated like a public utility, or will it not? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on all of those three issues the financial, the constitutional one, the question of how 
we are to develop and have the benefit of energy resources in Canada, can we, a year later, say that we 
are better off on any single one of those points? I say we are not. I say that despite the best efforts of the 
Provincial Governments and the Federal Government as it participated in the two energy conferences, 
one in January and the other one at the end of March, despite the understanding and agreement that was 
reached at that March conference which gave a measure of certainty to the people producing oil and to 
the people servicing the oil industry and gave a measure of certainty and security to the consumers of 
energy in the form of oil, despite those efforts and despite that agreement, arrived at surely by 
honourable men working in a difficult situation considering the international setting and considering the 
difficulties of governing a federal state like Canada, despite the efforts and despite that agreement, a 
year later we are no better off. In some ways, Mr. Speaker, we are worse off than we were a year ago 
and I must say regretfully, that I lay the blame for that entirely at the feet of the Federal Liberal 
Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — And it is sad indeed to listen in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, to these little Liberals in 
Saskatchewan trying to defend them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

407 

Mr. Thorson: — Now it is suggested that somehow the Provincial Government, in the provisions of 
Bill 42 has caused the trouble for the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I say clearly that it is not so. All that Bill 42 has done is to increase our royalty rate 
and that, considering the way the price oil was escalating in 1972, and at a much more spectacular rate 
in 1973 at the end of the year and in 1974, all of that was quite legitimate. Everyone, I think, except of 
course the Liberals in Saskatchewan, who are looking for discontented people because they felt 
somehow or other that that elevated their provincial and political stature if they could find some people 
who were discontented and sympathize with them and distort the causes of their difficulty, everyone, I 
think, applauded the moves that were made by the Provincial Government in Bill 42 and the stand which 
the Government of Saskatchewan took in the two energy conferences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Up to that time, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to consider what happened to the money 
that could be earned by producing a barrel of oil in southeastern Saskatchewan and selling it on the 
international market of the United States. 
 
Now, my friend for Milestone was kind enough to present me with a cake this afternoon. I am sorry I 
haven’t anything as sweet or nice to offer him in return, but I do have a little pie chart which I should 
like to show him. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Food for the mind there. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, up to the time of the Turner Budget in May of this year and of 
November of this year (I’ll call the former the old Federal Budget), a barrel of crude oil being produced 
in southeastern Saskatchewan, where I come from, could be sold on the international market for a very 
substantial price. Ignoring the transportation costs, let’s say it could have fetched something like $11.80 
and out of that the province got 28 per cent. The producer got 28 per cent. About $3.30 each, give or 
take a few cents. The Federal Government, which had already imposed its export tax in October of 1973, 
and continued to raise the rate of the export tax, almost monthly thereafter until May of 1974, was 
getting about 44 per cent of the value of that oil as it was produced. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the old Budget, that’s the situation when the Premiers and the Prime Minister 
arrived at an agreement on the 27th of March, 1974 on what the price of oil should be on the domestic 
market and who should get the benefit of the windfall gains available on the international market, the 
federal tax of something like $5.20 per barrel. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Turner new Budget came in, it is interesting to consider the fate of one of 
those barrels of oil from southeastern Saskatchewan when people began to divide up where the money 
should go. Because that Budget not only 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

408 

maintained that the export tax would stay on at $5.20 per barrel, but now the money which the producer 
was paying to the province in the form of royalties at $3.30 approximately for each barrel, now that was 
to be treated henceforth as though it were not an expense by the producer but income and subject to 
income tax by the Federal Government. 
 
Well let’s say that the tax is going to be about 50 per cent of that $3.30, about $1.65 a barrel. So this is 
what happens, Mr. Speaker, as the result of the new Federal Budget, to the barrel of oil from 
southeastern Saskatchewan. Now the province continues to get 28 per cent at about $3.30 a barrel, but 
the producer is squeezed down to 14 per cent and where does it go? To the Federal Government, that is 
where it goes. They are still collecting the $5.40 a barrel and they are collecting another $1.65 in income 
tax and now they are getting 58 per cent. 
 
Now the Member for Milestone tries to tell the people in the oil fields supply and service industry and 
the people of Saskatchewan that somehow this difficulty is the result of Bill 42. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 left in the hands of the oil producers, all of the income according to the 1973 
average price. Nothing in Bill 42 changed that. We did say that we would recognize increases in cost of 
production; we did say we would allow a higher price if the increased revenue is spent on exploration. 
We have changed nothing since a year ago with respect to our share of the money that should come from 
producing oil. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — But it is not so for the Federal Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker. Regardless of the 
agreement that was reached in March 1974 . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister. In that 
beautiful pie of his has he included the rebate? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what rebate he is talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I don’t know what deal the Federal Liberal Government made with some of the oil 
producers in Canada. They weren’t in on the discussions in March of this year. I hear from some of 
these news reports that somehow or other the producers and the Federal Government had an 
understanding that they were both to put pressure on the provinces for the provinces to reduce their 
royalties. And I don’t know what the Federal Government agreed to pay the producers for that change. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Read the Budget. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I know what the provisions of the Budget are as they were announced by the Federal 
Minister of Finance and I know despite the fact that the federal take has gone up from 44 per 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

409 

cent to 58 per cent, that that is not intended to benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — What is the Federal Government doing with this revenue? Well, some of it they are 
using to subsidize the consumers of oil in other parts of Canada, and they are taking it out of the 
resources of the Province of Saskatchewan to do it. Some of it, presumably, they are going to pay back 
to some of the oil companies, I don’t know. But we do know, Mr. Speaker, that it is certainly not going 
to benefit the people of Saskatchewan under the new Budget because our equalization payments, under 
this new Budget, will go down $40 million. And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the Federal 
Government proposes, in its new Budget, to increase its tax levy on the producers of natural gas if they 
sell to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Now tell me, Mr. Speaker, how these actions of the Federal Liberal Government have improved our 
situation on those three issues that we were concerned about a year ago. Are we better off financially as 
a result of these actions? Not at all. Have Federal-Provincial relations been improved by the conduct of 
the Federal Liberals in this issue, this resource and energy issue? Not at all, Mr. Speaker. And is there 
any evidence that the Federal Liberals will do anything to establish, once and for all, that energy in the 
form of oil should be treated like a public utility in the same way that we treat electricity? Not at all, Mr. 
Speaker. And all we get, as I say, from these little Liberals in Saskatchewan, is a defence of this kind of 
conduct of the Federal Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you can count me as one who supports Premier Blakeney and the 
stand that he has taken on these energy issues and Federal-Provincial Government issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — You can count me as one who supports the warning that is raised in this Speech from 
the Throne that we heard from His Honour in this Chamber, that these storm clouds on the horizon are 
threatening the well-being of Canadians in a federal state. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I will support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — Mr. Speaker, seeing that the Minister refused to answer my last question I should 
like to ask him in simple mathematics, the Provincial surtax says that anything over $3 a barrel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! Is the Minister prepared to answer 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

410 

the question? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that I can help him on the mathematics but if there is a 
legitimate question of information that I can help him with I will try and get it for him. 
 
The Speaker: — Well, will the Member please just ask the question and don’t make a statement. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial government surtax is 100 per cent of anything over $3 
a barrel. If the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, what is your question? 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — If the Federal Government had no export tax what additional revenue would be 
given to the producers of this province? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — On a Point of Order. Mr. Speaker, it has always been my understanding, and that 
Member over there has been in the House long enough to know, that when the Speaker is standing on his 
feet he sits down. I would like a little more decorum and manners from those people opposite. 
 
Mr. Macdonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. It has also been my understanding when a man 
rises to speak in this House he speaks in his own seat. The Member is so stupid that he doesn’t even 
know where he sits. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! I think the adverse compliments are flowing a little too freely and we 
had better get on with the debate. 
 
Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, after that little outburst of 
friendliness I am not sure that anything that I will have to say will be able to match either Member, 
whatever side of the House you want to consider. 
 
I want in the time that is left to us this evening and in the closing minutes of the Debate, to make a few 
comments with respect to only a couple of subjects and not attempt to deal with the many virtues of the 
Throne Speech Debate and in doing so leave some time for the Opposition who is, I understand, by 
some agreement to close the Debate. 
 
I want to talk about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and I want to talk about some forest 
development in Saskatchewan and will try to limit my remarks to that. 
 
All of us will agree that for a while after 1971 and 1972 the idea of a single agency, that is the idea of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, was not very popular. Opposition Members did their best to 
destroy the concept and to destroy the confidence of the Saskatchewan people in it as well as the 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

411 

people in the North, without really making any alternative suggestions as to what we could do, or should 
do, to resolve those rather important issues for the people living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The vested groups took their swings from a variety of positions, from their own vantage points of view 
and that is really not a criticism of them. And even some employees of the Department with loyalties 
only to their own objectives and political affiliations were vigorously attacking the Department from 
within. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the initial tests are now over. Resolutions from Saskatchewan northern people have rolled 
in commending our Government for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Resolutions from 
Saskatchewan’s southern people have been rolling in as well commending our Government for the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resolutions are even coming from the Liberal Party provincial convention, they have 
been rolling in as well. They are a little more reserved about their commendation of the policy, but at the 
promptings of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan’s most recent convert, the Hon. Member for 
Athabasca (Mr. Guy), they could not resist from getting on the bandwagon with the rest. What a 
conversion, Mr. Speaker, what a conversion that prompts a headline in the Leader-Post and suggests that 
Mr. Guy comes to the defence of the Northern Department. 
 
When I was a child I marvelled somewhat at the New Testament story about the miraculous conversion 
of the Apostle Paul, on the road to Damascus. As a man I am overwhelmed by the sudden conversion of 
the Hon. Member for Athabasca and his disciples, the Liberal Party. However, unlike the story of 
Apostle Paul, I have reasons to doubt the depth and the sincerity of the most recent conversion of the 
Member of that party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bowerman: — Why do I have reason to doubt? Because there is an election in the offing and the 
Liberal Party has demonstrated itself to be like some other biblical characters, who were able to change 
their coats and appear to be different but remain the same. 
 
The Liberal stand on the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in the past is the real stand of the 
Liberals in Saskatchewan today. People of the North will not be fooled again. People of northern 
Saskatchewan will not be fooled under the commitments of the Liberals, that they have made or the 
suggestions of commitments that they have made recently in their convention. Liberals are committed to 
destroy the New Democratic progress in the North as they are dedicated to destroy it in the South. 
 
Today we can see the beginning of the fulfilment of the North. A growing change in awareness by the 
mainstream Saskatchewan cities of the North, the citizens of the North and its people and an awareness 
in the people of the North of our genuine concern for them. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

412 

Mr. Speaker, there was a day which ended in June 1971 when we never even drew our provincial road 
maps to include anything as far north as La Range. There was a time in the recent past when roads didn’t 
even go beyond the geographic centre of our province. There was a time when we developed our mining 
industries in the North and allowed them to be serviced both from Edmonton and Winnipeg only. There 
was a time that ended in June 1971, when old line departments of the Government and when 
governments accepted less than human necessities for acceptable standards in education, in health, in 
employment, housing, child care, social and legal justice in the North. 
 
Let me use the statistics again that represent the condition of northern Saskatchewan people when we 
took office in 1971, after seven years of opportunity for Liberals to do some thing in a major way to 
alleviate these unbelievable and unacceptable conditions, yet we were faced with these facts. 
 
The incidence of disease about which the Liberal Party, in their seven years of government, did nothing 
was 35 times higher than the rest of Saskatchewan; drop-out rate amongst students approximately 80 
times higher than in our southern schools; unemployment 50 to 70 per cent of the labour force of people 
in the North; income of one-quarter of those employed less than $3,000 per year; the welfare cases in 
1970 and 1971 — and there was a sharp rise in the welfare cases in 1970-71 and the Member for 
Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) can probably point out the reason why that was — were highest in the 
history of northern welfare records. An average of 25 or 30 new houses per year were being built of 
minimum standards. No new medical clinics were being constructed; no child care facilities were being 
built; no new employment opportunities; no new major recreational or educational installations. You 
name one. You seem to be doing a lot of talking from your seat but why haven’t you named some. No 
new roads for the people of communities, but there were roads like the Primrose Path and there were 
roads like the road from Anglo-Rouyn Mine to Flin Flon and there was a road serving another mine, but 
no roads to serve people in communities. 
 
I am not able to list all the programs and all the projects which are resulting in the improvement of 
health programs; arrest of student drop-out; arrest the welfare cases, the child care problems, the 
unemployment, the poor housing, the social and economic injustices that have occurred in the North. 
But I recommend to you that you refer to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan’s annual report. It 
was tabled at this Session, which is the greatest evidence of a commitment and resolution that we have 
ever seen in this Legislature relative to the northern part of our province. 
 
I want to refer, however, to some of the outstanding accomplishments which are evidenced of our 
success in the North. The welfare statistics undeniably demonstrate that we have tackled today’s most 
difficult problem and have met with significant success. A major reduction in case loads of up to 35 per 
cent. A major decrease in total dollars required for SAP assistance. These statistics also demonstrate that 
we have substantially met the unemployment problem with wages comparable to labouring standards 
throughout the province. 
 
In grants to northern school boards, comparing the school grants to the northern school board, to 
Uranium City and to Creighton, from 1970 and 1971 to 1973-74 under the DNS, there is 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

413 

an increase of almost $1.2 million. In 1970-71 the grant to the northern school board was $1.79 million 
and in 1973-74 it was $2.78 million — an increase of $988,000. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — . . . after . . . 
 
Mr. Bowerman: — You might learn something if you would listen. You might learn something 
although I know it is very difficult for you. Even in grade school it was difficult. 
 
In 1970-71 the grant to Uranium City was $99,567 and in 1973-74 it was $264,000 an increase of 
$164,000 to Uranium City schools. In Creighton, 1970-71, the grant was $165,000 and in 1973-74 it was 
$198,000, an increase of $32,000. The child care centre established at Sandy Bay and now near 
completion for a capacity of 16 children, an organized drive to increase the number of foster homes in 
the North and an innovative placement program resulted in a number of children being retained in the 
North, have risen by 30 per cent. 
 
Health facilities. In 1973, an outpost hospital in Buffalo Narrows was renovated. Dental clinics were 
established in Buffalo Narrows and in Lac LaLoche. This will provide for dental care for children up to 
16 years and the expansion of that program we hope will be under way in 1975. 
 
Educational facilities. The following buildings were constructed to a stage this fall which will provide 
for construction on a continuing basis over the winter. A gymnasium in La Loche, 50 local persons 
employed on that project when I was last in La Loche. Green Lake, a gymnasium being constructed for 
the recreation and benefit of the children there. A new school at Pine House. New classrooms at 
Wollaston Lake. A gymnasium has been built at Buffalo Narrows, and a science room completed and in 
use there. 
 
The Member for Meadow Lake I am sure would be able to tell this House if he had the opportunity of 
how many times and in how many elections he promised the people at Buffalo Narrows that they would 
receive a gymnasium during his government’s reign. 
 
Sewer and water programs in Cumberland House, in La Loche, in Weyakwin Lake, in Buffalo Narrows 
have been undertaken and are well Under way towards their completion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend our Government, I commend the Premier and my colleagues for addressing 
themselves to the task of northern Saskatchewan and being prepared to stand with what were rather 
grave political hazards, political hazards beyond the fortitude usually ascribed to politicians in the 
program of renovating and rejuvenating the North. 
 
I turn to forest developments in Saskatchewan. We have approached development of our resources 
differently from the Saskatchewan Liberals. We have demonstrated our confidence in Saskatchewan 
people and not only in the international corporations as did the former government. We have planned 
our forest resources utilization for a greater variety of end products and for service to a greater number 
of Saskatchewan communities at market demands. Our forest developments have been designed to arrest 
the waste of prime forest resources and to produce 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

414 

higher value products from that forest resource. I believe that we have been successful in our ventures 
thus far and the red herring which the Leader of the Opposition dragged through this debate about the 
Springate Consulting firm and the recommended annual allowable harvest of resources being attributed 
to the recommendations of that firm is both insensitive and arrant nonsense and he knows it. And so do 
you, Mr. Member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Steuart served as the Minister of Natural Resources and he was the deputy premier of the Thatcher 
Government. He knows very well that forest inventories, that annual allowable harvests, that forest 
regulations and the setting of cutting limits are all within the undivided jurisdiction of the Forestry 
Branch of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. Although it is true that his government 
never listened to their advisors he knows well that his accusations about a forest industrial consultant 
having the powers of setting annual allowable harvests in any Canadian province including 
Saskatchewan is sheer nonsense and it is a deliberate attempt to mislead the public and to defame a 
consultant. 
 
The Springate firm took the forest inventories that were gathered and tabulated by our Saskatchewan 
Government employees and prepared for us a utilization report on the basis of the approved annual 
allowable harvests. Mr. Steuart is embarrassed because the common sense of the Springate Report points 
out the very ridiculous and foolhardy course of forestry development under his government. I need not 
defend the reputation of the consulting firm of Norman Springate and Associates. I think his record and 
his expertise speaks for itself. For the record of this House I will outline some of the qualifications 
which prompted us to undertake some major forest industrial developments as research and 
recommended by that firm. 
 
Norman Springate and Associates is a wholly owned Canadian company located in British Columbia 
and will be opening an office in Saskatchewan in Prince Albert in the very near future. Mr. Springate 
personally is a former Saskatchewan native son of this province. Of the firm’s 66 contracts in 1974, 41 
have been in Canada, 14 in the United States and 11 outside of North America. They have designed and 
built most of the plywood plants in Canada in the past six years including plants for North Central 
Plywood, Canadian Forest Products, Even Products, Riverside Forest Products, Canada Veneer and 
Tagama Forest Products . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Churchill Industries? 
 
Mr. Bowerwan: — No, they didn’t do that one. 
 
Springate and Associates have undertaken major projects for the Liberal Government of Ottawa, for the 
Liberal Government of Quebec, for the Liberal Government of New Brunswick and also for both 
governments in British Columbia. They are presently retained on projects for Crown Zellerbach, for 
MacMillan Bloedel, for Wellwood of Canada and for Canadian Forest Products. The Leader of the 
Opposition would like to have Saskatchewan people believe that the New Democratic governments do 
not have access to the best advice and consultant services across Canada. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

415 

Let’s check the kind of advice that we have received from this consultant and check it against the 
advisors of his former government. The Springate firm had advised the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation on five major projects that have been announced earlier; the Hudson’s Bay Plywood plant; 
the Big River Sawmill and Planer mill — I wonder where the former government got their advice on the 
one that is there now? — the Carrot River Sawmill and Planer mill; the sawmill at Green Lake and the 
Prince Albert Wood Treatment plant. The total estimated capital expenditure is $19.6 million for these 
five different community projects. It is estimated that they will provide 485 jobs in the forests and 545 
jobs in milling operations for a total of 1,030 jobs. Their forest requirements, that is, the requirements of 
the raw timber are estimated at 230,000 cords annually. 
 
Now let’s compare that recommendation with what the former government got. Let’s compare the 
Saskatchewan Forest Product Corporation proposal to the Prince Albert Pulp Company program. Capital 
expenditures, $19.6 million for Saskatchewan Forest products; PAPCO $65 million or upwards of that 
figure. The volume of annual raw material to be used in the five projects, Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation, 230,000 cords annually as opposed to 500,000 cords annually for the Prince Albert Pulp 
mill. The number of jobs in the recommendation to the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation were 
1,030 jobs as opposed to approximately 1,000 jobs in PAPCO. 
 
What does that mean? The capital cost per job as recommended for the corporation was $19,000, almost, 
per job. In the Prince Albert Pulp Company it was $65,000 per job. The annual raw material volume per 
job, Mr. Speaker, under the Forest Products proposal, the annual amount of raw material volume per job, 
223 cords annually, as opposed to 500 annually in the pulp mill operation. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition expressed concern about the volume of forest resources that the proposed 
development projects would use. Let’s compare them with the Simpson Timber operation between the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products operation at Hudson’s Bay. The annual raw material volume being used 
in the plywood mill at Hudson’s Bay is estimated at 60,000 cords. The Simpson operation is estimated 
to be 180,000 cords. The total jobs in the plant at Hudson’s Bay, that is, the plywood plant, 150 jobs. 
The total jobs in the Simpson Timber operation, 155 jobs. Again relating it to the amount of raw 
volume, raw timber used per job created in the Saskatchewan Forest Products operation 400 cords per 
man job as opposed to Simpson’s operation for 1,161 cords per man job of raw material required. I 
suggest that the value of the plywood product will be considerably higher than the same quantity of 
wood fibre that is being made into studs, is also a factor that needs to be taken into account. 
 
It is indeed interesting to note that the Hon. Member who recently suggested that the new developments 
of the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation which will use a combined total of 200,000 cords of 
soft and hard wood annually would result in overcutting of Saskatchewan’s forests. He made quite an 
issue about that in the House the other day in his speech in this Throne Debate. This is the same Hon. 
Member who only four short years ago tried to push the infamous Athabasca Pulp Mill, which was to 
use, don’t forget, and get this figure, not 200,000 cords annually which he is so concerned about now as 
being an over-cutting proposition, but the proposal which he was making only 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

416 

about four years ago, Mr. Speaker, was to use a minimum of 1.2 -million cords annually. 
 
In comparing the Athabasca Pulp mill with the new projects of the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation there are a number of important comparisons even though the number of jobs created are 
approximately the same. The pulp mill proposal would have used at least six times the wood volume that 
will be used in Saskatchewan Forest Products manufacturing plants 1.2 million cords as compared to 
200,000 cords annually. The proposed pulp mill would have resulted in over seven times the capital 
expenditure spent on Saskatchewan Forest Products industries. In other words, we were talking about 
$150 million back four years ago as compared to a proposal made now by the forest industrial consultant 
which we can develop for about $20 million. 
 
The Liberal pulp mill would have resulted in a tremendous tax burden to the people of Saskatchewan to 
build, they would have been required to build a new townsite, and an expensive road network instead of 
strengthening the towns and the cities already in existence as the new Saskatchewan Forest Products will 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the recommendations which we received from the consultants which we retained 
to advise us with respect to forestry matters in this province. It is unbelievable that the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) would then rise in the House in this 
Debate and cry foul because he believes that we were going to be overcutting the forest. He insinuated 
that the consultant which we had hired was the person who was recommending that overcut. He knows 
well that that is not and cannot be the case. He received the report which was tabled in this Legislature a 
year ago and if he had taken any time at all whatsoever to read and study that report he will know that 
the advice or the basis of the consultant’s report was on the basis of the information which has been 
tabulated and correlated by the officials of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many things about this Throne Speech Debate which I should like to have spent 
some additional time in discussing. I am sure most of them have been covered by my colleagues who 
have taken part in this Debate. I am sure that when the conclusion is made after the next speaker 
resumes his seat that the decision with respect to the adopting of the Throne Speech Debate, Mr. 
Speaker, will not only speak well for what the program of the New Democratic Party has been in 
Saskatchewan, but the results of the Government in action for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
I heartily support the recommendation of the motion that we support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — I seem to be squeezed out of a fair bit of my time, but I will try and 
cover as much as I can. We have had a rather strange debate this year. The Government Members have 
not defended their record, they have not defended their old programs, they haven’t come up with any 
new imaginative program, they have been dispirited throughout the entire debate. 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

417 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardiner: — They said they were going to talk about Saskatchewan issues, Mr. Speaker, but they 
soon drifted into the federal field where they meander into meaningless arguments. They lack 
enthusiasm this year in this debate, they lack credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I should like you to compare this with the aggressive and optimistic 
attitude displayed by the Members on this side of the House during this debate. The Members over there 
have flooded us with misleading and inaccurate statistics. We could give you dozens of examples and 
we certainly saw one a minute ago from the Minister for Souris-Estevan. I’ll just give you one, because 
that is all the time I have, although I have quite a few here. It is from a person whom you would least 
expect and that is the Minister of Municipal Affairs. This afternoon he made a great speech about how 
you had changed and reversed the trend of people leaving the rural areas. He told us this was because of 
the Land Bank and FarmStart and so on. In the paper, in the Leader-Post of December 5, 1974, we 
noticed that some statistics were given on population. For example, the number of farms in 
Saskatchewan in one year — this is from 1972-73 — decreased from 69,295 to 66,980, 2,300 less 
farmers in one year under the NDP. This is what the Land Bank and FarmStart has done. The strange 
thing about this report and I could go on, because it also tells you how the towns have lost population in 
the villages, and municipalities. But this was put out from the annual report of the Department of 
Municipal Affairs. The very Minister who at up and told us exactly the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get into my main remarks, because my time is short. Before I begin my remarks 
on the agricultural situation I should like to bring to your attention a matter which should be of great 
concern to every citizen in this province. That is the attitude of the NDP Government towards potash 
production. I should like you to consider the following facts. Saskatchewan has unbelievable and almost 
unlimited supplies of potash, it is not a resource such as oil where conservation is a factor. 
Saskatchewan’s soils contain sufficient potash for crops but in many parts of the world this very 
important ingredient is lacking. The recent World Conference in Rome and as the Minister of 
Agriculture was there he knows this is accurate, pointed out the problem, millions of people in the world 
face starvation and in fact every day thousands of people are dying because of the lack of food. The 
situation is desperate and I don’t think anyone can deny it. World grain reserves are low and problems of 
transportation, storage and distribution are fantastic. Shipping grain to these people is only a partial 
answer and inadequate in the long run. Delegates in Rome agreed that countries with starving 
populations would have to grow more of their own food. But these are the very countries where soils are 
deficient in potash, therefore, food would be available to starving people if they had the potash fertilizer. 
Now we have unlimited supplies of potash. Money is available through international organizations and 
agencies to buy this potash from us at a good price. Mr. Speaker, the point is amazing but nevertheless 
true. An NDP Government Saskatchewan is restricting production and denying fertilizer to people who 
literally must have it or starve to death. Almost every operating potash company in this province would 
like to 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

418 

expand their production. The papers are full of reports of mine expansions cancelled because of the 
unfavourable political climate in Saskatchewan and because of the NDP and I have a number of them 
here. I don’t have time to read these quotes. I am sure we are all aware of them. 
 
I should like however to refer to one because it affects my constituency. Sylvite of Canada Company 
recently announced the cancellation of a $40 million expansion at Rocanville. Now, Mr. Speaker, we 
may rightly be concerned about the loss of jobs this means to our young people in Saskatchewan. We 
can be concerned about the loss of taxes to the local municipalities, the loss of tens of millions of dollars 
of royalties that we could charge these potash companies. But much more important we must be gravely 
concerned about denying this basic commodity to starving people who desperately need it. Expansion 
must be started now. It should have started years ago. Any delay means that additional people will die of 
starvation. This was made clear from the Rome conference. Lead time for a new mine is about four 
years. Because of shortages of material and labour, the lead time for expansion is about two years and 
with government involvement this could probably be doubled. I checked some recent offshore shipments 
of potash and found the destinations were approximately as follows: Such countries as Brazil, Malaysia, 
Bangladesh, China, India, Philippines and certain African countries. The amounts were pitifully small. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a moral obligation to do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — I should like to say and put on the record that if there is mass starvation in these 
countries, in three or five or ten years the Blakeney Government of 1971-75 will have to accept their 
share of the blame. The Liberal Opposition believe that this natural resource belongs to Saskatchewan 
people. When potash prices are high we should be prepared to tax these people at a very substantial rate 
but we should not interfere in the potash business in such a manner that production and expansion is 
curtailed. This is what the NDP are doing. We in the Opposition are doing all we can to bring this 
important issue to the attention of the Government and the people. 
 
We tried to get a special debate in this Legislature to point out this very problem. All NDP Members 
stood up and backed the decision which denied us an opportunity to discuss this urgent matter. But the 
people of Saskatchewan will soon have a chance to elect a government which will change this callous 
NDP policy. But for some people, Mr. Speaker, some people who are starving now, it may be too late. 
 
Mr. Blakeney insists on a controlling interest in all new mines and expansion, so there is little chance 
that any new development will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my main remarks tonight will be on agriculture in the time that I have left. We notice of 
course, and I am glad, that the Minister is listening. He should have been paying some attention to get 
some programs into the Throne Speech so we would have something to talk about. 
 
Those who expected imaginative and new programs, especially 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

419 

for the cattle farmers, were disappointed. And cattle farmers need these new programs. I should like to 
take a look for a minute or two at some of the non-accomplishments of Mr. Messer’s Department of 
Agriculture. I know I haven’t got time for them all but I will try to go over a few. 
 
The NDP have raised grazing fees in community pastures on several occasions. And not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, they are basing these grazing fees now on the price of fat steers in Winnipeg. Cow-calf 
operators — and this is particularly true in my area — who use community pastures know very well that 
there is very little relationship between the price of calves especially this year and the price of fat steers 
in Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Messer: — What did your Government do? 
 
Mr. Gardner: — We charged about a quarter of what you are charging right now. Another point, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP have been responsible for a dramatic rise in the price of farm fuel. I looked up some 
recent invoices and I should like to give you quickly the following figures. From September 1972 to 
September 1974 the price of purple gas rose from 29.1 cents to 42.8 cents in my area, a rise of 13.7 
cents. In the same period of time the price of diesel fuel rose from 25.5 to 40.2, a rise of 14.7 cents or 58 
per cent in two years. How’s that for inflation, Mr. Speaker? We have oil wells in this province, this 
natural resource belongs to the people and it belongs to the farmers of this province. And the NDP have 
raised the price of their fuel 58 per cent. The NDP are responsible for a 14.7 cent rise in this basic 
necessity and Mr. Messer apparently is bringing in a bill and making a big thing about giving about half 
of that back, less than half, providing the farmer can produce invoices and send them in at the end of the 
year. 
 
A very important point, Mr. Speaker, is the manner in which the NDP have refused to help the cow-calf 
operator in his present difficulty. A quote from the Western Producer of November 21, 1974 pretty well 
describes the NDP attitude. It says that in Regina several hundred farmers received the sympathy of 
Premier Allan Blakeney but little else. This Government has been able to find $15 or $20 million for 
hog producers, but nothing for the cattle industry which is much greater and which is now in desperate 
need. A small amount of money, much smaller than this would have solved the problem. The figures last 
year indicate that there were about 200,000 calves marketed from September to December in this 
province. Fifty dollars apiece would only be $10 million, far less than they have spent on subsidizing the 
hog industry. All Mr. Messer could come up with is a plan to put farmers further in debt. It is a plan 
which encourages many farmers who don’t have the facilities to keep these unwanted calves, a plan 
which will mean additional cattle on the market next year. This is a very important point because this 
may well prevent the price recovery in the cattle market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have refused to take any action or even any notice of the fantastic rise in the price 
of baler twine. I brought this to the attention of the Minister of Agriculture last spring, I don’t know if he 
even knew what baler twine was. We could see that it was going up from $8 to $30 a bale. We have a 
Department of Consumer Affairs, incidentally all they do is send you out a bulletin on how to buy a used 
car but they don’t say anything about the price of baler twine. 



 
December 10, 1974 
 

420 

They simply haven’t done anything about it, they haven’t made any investigation, and the price I 
understand can rise considerably next year. 
 
Another non-accomplishment of this Department is the manner in which they have allowed interest rates 
on the Provincial Government Guaranteed Livestock loans to rise from the guaranteed seven per cent to 
over 11 per cent in many cases. The Liberal Government brought in this program, guaranteed the rate 
for three years at seven per cent. Many young farmers received a jolt this fall when they went to the 
bank to pay their loan interest. They had sold their calves as we all know at distress prices and they 
found that the NDP Government had allowed these interest rates to rise to 11 and 12 per cent and they 
had to pay it out of the small cheque they get for their calves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney Government as we all know cancelled the irrigation program on the South 
Saskatchewan River, a program which would supply needed reserves of fodder at a strategic location in 
central Saskatchewan. 
 
The Blakeney Government has allowed farm truck licences to rise dramatically. I looked some of these 
up, some of them over 300 per cent. The Blakeney Government has imposed estate taxes which 
threatened family farms. They have denied farmers over 65 the right to use community pastures. The 
NDP have persecuted machinery dealers and as a result this vital service is available only in limited 
areas. This NDP Government cancelled the STEP program which allowed young people to go out and 
work on farms at a subsidized rate. This again was a Liberal program that was cancelled. The Premier 
got up in the House and indicated that farmers didn’t need this kind of assistance and apparently the 
Minister of Agriculture agreed with him. 
 
They have initiated a FarmStart Program which has taken many programs traditionally available to all 
farmers in this province and made them available to only a select few. This is one of the tragedies of the 
FarmStart Program which could have been helpful in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, I believe dislike farmers because farmers believe in free enterprise. They are out 
to bring farmers under government control and government interference. But they are not through yet, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is even more important. Future threats are even more frightening. 
 
Mr. Messer: — Hurry John. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — I am sure you would like to hear all this. The NDP are threatening farmers with a cattle 
marketing board which they clearly don’t want. The NDP are threatening farmers with a limitation on 
farm size. And again this is going to be a real problem in this province in the next few years. A 
resolution passed at the recent NDP convention confirmed their intention, and statements by Mr. 
McArthur have also confirmed this intention. This is a very serious situation as far as the farmers are 
concerned. 
 
Farmers can expect severe legislation to accomplish this if the NDP were ever re-elected. Information 
available indicate that they intend to do this by a taxation rate which becomes progressively higher as 
the amount of land increases. A farmer with a quarter section of land would pay a basic rate which 



 
December 10, 1974 

 

421 

would rise rapidly until a farmer could not afford to own the fifth, or sixth or seventh quarter. This, Mr. 
Speaker, could destroy the medium sized farmer in this province who is the backbone of rural 
Saskatchewan. This is what farmers can expect if the socialists are re-elected. but worst of all, Mr. 
Speaker, is the threat of Government control over farm land. They believe farm land should be owned 
by the state. I am not going to mention the comments made by some of the speakers about the lease 
containing an option to purchase. I have a lease here, I got it last week from the Land Bank, everyone 
can look through this, there is absolutely no option to purchase by anyone after five years or any other 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — The Member for- Nipawin, the Member for Canora and others who claim there is, are 
absolutely wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purchase by this Government of the Matador Farm marks the establishment of the first 
state farm in North America. One of the first state farms in the free world. Perhaps called by different 
names in different socialist countries, but a true state farm. Owned by the state. 
 
Mr. Speaker interrupted the debate and the question being put on the motion, it was agreed to on the 
following recorded division: 

YEAS — 38 
 

Blakeney Brockelbank Owens 
Dyck MacMurchy Mostoway 
Meakes Pepper Gross 
Wood Michayluk Feduniak 
Smishek Byers Comer 
Romanow Thorson Rolfes 
Snyder Whelan Lange 
Bowerman Carlson Hanson 
Kramer Cody Feschuk 
Thibault Tchorzewski Flasch 
Larson Taylor Richards 
Kowalchuk Matsalla Kaeding 
Messer Engel  

NAYS — 14 
Steuart Grant MacLeod 
Coupland MacDonald (Milestone) Wiebe 
Loken Gardner MacDonald (M.J.N.) 
Guy Weatherald Malone 
Boldt Lane  
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney): 

 
That the said Address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor by such 
Members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:08 o’clock p.m. 


