


























































Hansard: March 27, 1974


1843 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

38th Day 
Wednesday, March 27, 1974 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all Members of the Assembly, 50 Grade Eight Students from Al Pickard School in 
Regina North West. They are seated in the west gallery with their teachers, Mr. Dunn and Mrs. 
Henderson. It is also my pleasure to introduce to this Assembly a group of 31 Grade Five and Six 
students from the Ken Jenkins School in Regina North West. They are located in the east gallery with 
their Principal, Peter East. 
 
The Al Pickard School is located in North Normanview and the Ken Jenkins School, Regina’s newest 
school, is located in South Normanview. This district, Normanview, is Regina’s fastest growing urban 
area. 
 
On behalf of all Members may I extend a warm welcome to these two groups, Mr. Speaker. We hope 
their visit to the Legislature will be pleasant and educational. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H. H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce to the House two groups of students from two elementary Saskatoon public schools. I think 
this must be somewhat of a record, Mr. Speaker, that a Member has that many students in the House at 
one time. There are a total of 104 students from these two schools. 
 
The students from Churchill School are Grade VII students. They are accompanied by their teachers, 
Mr. Kelly Bauer, Mr. Schultz and Mr. Reehan. They are seated in the west gallery. I’ll be meeting with 
these students at 3:15. 
 
Behind me, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery, we have Grade V students from Prince Philip School. I had 
the pleasure of meeting with these students last week for about one hour, when they asked questions and 
I tried to inform them about procedures in the House. These students are accompanied by their teachers 
Mr. Porteous and Mrs. Beattie. I will be meeting with these students at 3:30. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that these students will enjoy these proceedings this afternoon and I should like to 
draw to their attention that there is something a little bit different this afternoon in that they will see 
Estimates being done. I hope you will enjoy the proceedings and find it very educational. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 27, 1974 
 

 
1844 

Mr. A. Oliver (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Everett Wood who is ill, I should 
like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and to this House some 50 Grade VII students from St. 
Patrick and St. Joseph Schools in Swift Current. I hope you will enjoy your stay and have a safe trip 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Assistance to Municipalities for Snow Removal Costs 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Acting Minister of 
Municipal Affairs (Mr. Messer). During the past winter, Saskatchewan has witnessed I think one of the 
worst winters in terms of snow and snow drifting in the past 20 years. It has been quite a costly venture 
for most of our municipalities. The normal budgets which they have had to budget for snow removal 
averaged over the ten year period was not sufficient, of course, for the expected this winter. It is quite 
evident that most municipalities are looking at rate increases of from seven to twelve mills above their 
normal budgeting. As we see in the Budget, there is no increase . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Your question please, I think the statements are getting a way too long. 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, in order to get the question answered correctly I feel that I have to phrase it 
in this way. To ask the question, Mr. Speaker, there is no increase shown in this year’s Budget. Is the 
Department of Municipal Affairs prepared to help the municipalities throughout this province in a 
one-shot effort for this year to offset the seven to twelve mill rate increase that will be required to pay 
for snow removal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I know nothing of the seven to twelve 
mill rate increase that the Hon. Member makes mention of. We are aware, as are all residents in the 
Province of Saskatchewan, that this winter has been a severe one. Certainly municipalities have run into 
larger expenses in attempting to keep the roads open for those whom they service. I have had no specific 
discussions or, for that matter, correspondence with municipalities asking for special assistance in regard 
to the snow removal. However, if municipalities do make requests to the Department or to the 
Government, it certainly will be given consideration. 
 

Primrose Air Weapons Range 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to direct either to the 
Hon. Mr. Kramer (Acting Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) or to the Minister of Natural Resources 
(Mr. Kowalchuk) who unfortunately is not here today, concerning the Primrose Air Weapons Range. A 
20-year lease was signed in 1954 which expires 



 
March 27, 1974 

 

 
1845 

this year. It was obviously a bad lease from the point of view of the province and from the point of view 
of native peoples dispossessed of fishing and trapping rights. The lease is now up and my question to the 
Minister is: What are the Government’s intentions with respect to renegotiation of this lease in terms of 
provincial revenues, in terms of compensation and recognition of native rights to the timber and to the 
oil, which I understand could be up to 500 million barrels based on very tentative estimates of heavy oil 
in the Cold Lake area, immediately to the west of this reserve? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, the Acting Minister of Northern Saskatchewan is my colleague, the Hon. 
Gordon MacMurchy . . . 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question asked by the 
Hon. Member for Saskatoon University, with respect to whether negotiations from our point of view 
with the Federal Government in respect to the bombing range are underway, I don’t think they are at this 
point. That is not to say that they will not be established in the very near future. I have no accurate 
information in my mind. I can probably provide the information if the Member requests it through a 
Question. 
 
Mr. Richards: — If the Minister would provide this information I should be very grateful. I will put it 
on the Order Paper in the appropriate form. 
 
The Supplementary question, can the Minister give assurance that there will be significant local 
participation this time round on these negotiations so that people at Canoe Lake for example, will know 
what is going on with respect to that bombing range and that we won’t have, as we have had 
unfortunately for the last 20 years, a deal in which local people have had no participation and only token 
compensation for loss of hunting and fishing rights? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — I think the Member for Saskatoon University is well aware, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
a general policy of this Government, there has been in fact consultation with community groups. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Piling of Sawdust at Copper Mill at Sturgis 
 
Hon. N. E. Byers (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to reply to a question raised 
yesterday by the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) concerning the piling of sawdust at the 
Sask Forest Products Copper Mill at Sturgis. We have contacted the Sask Forest Products’ officials since 
yesterday. We are assured by the Sask Forest Products’ officials that the company is temporarily storing 
sawdust near the mill. However, the sawdust is contained within a slab fencing and we are assured that it 
is being stored in an area that is not susceptible to flooding. This is an arrangement that by necessity is 
temporary and the company does plan to undertake the construction of a permanent retention 



 
March 27, 1974 
 

 
1846 

area immediately after the land dries up this spring. So I hope that all Hon. Members will be assured that 
this company is doing its best to retain sawdust so as to not unduly pollute the waters of the Assiniboine 
River with the high spring flood potential this spring. 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I believe I’m allowed a comment. I certainly 
appreciate the information and I sure do agree that it is temporary because the first day the sun hits 50 it 
is going to be in the middle of that river. What we are really interested in is how to stop it being in the 
middle of that river. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Statements back on the questions, I don’t think that should be done on 
questions on Orders of the Day. 

 
Automobile Accident Insurance 

 
Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 
responsible for Automobile Accident Insurance propaganda. In light of the unprecedented promotional 
campaign, and I say misleading promotional campaign put on by the Automobile Accident Insurance 
Fund, when does the Government of Saskatchewan intend to start telling the people of Saskatchewan 
first of all, that the point system has been reintroduced and secondly, there is a possibility the point 
system is being reassessed for a period of three years, that a review of drivers’ licences is being made 
retroactive for a period of three years? 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that information is being put out as 
accurately and as fairly as we can. I told the Members in Crown Corporations and I have indicated in 
Questions at the time the AAIA rates were announced in the House that there would be a demerit system 
introduced. All I can say is that I believe the information is being handled as fast as it can be and if the 
Hon. Member feels that we should be putting out more public information along these lines, I certainly 
will take that up with the SGIO officials and urge them to consider additional public information on 
these areas. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Well that’s my supplementary question. I would hope that the Minister would be prepared 
to now start telling the public of Saskatchewan that in light of the demerit system and the premium 
system that has now been implemented, that under an Automobile Accident Insurance Policy we now 
will have some of the highest insurance rates in the Dominion of Canada. I would ask the Minister when 
he will start to tell the public that information? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I notice the Liberals applauding to that question because they do 
applaud any time there is a question which knocks the Saskatchewan Government Insurance office. The 
Member is totally wrong when he says we have the highest insurance rates anywhere in Canada. He is 
totally wrong. We and Manitoba still have the best automobile insurance rates anywhere in North 
America . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 27, 1974 

 

 
1847 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . I tell the Member for Lumsden, the best anywhere in North America. The 
Members opposite applaud when he says we’ve got the highest insurance rates which full well 
demonstrates the Liberals’ disgust for SGIO and if they had the opportunity they would sell it. I want to 
say this, Mr. Speaker, that the simple fact of the matter is that if we are going to be penalizing the 
accident prone, the conviction prone drivers, as the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) believes in, in 
which I also believe in, and I thought your party believed in, we are going to have to be introducing a 
demerit system on that basis. If we are going to be penalizing those who are accident prone and thereby 
putting the drain on the fund, we have to have this type of a system. Maybe it isn’t going to be the best. 
Maybe it is going to have to be overhauled but to say that we have got the highest insurance rate by 
combining those two is an absolute and total falsehood. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Personal Privilege, that is not a falsehood, that is the truest 
statement made in this House, Mr. Speaker. And under the Government opposite we have the worst run 
government operated insurance program in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I wish the Member would learn to ask questions without prefacing them first, 
we wouldn’t get into this crossfire if questions were asked just as a question without the statements. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Error in Leader-Post re Community Capital Fund 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like 
to correct an erroneous impression given in a report in the Leader-Post yesterday regarding second 
reading of the Community Capital Fund Bill. The error relates to the impression given in the article that 
urban communities of 500 or less in population would not be eligible to receive grants under the 
Community Capital Fund Program. I want to make it clear that the program applies to all villages, towns 
and cities in the province regardless of size and also to hamlets and rural municipalities. There is no 
discrimination, Mr. Speaker, whatsoever in the program as between the larger centres and the smaller 
ones as was inferred by the Member for Lumsden who is quoted in the article. If he had read the Bill and 
the pamphlet I handed out it would have been abundantly clear to him. 
 
I also should like to clarify that we are not asking urban communities of 500 population or less to 
prepare a five-year capital budget, simply because such detailed planning might be burdensome. 
However, we would encourage them to carry out program planning, it would surely supply assistance in 
the planning as may be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader-Post to make an appropriate correction as soon as possible so that 
the urban communities are not misled by this article nor continued to be misled by the Member for 
Lumsden (Mr. Lane) who was voicing his inability to understand the facts. 



 
March 27, 1974 
 

 
1848 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that my statements in the House were brought in on a comment by 
the Minister, and I have a right to comment. 
 
There is no doubt that under the program as announced by the Minister that there is discrimination 
against communities under 500, that the Government is indicating a lack of confidence in villages or 
communities under a population of 500, and if the Government opposite had confidence in these villages 
they would allow them to bring in a five-year program and a five-year budget . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Mr. Messer: — On a Point of Order! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Minister rose to make a correction on a press statement. The Bill is before the 
House and I think any debate on the details of the Bill will be better done in second reading and I won’t 
entertain any more discussion on it at this time. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I would take the matter . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, may I revert to the little controversy a 
second ago between the Hon. Acting Minister of Municipal Affairs and the Hon. Member for Lumsden. 
Mr. Speaker, would I be right in thinking that the remarks of the Minister of Municipal Affairs properly 
shouldn’t have been brought here but were really part of his rebuttal or his closure of debate at the time 
when he closed the motion? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No, the Member has a right to rise in the House if he is misquoted in the Press. A 
Minister has the right to rise on Orders of the Day and make ministerial statements and he was 
correcting a statement in the Press. If the debate pertains to the Bill itself that would be left until the Bill 
comes up but he was rising on that statement and we have now passed that part of the Orders. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — The Minister may well have a right to correct an incorrect Press report, 
whether he has the right to cast aspersions and snide remarks relative to comments by the Member for 
Lumsden or any other matter, that’s a question that is very much open. I suggest he has no right to 
engage in casting remarks on the comments of any other Member in the business of correcting a press 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think this will be best settled if we leave it until second reading of the Bill when you 
can have a full debate both ways. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order. Seemingly we are starting a practice of ongoing 
censorship here, when a Minister 



 
March 27, 1974 

 

 
1849 

can get up and correct anything in the debate and surely that practice of the Acting Minister of 
Municipal Affairs should have been stopped as soon as he started to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have ruled that the Minister or other Members have the right, if they feel that the 
paper has misquoted them, to rise and make a statement. I can’t always control the words that any 
Member may use. But they have the right to rise if the paper has misquoted them. But a debate cannot 
ensue over that issue. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


