
























































Hansard: March 29, 1974


1866 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

40th Day 
Friday, March 29, 1974 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and to this House a 
group of 42 Grade Ten students from Kelliher High School under their teachers, Mr. Ledingham and 
Mrs. Olekson, in the west gallery. I hope that their stay here today is an educational one besides a 
pleasant one. And may they benefit from their studies in the coming year from this visit. I wish them a 
safe journey home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet I should like to introduce a second group of 8 adult students from 
Lestock, they are upgrading students under their teacher, Mr. Tusa. I wish them, as well, a pleasant 
journey home and an instructional day while they are here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure on behalf of Mr. Cody 
who is the Member for Watrous, to introduce a fine group of students from Cudworth. They are led here 
by their teachers, Mr. Peter Yuzik and Mr. Jim Bridgeman. Their bus driver is Mr. John Diakiu. There 
are 34 students from Grade Eight. They have toured the city since this morning and this afternoon they 
are visiting, I believe, the telephone building and I am sure that this day is going to be an educational 
one and I hope that today will be an exemplary one in the Legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope all Members will join with me in welcoming this fine group of students from 
Cudworth. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H. H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to the House a group of 33 students from St. Francis School. St. Francis – the 
actual building is not in my constituency – is about a block outside of my constituency, but many of the 
students who attended St. Francis School, however, do live in my constituency. They are Grade Seven 
and Eight students. They are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Nicholson and Mr. McGartlin. I had the 
opportunity to spend one hour with them, last Monday, to discuss with them the procedures in the 
House. I hope the hour will be worth-while. I will be meeting with them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1867 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a word of welcome 
to the students from St. Francis School and their teachers Mr. Nicholson and Mr. McGartlin. I do this 
because I welcome any group of students to the Assembly, but I understand they are now in the new 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana which is, in the main, the constituency I currently represent, 
Saskatoon Nutana Centre. 
 
I appreciate very much the fact that they are here today and I sincerely hope they enjoy a reasonable 
educational experience. I hope along with the Member for Nutana South to speak to them shortly after 
they leave the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, St. Francis is probably the most welcomed 
school in the history of this Assembly. I simply want to welcome them because they are still in 
Riversdale constituency. That was in the good old days when we had the distribution done. I welcome 
the students, I hope they find their visit here entertaining and informative. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Oil Policy 
 
Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I announced the provisions of an agreement 
regarding the increase in the price of crude oil in Canada. I also mentioned that today I would indicate 
what measures our Government would propose to alleviate the impact of this increase as it is reflected in 
gasoline and petroleum products prices on Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
During the debate on Bill 42, we argued that the windfall profits accruing from the increase in the price 
of crude oil should benefit the people of the province and not the international oil companies. We 
indicated that this natural advantage we have as an oil producing province should be reflected in the 
prices which our consumers pay for their petroleum products. 
 
Accordingly, today, I will announce the measures which we will propose to introduce to shelter the 
Saskatchewan consumer from the increase in the price of gasoline by the increase in the price of crude 
oil. 
 
Effectively May 15 the gasoline tax in Saskatchewan will be reduced from 9 cents per gallon to 12 cents 
per gallon – a reduction of 7 cents per gallon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — This move will reduce the costs of Saskatchewan motorists by approximately $19 
million. When this reduction is combined with the transfer of 3 cents per gallon to the AAIA fund, the 
total reduction in gasoline tax will be 10 cents 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1868 

per gallon, and will effectively bring Saskatchewan’s tax rate to what I believe to be the lowest in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — On May 15th we propose to reduce the tax on diesel fuel, used on highways from 21 
cents per gallon to 16 cents per gallon. This will reduce the revenues accruing to the province from this 
tax by about two and one-quarter million dollars per year. 
 
While these selective tax reductions are of benefit to users of taxable gasoline, they do little for our 
farming community who use tax free gasoline for their farming operations. Accordingly, effective May 
15 we shall be introducing a farm cost reduction program. 
 
Under this program the Government will be compensating farmers for their increased costs of 
production due to the increases in the costs of purple gasoline and diesel fuel used in farm production up 
to a level of 7 cents per gallon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — We estimate that this Government of Saskatchewan roughly $14 million per year and 
reduce farm operating costs by up to 3 per cent. 
 
The date of May 15 has been selected as the commencement date since the Federal Minister of Energy 
Mines and Resources has requested that the oil companies not raise their retail prices for six weeks when 
their inventories of gasoline and other fuels produced from low cost crude will have been depleted. 
 
For the companies to do otherwise, i.e. for the companies to increase their prices immediately, would 
result what we would think to be unjustified windfall profits accruing to them at the expense of the 
Canadian consumer. We would certainly hope that the companies would adhere to the request from the 
Hon. Donald Macdonald. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — In total the measures I have proposed today will save the Saskatchewan consumers 
approximately $35 million a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the announcement by the 
Premier, we looked forward to this when Bill 42 was brought in and the promise was then made to 
protect the Saskatchewan consumer against any possible rise in the price of oil and oil products because 
of the world market situation. I presume this will do it. I presume what we have heard is that this will 
cover the increase that can be anticipated. 
 
I look forward to finding out from the Premier of from the Finance Minister, if they intend to take that 
amount of money- if he said it I missed, I am sorry – if they intend to 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1869 

take that amount of money in from the oil revenue into general revenue, reducing the gas tax to 12 cents 
from 19 cents and the fact that they have siphoned off 3 cents is going to mean that we have an effective 
gas tax now of 9 cents a gallon which is pretty drastic drop. This is fine now when we have very buoyant 
revenues. I wonder if the amount to replace that money will be earmarked from the revenue from oil 
down the road for any distance so that a year or two or three years from now when things return to 
normal – if they ever return to normal. Future administrations may find themselves in great difficulty if 
they are looking at an effective gasoline tax of 9 cents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I didn’t hear the muttering of the gum chewing Minister for Moose Jaw but I am sure if 
he said something intelligent it was purely by chance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t worry about that. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — We probably will have to worry about that, that’s why I raised the question. I look 
forward to hearing that there will be a transfer from oil revenues into general revenues, as a matter of 
fact, I can’t understand why the oil revenue is not going to be taken into general revenue, unless there 
are agreements with the Federal Government. As was said yesterday by someone on the national scene, 
there is a little bit of funny work going on to fiddle some of the other provinces out of what might be 
considered their rightful share of the tax equalization grants. Of course, if Saskatchewan was joined in 
the fiddle – well I suppose we can’t complain. I presume some other governments may have something 
to say about that later on. 
 
Anyway, we welcome this, and as I say we look forward to an explanation of how they intend to replace 
these revenues, if in fact they do, from oil revenue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SUSPENSION OF MEMBER FROM LEGISLATURE 
 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege, before the Orders of the 
Day, I wish to make a very brief statement on the events of last evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I don’t think that private Members should make statements on Orders of 
the Day. Furthermore, I think what happened last evening should not be raised at this time. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, since when is it your ruling, Sir, that a Member cannot rise on a Point 
of Privilege? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If a Member has a Point of Privilege, he should state just what the Point of Privilege 
is, and acquaint the Chair with the Point of Privilege. But not to try to make a statement of what had 
happened and so on. The bare facts of a privilege should be raised. 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1870 

Mr. MacDonald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, may I point out what my Point of Privilege is to you, is that 
your ruling? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I am willing to entertain your Point of Privilege, if you are rising on a Point of 
Personal Privilege. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — It will be very brief, Mr. Speaker. I personally regret the sequence of events that 
occurred last evening. However, I can in no way regret the principle that I expressed in remaining firm 
in my decision to call upon the Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) to provide the proof of his 
accusations against me personally and against an unnamed civil servant. I wish to repeat, Mr. Speaker, I 
am absolutely unaware that at any time during the leadership campaign did any civil servant campaign 
for me on government time. I have also checked with my campaign committee, they also deny the 
allegation and they have substantiated my position. 
 
The real issue here, Mr. Speaker, is the honor and integrity of the public service of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wish to inform you, Mr. Speaker, that I will introduce a Bill that will prevent this unfortunate 
circumstance from occurring in the future. 
 
First, it will guarantee the right of any civil servant in Saskatchewan to participate in municipal, 
provincial or federal politics as a candidate and assure his right to leave of absence to campaign. 
 
Second, guarantee the right of any civil servant to participate in our democratic system outside his hours 
of work and on his own time. 
 
The third, and most important, to prohibit any government from granting a leave of absence to a civil 
servant to actively campaign on behalf of a political party other than as a candidate. It will prevent the 
government of the day using the taxpayers’ money to build up a bank of political organizers that can be 
used in an election campaign. 
 
I expect, and I believe that the public of Saskatchewan will expect, that the Member for Nutana South 
will provide the name of the civil servant and what is more important, the evidence to back up his 
charges. It is unthinkable that this Legislature can be used by any Member to make an unsubstantiated 
attack on the good name of public servants working in the Department of Welfare or any other 
department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Under the circumstances we are prepared to entertain the full statement of the Hon. 
Member, I would say the last half of it did not altogether comply with a Point of Personal Privilege 
because it was just a notice of introduction of a bill. 
 
What I would like to read to the Members, Beauschene, page 126, Citation 145, which I think covers the 
problem we ran into 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1871 

yesterday. I quote: 
 
It has been formally ruled by Speakers in the Canadian Commons that a statement by an Hon. Member 
respecting himself and peculiar within his own knowledge must be accepted. But it is not 
unparliamentary to temporarily criticize statements made by the Member as being contrary to the facts. 
But no imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. A statement made by a Member in his place is 
considered as made upon honor and cannot be questioned in the House or out of the House. 
 
I think that along with the statement made by the Member for Milestone should close the incident at this 
time. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE – PRIVATE SESSIONS OF CROWN CORPORATIONS 
COMMITTEE 

 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to ask for leave 
under Rule 17 to move a motion asking for the Priority of Debate for the purpose of discussing a definite 
matter of urgent public importance. I regret the lack of two hours’ notice, part of the problem being the 
matter I referred to arose out of today’s edition of the Leader-Post which I happened to see about 1:15 
this afternoon. I want to state the subject matter to be as follows: 
 

Today’s report that Government Members of the Crown Corporations Committee, a Committee 
established by the Legislative Assembly, have held private sessions, at the request of the Ministers, to 
question Corporation representatives. 

 
The reported reason given by the Chairman of the Crown Corporation Committee for these secret 
meetings was to give Government Members an opportunity to question Corporation officials in private 
prior to the regular public meetings of the Crown Corporations Committee. This represents a serious 
breach of the spirit under which the Crown Corporations Committee was established. 

 
Therefore, this Assembly should order the Chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee and the 
Members of the Executive Council to cease and desist from this practice. 
 
As I say again, I certainly suggest, Mr. Speaker, this is a very urgent matter dealing with the privilege of 
all Members of this House. And the abuse of privilege I suggest that this Committee is perpetrating and 
as I say, I regret I didn’t have notice. I do ask that priority to debate be given this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have the notice from the Hon. Member for Wilkie and as the Member for Wilkie has 
mentioned I have had no prior notice whatsoever of it so I haven’t had the chance to peruse all the 
various rules which may apply to this type of a motion. Rule 17 says that two hours’ notice shall be 
given but it also gives the Speaker the right to waive the time if he so feels. Now this is a situation the 
Member pointed out which he had no knowledge of until after lunch time today, which he could not 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1872 

raise on an earlier occasion. I am not trying, at this time, to judge what the facts are, whether the 
statement is correct or incorrect, whether meetings have in fact or have not been held. That is not my job 
to judge. But I do think the House would want to express its opinion on this allegation if it is correct in 
fact or not. They would like to express their opinion on it. So I believe that under Rule 17 that the 
Speaker can waive his right to have the debate so I will ask the House if Members are agreed that the 
Hon. Member should have leave to proceed with this debate. 
 
Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just before you do put that question, I am 
wondering if I can rise on a Point of Order. This depends I suppose to a large extent on what the 
interpretation of the words ‘public importance’ are to mean in terms of this motion. My submission to 
you, Mr. Speaker, is that what we are really talking about is something which may relate to Members’ 
privileges, Members’ rights. But the meaning of the words ‘public importance’ really have a different 
connotation. It has a connotation of “public” in the sense of external from the conduct and activity of 
Members here, problems of public issues of the day, public debates or public problems that arise. When 
we are talking about ‘urgent public importance’ we are not really talking about urgent importance of the 
Members’ rights. This is really what the Member is saying. If we are, we have other mechanisms for 
that. When we are talking about urgent public importance, we talk of something about feed grains 
subsidies or transportation or something of that nature. So I would argue, Mr. Speaker, not argue but I 
am just wondering if Mr. Speaker might consider the helpful or otherwise comments that I have to make 
with respect to the meaning of the words ‘public importance’. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, just a word on that point raised by the Attorney General. Surely the 
Attorney General isn’t trying to tell the House or you, Sir, that the question of the privileges of the 
Members of this Legislature aren’t considered of public importance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — That’s the argument he tried to make as I listened to him. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to 
you, what could be more important than the rights of the duly elected Members of this House? 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — May I just talk briefly on a point the Attorney General 
raised. Crown Corporation meetings are now on, they will again resume the consideration of the reports 
of the Crown Corporations on Tuesday. All the members that are on the Crown Corporations Committee 
are elected MLAs and they have a prior responsibility over and above their political responsibility to the 
people that elect them. One of the reasons that a Crown Corporations Committee is set up is to make 
these very important Crown Corporations that are a vital part of the life and the fabric of 
Saskatchewan’s society, accountable to the Legislature and to the public through these open Crown 
Corporations meetings. It is an excellent forum. It’s a very distinct possibility that by having these secret 
meetings, as they have been described, that questions that should be asked publicly and answered 
publicly for the information of the public are dealt with on that basis and possibly for that 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1873 

reason, and not only are the Members of this House being treated differently but it may be that the 
public is denied some information that is vital to them, vital to their understanding and their appreciation 
of what happens in Crown Corporations. So I think it is important and I think there is some urgency that 
this matter be settled. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I realize the point the Attorney General made which I believe is well taken. Yet at the 
same time it puts the Chair in a difficult position to make a ruling on this type of a case. Because 
whether the statements as listed here by the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) are correct or not is, as I 
said, beside the point but there are certain statements made that meetings are being held ahead of the 
official meetings. So I don’t see anything in the rules that says that a meeting should or should not be 
held, or it could or it couldn’t be. Before I make a definite ruling I know the Leader of the Opposition 
thought this, but I think he was speaking to the subject matter of what the Member wishes to raise 
because this is the type of a topic which has not come to this Legislature before and I will ask Members 
not to speak on the subject matter. If they wish to speak on what they feel the rule should be to guide me 
in my endeavor to make a ruling on it, but Members may only speak once on speaking to a ruling 
because it isn’t a back and forth, open free debate. Are there any members who have any more they wish 
to say on the ruling before I make a ruling on it? 
 
Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I rise only on one point. I don’t claim to be an authority on 
rules but I have heard you a number of times, the Chair a number of times say that we cannot go on the 
reports of newspapers. As I understood the Hon. friend from Cut Knife (Mr. Kwasnica) said he read it in 
the paper. I don’t know whether that would apply in this ruling or not but I have heard you tell Members 
that we should not, in this kind of a situation use newspaper reports. 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention a work about the urgency of 
this matter. A Crown Corporation is a public corporation. It does not operate under the auspices of any 
political party. The urgency of this debate is the fact that this Crown Corporations group may meet again 
or there may be another secret meeting involving the confidentiality of a public corporation. What 
information was divulged in these private secret meetings, to Members of a political party, not a 
legislative committee. For example, SEDCO. What loans? The Intercontinental financial statements. 
There could be so much information of a confidential nature that is not the prerogative of any one 
political party and is public knowledge if it is to be revealed. Second, there is a real threat to the rights of 
civil servants when they are being forced to appear before a political party and an NDP caucus . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — . . . the subject matter of the motion. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I am. Here are the civil servants who are supposed to be independent 
and an independent corporation are being forced to come to a meeting at the request of their Minister. 
That is the urgency, Mr. Speaker, and I think it is a matter of urgent public importance because of those 
two 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1874 

aspects. And I do hope that you will stand by your original ruling. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if I might with your permission again speak to the Point of Order, that 
is to say the matter of public importance. I think those are the words to this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — He spoke before I asked the House to give me a discussion on the rules, so I will 
entertain – I am not trying to be too strict I want to try and get this off the ground right. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I would just refer your honour to your ruling on November 30, 1973, in the Debates 
and Proceedings on page 10. Your honour there outlines some of the rules and determining what is the 
matter subject to immediate debate. I would quote from page 10, your honour said as follows: 
 

I would refer Members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 17th edition, pages 364 to 370 and 
further . . . 

 
Then you quote from Erskine May: 
 

A motion for priority of debate must involve the administrative responsibility of the Government and 
it must be so pressing that public interest will suffer if it is not given immediate attention. 

 
Now the key words there, Mr. Speaker, I refer to what I said earlier about public importance, are 
“Administrative responsibility of the Government”. The Crown Corporations Committee is not an 
administrative arm of the government. The activities of the Crown Corporation in committee are not 
administrative functions of the Government. The activities or the non-activities of the Crown 
Corporations Committee are the activities of this legislative body. If Erskine May is correct, then I 
would argue to you, Sir, that the debate must involve an administrative responsibility of the 
Government, something that the Government can be held accountable for. With respect, Sir, that is not 
the case in this are. We are dealing here with an administrative responsibility of the House, if I can put it 
in those terms, and not an administrative responsibility of the Government. I would suggest, 
respectfully, that this matter can be passed on for judgement or comment by the Members at another 
equally advantageous opportunity, private Member’s resolution. But the key words, Mr. Speaker, I say 
to you on Erskine May and on the precedent is the words, “Administrative responsibility of the 
Government.” Surely this does not involve the administrative responsibility of the Government. 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Crown Corporations Committee, I 
would certainly have to suggest that Crown corporations are an administrative responsibility of the 
Government. I would also have to suggest that the Crown Corporations are certainly a function of this 
Legislature. I believe that as a result of today’s disclosure the meetings to date of the Crown 
Corporations that we have had may have been held under a cloud of suspicion in the minds of the 
general public, and I say ‘may’ but certainly with the disclosure that we have had, and I am not going 
into the subject matter of it, but I believe that this cloud should be removed from the operations of the 
Crown 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1875 

Corporations Committee and subsequently on the operations of the Crown Corporations. I believe that 
the only way to do this is to have the debate and get to the bottom of the matter and certainly this would 
remove the cloud and suspicion that people may have because of the report that we have today. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, if I may I should like to use the Attorney 
General’s remarks earlier on this Point of Order, just to prove the case that the Member for Wilkie has 
brought to you. Crown Corporations are a definite administrative responsibility of the Government. One 
of the checks on those corporations is through the Crown Corporations meetings that we have. If those 
meetings are in any way infringed upon or tampered with in any matter, I would submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is a matter of urgent public importance. The matter before you is directly pointed up, as 
the Attorney General has indicated in his remarks to you, that these Crown corporations are the direct 
responsibility administratively of the Government, they are being questioned in these Crown 
corporations, therefore, this matter is properly before you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, I think this is one of the most difficult positions for the Chair. 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure if I can contribute much more 
before you make a decision. But I should like to refer to the last time we dealt with this, if I may, Mr. 
Speaker. One of the problems that you, Mr. Speaker, face is the question of the administrative capacity 
of the Government to deal with this and the remarks that were quoted by the Hon. Attorney General say 
that on a motion for priority of debate, the debate must involve the administrative responsibility of the 
Government. Now, Mr. Speaker, I presume that the Government referred to is the government of the 
forum in which we are dealing, namely this Legislature, not the legislative authority of some other 
government because otherwise we could wander around with priority of debate all over the place, which 
is exactly what the Government has attempted to do in the past, Mr. Speaker. On the 25th of February, 
1972, in fact the Hon. the Premier sought to have priority of debate and did so on the export of grain 
through the Pacific coast ports, a matter which was rather far afield from our own duties in the House 
here today. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would urge you and I understand the difficulty you are facing, when the 
Government obviously doesn’t want to debate the matter and the Attorney General is persuading you not 
to allow it. The rules I think, therefore, must be interpreted in such a way that, quite frankly, it is a 
matter of the administration of the Government of this day. Quite frankly, this is something that is, I 
suggest, within the realm of the rules clearly, because, first of all it is a matter of urgency. We must deal 
with it now if we are going to deal with it effectively. I think the timing is very important. 
 
Secondly, it is clearly a matter within the administrative competence of this House. 
 
Now the third argument I put to your honour is this, that it is a matter for the public. The Attorney 
General has suggested to you that something of public importance is something that is 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1876 

entirely separate from this Government or separate from this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, what I am doing 
here and what you are doing here and I suggest what all of us are doing here is of supreme public 
importance. There is just nothing that we are doing that is of more public importance than the 
procedures of this House and the rights and duties of democratically elected Members of this 
Legislature. When it comes to a question of public importance, nothing is more publicly important than 
what we are doing in this Committee. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. the Attorney General 
has attempted too narrowly to interpret the rules. 
 
Mr. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before making a ruling I wonder if I could 
ask you to consider some remarks that you made November 30, 1973 when there was a request for 
priority of debate? You said, Sir, on page 10 of the Debates and Proceedings, the official report for the 
Session of 1973-74, and I quote you, Sir, Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, 
Citation 100, page 89. You say a Priority of Debate cannot take place on a grievance that is continuing. 
The fact that new information has been received regarding a matter that has been continuing for some 
time does not in itself make the matter one of urgency. A motion for Priority of Debate is also out of 
order if the matter can be debated in the ordinary manner with the proper notice or in a major debate 
such as the Address and Reply and the Budget Debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say in regard to that quotation that you made from Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules that the Hon. Members of the Opposition have every right and opportunity now to 
put a Resolution or a Motion on the Order Paper which can and could be debated Tuesday next. I’m 
informed that there are no Crown Corporation meetings to be held until at least Wednesday of next 
week. This would give them the opportunity to debate the matter fully in an ordinary manner, before any 
other meetings of Crown Corporations were held which seems to be their primary concern. The fact that 
there may or may not be meetings that are held between Members of the Government and officials of 
those Crown Corporations and then how those meetings may influence the Crown Corporations 
meetings that follow with representatives from both Opposition and Government. So I suggest, in 
relation to the quotation that you and I have both referred to, that they are able to handle the matter in a 
normal fashion. 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak to the point raised by 
the Attorney General. If I understand him correctly, now I many have misinterpreted what he said, but I 
think he said the Crown Corporation Committee is not an administrative arm of the Government. Really 
the subject matter of the Motion by the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) is not referring really to the 
Crown Corporations Committee. It refers to actions by Crown Corporations personnel and it’s my 
understanding that the actions of those people is certainly part of the administrative arm of the 
Government. When a Minister of a Crown Corporation brings in staff from that Crown Corporation to 
sit down with MLAs it seems to me that it’s bordering on the administrative arm of government. The 
Member, the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) has suggested that this matter can wait. I 
present 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1877 

that it can’t wait. It is of public importance and these Crown Corporation Committee meetings are open 
to the public, the public are welcome to come and listen to anything that goes on, but the meeting that is 
in question as mentioned in the Leader-Post was not open to the public. These are meetings that are 
being held in private through actions of the Government and, therefore, I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that 
your ruling should be in favor of Priority of Debate and we should proceed with it. 
 
Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, on this Point of Order, in reply to the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer). He says that there will be time to debate it, perhaps next Tuesday. Now, it’s 
only the twelve or thirteen Members of the Crown Corporations Committee that perhaps know today 
when the next meeting will be held. Members of the Legislature as such, are not aware when the next 
meeting of the Crown Corporations will be held. It could be held on Monday for all that Members and 
members of the public are aware. Members of the Crown Corporations may have additional information 
that is not available to other Members of this Legislature. All we know is that the Crown Corporations 
are meeting at… 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Adjourned debates. The subject matter of the Motion. I want to stay right to the rules. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, I’m just getting to that, Mr. Speaker. I’m replying to the Point of Order that the 
Minister of Agriculture raised and all that I’m saying is that it is a matter or urgency because we don’t 
know when the next meeting of Crown Corporations will be held. We don’t know when the next secret 
meeting will be held, in fact, it could well be scheduled for later this afternoon, prior to the next meeting 
of the Crown Corporations. We don’t know that. All we’re saying is, is that the public of Saskatchewan, 
now that they are aware that these private meetings are being held, have to have some concern and I 
think we have to debate this and get the facts before the public just as quickly as possible if the decorum 
of this Legislature is to be maintained. 
 
Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a couple of words to reinforce the 
points made and I think aptly made by Members of this side to the House. 
 
Firstly, the rules make it perfectly clear that Priority of Debate resolutions can only be directed to 
matters which are the concern of the Government, the Government meaning the Premier and his 
Ministers. There’s no question of that and I invite anyone to read Beauchesne or any other authority of 
that nature. That I think is perfectly clear. The fact that a Member of the Legislature may be meeting 
with someone is not relevant. The fact that a caucus may be meeting is not relevant. The fact that a 
caucus committee may be meeting, secret or otherwise, is not relevant. The fact, and before Hon. 
Members raise it, at least in my judgment, the fact that members of the public service meet with a 
caucus committee is not relevant, because it seems perfectly clear to me that unless the Premier in his 
administrative capacity should somehow have stopped this procedure or acted on it, then it’s not within 
the administrative competence of the Government. It is clear I think that the 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1878 

Government of the day is not in a position to stop meetings, secret, private, public of Members of either 
side of the House. If there is one thing that is clear, it’s that Members of the Legislature meet when they 
want to and not when the Government of the day says they should meet. And if one thing is clear, it is 
that Members of the Legislature talk with whom they wish and not with whom the Government says 
they should. I personally have heard such statements in this Legislature and some will remember them. I 
think of the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) making it as pointed as he could that he would talk with 
any public servant any time he wished and that he wasn’t about to have any Minister stopping him. 
 
So I want to make a few of these points. These, I think, are well know customs of the House. Unless it’s 
an action of the Government, then I think it’s not an appropriate subject for debate. I suggest that one 
can read the article, read the statement or be aware of the facts and it will not be anything that is the 
responsibility of the Government. It is Members of the Legislature acting as they think they should act, 
wisely or unwisely. 
 
Now it may be that this is a matter for the Committee on Privileges and Elections. This is the body we 
have set up to deal with the regulation of private Members’ activities, and I don’t for a moment suggest 
it is, but I am saying that if you don’t like the way private Members are acting, you don’t direct your 
complaints to the Government of the day. That, I think, is the argument and once again it is perfectly 
clear that the complaint is with respect to the meetings. You just have to read the statement to see that 
that is what they are complaining of, the secret meetings; so I think it’s perfectly clear, on the basis of 
their statements, that the material complained of is not material, not actions that are the actions of the 
Government of the day. Accordingly, I think the comments of the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) are 
sound and this is not an appropriate subject for Priority of Debate. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — This counter comment on, I have spoken earlier, I’m not sure of one point in your 
ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — You started debating the different comments back and forth. 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to note that the Premier says only 
Members of the Legislature and not the Government. This article purely states as reported by Mr. 
Rolfes, Chairman of the Committee, the meetings are called by the Ministers and the Ministers are the 
Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boldt: — These meetings are called by the Ministers, not by Mr. Rolfes. Mr. Rolfes. Mr. Rolfes is 
forced, he is acting as Chairman and when you get the Crown Corporation people there, for instance 
SGIO. I don’t know whether you have muzzled then in what kind of questions or answers they are 
supposed to give. It is apparent to me that when the facts are going to be know, the reason we want this 
debate is whether the Crown Corporations 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1879 

 
Committee will want to call the other Crown Corporations back and discuss them again because of the 
secret meetings that have been held. I think it is a downright disgrace where 45 Members almost run this 
Government like Hitler did Germany. I think it’s a shame, an outright shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Let’s stay to the rules. 
 
Mr. D. F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to comment on the 
comments of the Premier as he tried to wiggle his way out of this Priority of Debate. And he inferred 
that somehow this was a caucus committee and that it was not within the administrative competence of 
either himself or his Government to deal with. Well, Mr. Speaker, these meetings are called by the 
Premier or by the Premier’s Ministers, one or the other. The Premier’s Ministers are certainly within the 
administrative competence of this Government. It is the Ministers who have called this meeting. It is the 
Ministers who have ordered Crown Corporation employees to appear before a caucus committee, a 
committee of caucus. So that certainly is within the administrative competence of the Government when 
it is their Ministers who are ordering these meetings to be held and it clearly is of great public 
importance. 
 
Mr. J. G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps there are precedents which will answer a 
particular problem. I think we have to keep in mind, whether or not it is a matter of pressing public 
importance. 
 
The Attorney General put great weight on the fact that this was not of public importance, that it dealt 
with the Members of the House and their activities. And he said, I believe, that for it to be a matter of 
public importance it had to be such things as freight rates and matters beyond the ken of the House if I 
am correct and he’s nodding in agreement. 
 
I’m going to cite Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, page 361 where rules governing subject matter of 
motions and it makes it quite clear at that page that the conduct of Members of the House, of judges, 
either House of Parliament and persons holding a position of a judge, the Speaker himself. It makes it 
quite clear that they are the subject matter of a debate and can be the subject matter of a debate. So when 
we are talking about matters of public importance, there is no doubt that the rules make it clear that that 
includes what happens within the Legislature and the Members themselves. So I’m saying quite simply, 
that the Attorney General’s argument does not apply. What constitutes public importance by precedent 
includes the operations of Members of the House, Ministers of the Crown, etc. As to the matter of urgent 
public importance, I think that we have to keep in mind that if the allegations are true and I say ‘if’, then 
the next meeting of the Committee is Tuesday and surely if the allegations are correct, action should be 
taken prior to that meeting. I think it quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that this one is a situation where the 
Members should be given the opportunity to debate whether, first, are these allegations true; secondly, it 
is an urgent matter because the next meeting is Tuesday; thirdly, it is a matter of public importance by 
precedent and by the rules. 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1880 

Mr. Speaker: — Now I think we’ve had a good discussion from both sides and before I make a ruling 
I’d like to have a few minutes more to discuss with my Clerk. 
 
Order! I think this is one of the most difficult tasks you kind people have given me to work on. 
 
It is true that directly as he states it is not public importance, but it is of importance to Members and in 
turn the work that Members do is of importance to the public. Now the House can lay down the rules 
and regulations and when the House sets up its committees it lays down what the committees can or 
cannot do. 
 
This question was never raised at that time, whether it could be taken to committee or not, but some 
Members feel grieved if this report, as given to me by the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) is 
substantiated or if it is correct or not. 
 
Now Section 7 of 17 says if objection is taken, Mr. Speaker request those Members who support the 
motion to rise in their place and if more than 15 Members rise accordingly, the Member who asked 
leave can then proceed. I think in this case it is a thing which affects the House and affects the Members. 
While I agree with the statements of the Premier that caucus meetings or committee meetings of caucus 
or others is not the business of this House, I think it is a thing that the House would like to decide on and 
make their own decision, whether they do agree with and are able to have that privilege of having 
caucus meetings and so forth. So objection has been taken so I’m going to ask the Members to rise and 
see if more than 15 rise. Those in favor that this shall be proceeded with, please rise. 
 
Agreed to, by a vote of 17. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank all Members of the Assembly for 
a very . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — How about thanking Al? 
 
Mr. MacIsaac: — Yes, I want to thank all Members, that certainly includes the Attorney General and 
the Premier. 
 
For I suggest a very careful consideration of a very serious matter of urgent public importance. I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, to you that nothing could be more important than the rules and the practices and 
the procedures of this Assembly insofar as they affect the rights of individual Members. And I would 
hope at the end of my remarks now, to make a Motion for the Priority of Debate be given to the reported 
private meetings of the Government Members of the Crown Corporations Committee and Members of 
the Executive Council with corporation officials. We can debate that and hopefully at the conclusion of 
that debate come up with a motion referring the entire question perhaps to the Committee on Privileges 
or Rules and Procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the practice as reported in the Leader-Post today on page 14 under the byline 
of Fred Harrison of the Leader-Post, parts of an interview with the Member for Nutana South (Mr. 
Rolfes) admit of a practice that’s 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1881 

nothing short of a despicable practice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — It’s the kind of action we’ve come to expect from that particular Member. It’s also the 
kind of activity . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I’ve got to ask Members on this debate to make sure we don’t get personal with 
one Member, so that I hope we can debate the matter so we don’t get into a side track on it. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I assure you I don’t intend to call him a liar, or anything like that. I don’t 
wish to, but I do say that his actions in this regard typify the actions of this NDP since they have come to 
power with respect to dealing with this House. I only have to look at a small pamphlet that I have in my 
pocket, that came out dealing with a piece of legislation that hasn’t even been given second reading yet. 
I am speaking about the pamphlet titled “Information About the Saskatchewan Foreign Ownership Act, 
1974.” If that isn’t flaunting this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what is. I suggest to you that is 
the kind of activity that we have seen too often, too repeatedly from the Government opposite. 
 
The concern here, these private meetings are being held, first of all indicates that these Crown 
Corporations are not Crown Corporations and public corporations responsible to the Legislature, set up 
by and on behalf of the people of the province, responsible to the people of the province, but responsible 
to the Legislature. They are not the pawns of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, for example, the seriousness of this practice and I would expect the 
Chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee, the Member for Nutana South (Mr. Rolfes) to rise in 
this debate and expand on the comments that he has made to the Press in this regard. Take for example, 
a Crown Corporation such as SEDCO, as an illustration. 
 
What information may have been given this junior NDP addition of the Crown Corporations Committee 
in private that was, indeed, not given or refused to the sitting of the Committee, the Legislative 
Committee, where both parties from both sides of the House were represented. We don’t know. We have 
not knowledge, no idea. We have no knowledge, for example what policies or what programs of any of 
these Crown Corporations may well have been discussed and elaborated on, in detail, in those private 
meetings, prior to the open public meeting. 
 
I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that all of those meetings held particularly where there were the four 
meetings referred to, are well out of order and should be considered again. They should come again 
before the Crown Corporations Committee. We don’t know what material or what information may have 
been disclosed to NDP Members who attended those meetings, that, indeed, altered the course of the 
questioning or altered the 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1882 

course of the meeting, or altered the conduct of the Minister or, indeed, his officials at those meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, I suggest that this is a deplorable action on the part of the, not so much the chairman 
of the Crown Corporations Committee – who knows he may have been acting at the request of the NDP 
caucus, perhaps he was acting as he says in the report, at the request of individual Ministers, whether all 
the Ministers or not, we don’t know. But I certainly say that this matter should be given the top priority 
at the next meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee. I want also to call for the resignation of the 
Chairman of that Committee and I want to call for disclosure from all Ministers who did, in fact, request 
private pre-meetings, to use the term employed by the Member for Nutana South, the Chairman of that 
Committee. Mr. Speaker, I would move that: 
 

Priority of debate be given to the reported private meetings of the Government Members of the Crown 
Corporations Committee and members of the Executive Council, with corporations officials. 

 
Seconded by Mr. Gardner, the Member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words regarding this Motion. 
 
During the discussion on the Motion itself a considerable degree of debate was given to what were the 
functions of the Crown Corporations Committee and it was suggested there was really no administration 
level at all from the Committee regarding the administration of certain Crown corporations, or I should 
say, all of the Crown corporations. But we do, at times, very often and the minutes will disclose, that we 
do make recommendations, suggestions, some individuals have some complaints to make about certain 
Crown corporations, particularly the Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) who is very upset with 
some administrative policy of Sask Tel and he has every right to be. When you look at the Estimates for 
1975, on page 88, Sask Telecommunications, this Legislature is going to vote $28.5 million for the 
corporation. We are going to vote $15 million for Saskoil; we are going to vote $50 million for SEDCO; 
we are going to vote for the Saskatchewan Power Corporations, $17 millions. If these corporations have 
had all their financial statements discussed within the Crown Corporations Committee, surely we have 
the responsibility as a committee, to examine their books, to make recommendations. There are many 
functions, and if we have no responsibilities, there is really no need for us to sit at all. 
 
In reference to the statement that really bothers me is the headline itself, “NDP Members meet in Private 
to Question Corporation Officials.” And the meetings are called at the Minister’s request, according to 
the report given by the Member for Saskatoon Nutana (Mr. Rolfes). 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, No, not according to that report. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Well, he reported to the paper. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You read the paper? 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1883 

Mr. Boldt: — The meetings are called at the Ministers’ requests. 
 

Herman Rolfes, Saskatoon Nutana South, the Chairman, says he keeps order at the meetings, 
maintains the speaking order and informs Members when the meetings are to be held, but says he 
could not be called a full-fledged chairman of the meetings. 

 
Now if the Minister of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance has called the Executive with the NDP 
Members, what kind of questions have you told your Members to ask, in the committee meetings? Have 
you muzzled them and told them not to give the kind of answers that we might seek? That is a very grey 
area. Then the Member for Nutana South goes on to say that he also claimed that the present committee 
proceedings marked a drastic change – that certainly is a drastic change, private meetings, secret 
meetings, from what the Liberal Government had. There were no such things as private meetings. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Read what he says about . . . 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Yes, I want to. 
 

Before that Liberal Members of the Committee simply sat and did nothing. 
 
The member for Nutana has made a statement here and I don’t want to refer to last night, but, boy he is 
stretching the truth. He is not telling the truth he knows it. He has nothing to back up what he said. He 
never was at one of those meetings. Liberal Members questioned the Ministers when we were the 
Government, maybe not as often, but Liberal Members asked, as the Premier said before. Every Member 
of the Legislature had the right to go privately to a Crown corporation and ask for information. Private 
Members, both Government and Opposition Members came to see me on certain individual cases and 
they had every right to. I believe that we served, and I don’t want to suggest that you are not serving me 
properly now as I have no complaint on that level. The only area of complaint is the secret meetings that 
you have with Members of the Crown Corporations Committee aside from the main Committee. 
 
I want to agree with the Member for Wilkie, who pointed out very clearly that in certain regards I have 
respect for the Member for Nutana, but I should like the Premier to reconvene the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t convene the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Well, then the Legislative Assembly, reconvene the Legislative Members and let’s re-
elect a new Committee Chairman. 
 
I think the Government, the Ministers, have overstepped their privileges. The present kind of Crown 
Corporations meetings that we have today is just a farce. I don’t know if there is any value in continuing 
them. And if this should be done maybe we should have a little more confidence, we might recall some 
of the other Crown Corporation Committees, the Crown Corporation personnel back and question them 
some more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1884 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we go any further, I should like to mention that under 17 10 (b) it says, “Not 
more than one matter can be discussed on the same Motion.” I don’t want to be too restrictive, but as to 
whether the Crown Corporations Committee as such should have another Chairman or they shouldn’t, 
that is not in the Motion given to me by the Member for Wilkie. I hope that we stay strictly to what is 
the reported matter on the so-called meetings. Any further discussion? 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I think to begin with all MLAs should 
remember in this debate or think about as a result of this debate, exactly what their responsibilities are. 
 
The responsibilities of all elected MLAs are first, I believe, on a broad basis, to the people who elected 
them. We run as Party Members, one Party elects most of the Members and the leader of that Party is 
asked to form a government. He selects 12, 14 or 15, in this case, 18 people, and those people become 
the Cabinet and they become the Government. The Members on that side who are invited to become part 
of that Government are, in many ways, no different than the Members on this side, except that they 
happen to be supporters of the philosophy of the Government. 
 
But surely in our democracy and if our parliamentary system is to work, they are not and never should 
be tied to body and soul and committed to every action of the Government, every action of every 
Cabinet Minister. Now, what has this got to do with this particular problem, this particular situation? 
 
The Cabinet, and you can’t escape the responsibility, the Cabinet Ministers are also in charge of the 
Crown corporations. As one of the responsibilities of the Premier, he allocates the chairmanship of the 
Power Corporation, of SGIO and all the Crown Corporations, usually to a Cabinet Minister. Now I don’t 
know if this has to be done legally, if this is by legislation, it may well be, but it is either legally called 
for or certainly it has been the practice. So when these secret meetings take place, it means that the 
officials of the Crown Corporations have been ordered to appear by the Cabinet Ministers. 
 
Certainly it is the tradition of the parliamentary system that the Cabinet Ministers don’t act 
independently. If the Premier didn’t know that this was going on then I suggest that he should have 
known it was going on. It is the Government’s responsibility because if it wasn’t for the Government, if 
it wasn’t for the Cabinet Ministers, those officials of the Crown Corporations would not appear and they 
would not answer questions. 
 
This is a far cry from an ordinary MLA picking up the phone and phoning Dick Keith, the head of SPC, 
or phoning the head of SGIO and asking him a question. He may or may not give you the answer, he 
doesn’t have to. I have usually found that both in Opposition and in government that the people in the 
Crown Corporations are most co-operative. If they can give you information that is not privileged, that is 
not private, they will usually do it because they recognize the position of the MLA is, in fact, different 
than the position of an ordinary citizen and while, legally, they don’t have to give this information, I 
have always found them, and I am sure all Members 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1885 

have, very co-operative. 
 
They expect, in turn I imagine, a certain amount of responsibility from the MLAs if they happen to give 
them privileged information. And from time to time we get privileged information. We get a complaint 
from a citizen and we will phone or go and see an official of a Crown Corporation and they explain it 
and there is usually two sides to the story and very often the story which we have received from the 
individual is only half the story. We get the other half of the story from the Crown corporation official 
and we are able to make a decision and go back and say, we don’t think you have a case, or yes, we will 
take your case a little further, or whatever. That is a totally different thing, than for a Minister of the 
Crown having his officials appear and sit down with Members of the NDP who also happen to be 
members of the Crown Corporations Committee, and having this question period back and forth and for 
what reason? Obviously for the reason that if there are any hot potatoes or embarrassing questions, let’s 
clear them up first so they don’t come out to the public and they don’t embarrass the Government. That 
was stated in the article. 
 
I am not going to say that this hasn’t happened from time to time with all governments. Of course it has! 
A Member will come along who has a pet beef about a Crown Corporation – and I have done it myself 
as the chairman of a variety of Crown Corporations – I have gone to the individual member and said that 
I know that you have a complaint and let’s try and get it settled before it is brought up before the public. 
I make no apologies for that. 
 
This again, is a far different cry from an organized system where the Government is using its power to 
force these Crown corporation officials to come and be subjected to questioning by a certain group of 
people. This isn’t the same thing as a little caucus meeting where you might meet with the Chamber of 
Commerce, or you might meet with the Farmer’s Union or some other group, this is a group of people 
who are employed in Crown corporations and who have had the chairman of their board, the man who 
has a tremendous amount of power over their jobs, over their future, has said, ‘you appear at 9:00 
o’clock and meet with a group of people to answer questions’. And that group of people happens to be 
NDP and they happen to be Members of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Then at 10:00 o’clock the doors are open and in come the public, and in come the Members of the 
Crown Corporations from the Opposition. Okay, by that time what has happened? Who knows what 
information has passed back and forth? Who knows what legitimate questions have been answered? But 
one thing we do know is that legitimate information is being denied to Members on this side of the 
House. That is important but not nearly as important as the fact that that legitimate information is being 
denied to the public and this is serious. I think it is an arrogant and reprehensible breach of etiquette and 
of the spirit of the rules of why those Crown Corporations were set up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I think what this means, if it is carried on, and if it is allowed to continue, that we will 
have to examine our position in Crown Corporations. Now the Government might say, go ahead 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1886 

 
and examine it, that is your problem. I am aware that the Crown Corporations Committee is set up by 
the Legislative Assembly. I am also aware that they are responsible to the Legislative Assembly, but I 
am also aware, when the chairman of the board of SPC tells the officials of SPC to show up at 9:00 
o’clock and answer the questions of the NDP Members, they are going to do it. Of course, they are 
going to do it, because the chairman of the Board of SPC has a tremendous amount of power over them. 
He can say whether they will be promoted or demoted, or they will get a large increase in salary or a low 
increase in salary. He, in fact, even has the power of the officials outside of the union, to say that they 
might even lose their jobs. Of course, they are going to do what the Cabinet Ministers tell them to do. So 
let the Premier not stand up in this House and say that this is just an ordinary little meeting for 
information by the caucus group who have every right in the world to do this. They, of course, have 
every right to have that meeting. Where the immorality in this situation comes in – and it is an immoral 
situation, it is not proper – is when the Cabinet Ministers use their power actually, according to the 
report, to convene the meeting and then force the Crown Corporations employees to come and be 
subjected to this sort of private secret quizzing. 
 
I think it should be stopped. One of the better things about out Legislative Assembly, when I say the 
Legislative Assembly I am talking about all of our practices, including our committee meetings, has 
been the Crown Corporations Committee meetings. 
 
We have all kinds of committees set up and a great many of them never meet. And if they meet it might 
be every two or three years and not many people pay much attention to them. 
 
One of the finer things about the committee work in connection with the Crown Corporations is, that, 
they are held accountable, that is the one time when the public through their elected MLAs on both sides 
of the House can get to the bottom of what is happening in every part of the Power Corporation, every 
part of the Telephones, every part of the SGIO. I will grant you that of all the questions asked, 60, 70 or 
80 per cent don’t mean a great deal and they may just be of a political nature. But the 25 or 30 per cent 
that are genuine and need asking and answers come, have been good. They have kept the Crown 
Corporations generally in this province, very high in the public’s esteem. From time to time the Crown 
Corporations have been subject to very sharp and bitter political debate. They have been political 
footballs. We have opposed a great many of the Crown Corporations. But I can tell the House this, from 
my experience, and I will use the Saskatchewan Power Corporation as an example, the SPC used to be a 
terrible political football. The SPC would be in front of the Crown Corporations Committee for three or 
four days and political allegations would fly back and forth, when we were the Opposition before, when 
you people were the Opposition, and now again when we are the Opposition. But I have seen – all of us 
have seen – the SPC come up in the esteem of Members on both sides of the House and as a result, of 
the public, to where today it is not nearly the political football it was five or ten years ago. 
 
I think all of us, if we are honest, will admit that that has been a good thing. Good, sharp questioning of 
the officials of a giant important corporation like the Power Corporation is sound and is necessary. But 
there have been times – and I have 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1887 

been as guilty as anyone else when we have indeed embarked on questioning of the Power Corporation 
– that were strictly of a political nature and may even have done some harm. But over the years, because 
there has been that open public debate, sharp as it has been, sometimes irrelevant but because it has been 
open and honest and public, the reputation of the SPC has improved. And anything that will downgrade, 
anything that will undercut, anything that will literally make a farce of Crown Corporations hearings 
should be stopped. And the Premier has the power to stop it. And I call on him, not to get up and defend 
this practice because I think it is indefensible, but to just listen to this House and then go back and say, 
okay, we won’t do it any more. Because if you don’t then I say that the whole principle and the whole 
idea of accountability of the Crown Corporations to the public through that open public forum stands in 
jeopardy. We don’t debate Crown Corporations in this House, but we do debate them in the Crown 
Corporations Committee. It has been a good exercise. I think that it stands in danger today of becoming 
a farce if these preconditioning meetings, these secret meetings are allowed to continue. 
 
I was amazed and shocked when I read that this was happening. Because let no one try to delude 
anybody that this is just a practice that is being carried on, and boys will be boys, and it is not really any 
different than what the Liberals did or the old CCF did or maybe it is a little different but just organized 
better. It is much different, totally different, brand new. It is a distinct departure, it is a very bad practice 
and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the public pressure and the feeling of the Members on both sides of the 
House will see that it is stopped and stopped immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K.R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few remarks to address to this 
Motion. 
 
The principal purpose of these meetings obviously is to give the Government Members a chance to raise 
matters and deal in private with something which they might not want to raise in public. 
 
I suppose that is a question for the Members’ own consciences and the responsibility to their own 
electors. If, in fact, they choose to discover things and keep it secret, things which they properly as 
MLAs ought to disclose to the public, that’s their dereliction of duty and it’s for their own consciences 
and something which I condemn, but go no farther. 
 
The one thing that I consider most serious about this, is the fact that the public officials, the people who 
wok for the Government of Saskatchewan and thus the people of Saskatchewan are put in an 
embarrassing and compromising position. 
 
These meetings were held under the auspices or under the direction of a Minister. The public employees 
had really no choice but to present themselves to a Party caucus. They have no choice but to attend, not 
a committee of this House, not the Legislature, not to MLAs as such, but to a private group of 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1888 

New Democrats (who happen to be elected to this House) for the purposes of having them questioned 
about affairs of the Government and about affairs which the Government may not wish to have made 
public. 
 
These officials must certainly have been embarrassed and annoyed at having been ordered to attend 
before this private arrangement. There is just no reason as I see it, Mr. Speaker, why public officials are 
to be put in this position. They were expecting or they had the right to expect to be called before a 
committee of this Legislature. I am sure that they stand ready and willing at all times to appear before a 
properly constituted meeting of this Legislature to answer for their work of the past year. I am sure also, 
Mr. Speaker, that they are prepared to report to their Minister and answer for their conduct and take 
instructions. But it is inconceivable and it is contrary to the idea of a sound, responsible and loyal civil 
service that they should be required to attend and report to an individual party. Certainly the Liberal 
Party had never suggested that the civil service must report to us as a party. They must report to the 
Government. Consequently, I most seriously condemn, and what I consider urgent and public 
importance is, the problem that this can raise among our civil servants, if they are under the constant 
threat of being called to testify before the governing party as distinguished from the Government and the 
Ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another matter which concerns us. I am a member of a different Committee on a 
regular basis, but I have attended at the Crown Corporations meetings, although I do not do so as a 
regular member of that committee. I was struck, Mr. Speaker, at the singular absence of true and full 
information and I don’t want the word true to be misconstrued, Mr. Speaker. I am not suggesting that 
anyone has lied to me, not in the least, but I am suggesting, however, that I was impressed at how 
difficult it was to extract full information from the Government with respect to its Crown corporations 
affairs. I am concerned that that will continue, and I now believe it may well be as a result of the 
influence of what are referred to as pre-meeting meetings. There is no question in my mind that the 
subject matter of the day was discussed in these pre-meetings – these secret meetings – and anything 
that might embarrass the Government was dealt with in such a manner that the answers would divulge 
the least amount of information to the Opposition and to the people of Saskatchewan and put the 
Government in the very best light regardless of how it should have been expressed to give the full and 
proper picture of what went on. 
 
There is no doubt about it that any satisfactory results in the presentation of information fully and 
frankly has been seriously impeded by these secret meetings that occurred just before the regular 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Nonsense! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Well, the Hon. Attorney General says that it is nonsense. But I invite the Minister to 
join the debate, but I have no doubt that there were discussions on how the information has to be 
presented and matters which ought properly . . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Every Minister is coached. 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1889 

Mr. MacLeod: — I am pleased to see that the Hon. Attorney General is willing to express himself on 
the point and I invite him to stand and participate in the debate fully and completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this matter will undoubtedly come again to this Legislature, I am concerned about these 
two particular matters. One is that there is an obvious coaching of the Minister, if no one else, on what is 
to happen. Perhaps that is appropriate, perhaps it is not. All I know is that I had a lot of trouble getting 
appropriate information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Perhaps I should rephrase that but I shall plunge on. 
 
Secondly, there is no question at all that the civil service must view these proceedings with considerable 
alarm. And of all the remarks I make, that is the one I should like to emphasize because I consider in the 
long term that one is the most serious for the people of Saskatchewan. I congratulate the Speaker for 
having struggled the way he did to come to what I think is a very fair decision and one that I recognize 
was more than a little difficult to the Hon. Mr. Speaker. I wish also to congratulate the Members of the 
Government who stood to see to it that we did get the opportunity to express ourselves on behalf of the 
Motion. 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with my colleague for Albert 
Park in congratulating those two Members opposite out of some 40 odd who did see fit to support us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — We realize this is a rather small percentage that believe that this debate is of great 
public urgency and I suppose two out of 40 something is better than nothing. We didn’t really expect 
that there would be a large number who believed in freedom of speech in this House. I was rather sorry 
to see that none of the Crown Corporations Committee members stood up. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Order, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, I will draw your attention to the fact that not more than one matter can be 
discussed on this same motion. The Motion is exactly what was placed by the Member for Wilkie, no 
more or no less. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — I will stick to this and I am pleased to hear the Premier is a member of the Committee, 
I hadn’t noticed him at the meetings. 
 
The key question, then, Mr. Speaker, is certainly why did certain Ministers request these pre-meetings? I 
would think that this is really the nub of the whole debate. So far we don’t know. Why do certain 
Ministers request secretly and privately to discuss certain operations of the Crown Corporations with 
NDP Members only? I would think that the Ministers 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1890 

responsible in this regard should certainly rise in this debate and indicate why they have called these 
pre-meetings, why they have called their officials together. We are hoping that they will let us know in 
this debate. 
 
What we are concerned about, of course, is why certain information would be presented to some 
members of the Committee. Why should information be given privately, for example, to the Member for 
Redberry or Gravelbourg and not to the MLA, the Member for Cannington or Moosomin? We should 
like to know what would be discussed that would not be available to all Members and, therefore, to the 
general public. 
 
I want to emphasize again that the situation we are discussing is not in any way the same as a private 
MLA taking a specific problem to some official of a Crown corporation. I think other Members have 
brought this out, that this is a different situation. 
 
I would again suggest that the Ministers who have requested these meetings and this is the information 
that we have, if it is not correct I hope they would say so. But the Ministers who have requested these 
meetings should indicate the reason for requesting them and clear the air in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that no more meetings certainly of the Crown Corporations Committee should be 
held until this matter is thoroughly investigated. I believe that the meetings that have been held are now 
under a cloud of suspicion because of the events that we have had referred to us. And the public will 
certainly suspect that full disclosure has not been possible because Crown Corporations officials and the 
Minister and NDP Members previously discussed, probably what should be emphasized or what should 
be brought out in the Committee. I agree that Opposition Members can attempt to question many other 
things, but certainly there must be some transactions that they agree that will not be brought up. 
 
I would very strongly suggest that the Premier consider recommending that the Crown Corporations that 
we have examined so far, be recalled, so that full disclosure will not only be possible but that the public 
– and this is the important part – that the public will be satisfied that this has been done. I again should 
like to say, that as a Member I am concerned about the fact that pre-meetings have been held. Those of 
us who walked in there at ten o’clock to a Crown Corporation meeting certainly had no way of knowing 
that some secret and private meeting with these same officials had been going on for an hour or so prior 
to the time that we had to go in. We asked certain questions, they answered them. We don’t know 
whether certain information was brought out in these pre-meetings that was not available to us. I would 
hope that a full investigation is made of this and that these particular actions be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. T. L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I think this debate is totally irrelevant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I point out to the Members opposite that we are 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1891 

Government Members. And we are going to be continuing meeting as caucus committee with 
departments, Crown Corporations, and unlike the Members opposite who operated under a two-man 
dictatorship, we are going to do this, when and if the Government of the Government Members feel that 
they want to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — We have a strong intelligent questioning backbench who are taking an active part in 
working with all branches of government. You are not part of the Government as such and you meet 
these people only under the privileges of this House, in most cases. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Are you a part of the Government? 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Yes, I am. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — No, you are not. 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I am not part of the recognized Government as such of this Assembly but I am part of 
the Government. I am not a member of the Crown Corporations Committee, but I feel perfectly entitled 
to meet with any Minister and his staff, whether it be departmental or Crown Corporations, at any time 
that it is convenient to either of the groups. I am part of this Government and take an active part in 
governing and developing policy and assessing performance of branches of government. 
 
The Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) complained that he can’t get the answers and I would 
suggest that he can’t even keep a train of thought for more than three minutes. I suggest that possibly he 
is not capable of doing his job. I say, that we on this side of the House, are capable of managing our time 
and the time of our employees and their corporations wisely and I make no apologies for this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney (Premier): — Minister I have another commitment, but I did want to add a few 
words to this debate, because it seems to me that we are hearing some very strange doctrine here today. 
 
We are hearing some very strange doctrine when it is suggested that there is something wrong with a 
Minister taking his officials and meeting with some people, one person, or two persons, or three persons. 
I tell you this, Mr. Speaker, and all Members of this House, I propose to continue to ask officials for 
background information if somebody comes into my office wanting some information that I don’t have. 
I propose to continue to ask officials to come in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And if two people come into my office I will do the same thing. And if there are any 
MLAs who want to do that, I will do the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1892 

Mr. Blakeney: — And if the Minister of Industry wants to meet with his officials, with a group of 
MLAs, I see nothing wrong with that. If Members opposite see something wrong with that, if they think 
it is wrong and iNDPpropriate for a Minister with his officials, to meet with a group of MLAs, I want to 
know what is wrong with it, because I say that it is perfectly proper. It is a different style, I know, than 
when I was a Member of the Crown Corporations Committee, probably every year since I have been in 
this House. I have probably spent as much time in the Crown Corporations Committee as any Member 
opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not this year. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Not this year, I admit. I am in Government this year. When I was in Opposition I 
regarded as my job, as an Opposition MLA, to get the information out of that Committee. 
 
Members opposite are in effect complaining because they don’t know what questions to ask. They don’t 
know how to get information and they are saying that the Government Members are somehow being 
given information that they would otherwise ask in the Committee. Therefore, they say that the 
Opposition is being cut off from information. I say to you, ask your questions. I say to you, read your 
reports and study your material and ask your questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Because my report of the Committee this year shows two things: (1) that no questions 
have been asked which have not been reasonably answered in the Crown Corporations Committee, in 
accordance with past practice; (2) that Government Members as opposed to Opposition Members are 
asking more questions and moving more Motions than at any time in the history of the Committee. 
 
Mr. Lane: — They are told what to do. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) says they are being told what to do. Well, I 
don’t want to wash our dirty linen in public, but I say that a reasonable number of the Motions put 
forward by the Members behind me were not put there at the instance of a Minister of the Crown. I am 
afraid, in one sense of the word, but I am happy to say, in another sense of the word, that the Members 
behind me feel free to ask whatever questions they want and to move any Motions that they want. One 
short look at the minutes of the Committee, and I have read every single set of minutes this year, 
indicates that they are exercising that right in a way which Members opposite didn’t do in their seven 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I attended virtually every meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee from 1964 
to 1970 and I know that the function of the Members of the Government was to sit in silence and vote, to 
sit in silence and vote. There could have been any number of pre-meetings, or none, and it wouldn’t 
have 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1893 

affected the operations of the Committee one jot or tittle. Because they sat in silence and voted. 
Members opposite were here; Members behind were here. It is perfectly clear under those circumstances 
that the object of that Committee in informing their Members about the object of that Committee in 
informing their Members about the operations of Crown Corporations was not a very usefully performed 
favor, because they simply didn’t ask questions. 
 
Now Members on this side of the House are asking questions, lots of them, in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. They are moving Motions in the Crown Corporations Committee. They are asking questions 
privately too. I would suggest that when the Members opposite were in the government it would have 
been a good idea for them had they asked what was going on in their Government. They should have 
troubled themselves to meet with the Ministers. Perhaps they thought they shouldn’t talk to the officials, 
but I say to them, as I say to all Members of this House, that Members should talk with Ministers. 
Furthermore, if they want to organize it in a way that the Minister has his officials there so that seven or 
eight of them can get all their questions on say, the Power Corporation asked at one time, there is 
nothing wrong with that. It seems to me a perfectly proper and appropriate function of caucus. 
 
There is a suggestion that somehow public servants should not be asked with their Minister, and I 
underline that, with their Minister, to be at meetings with MLAs. If that is so, I say, that is bad doctrine. 
A Minister should certainly protect his officials. However, having said that, there is nothing wrong with 
the Minister and his officials meeting with a group of citizens, a group of MLAs, or a group of anybody 
else who wants information and has the legitimate right to get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — Coach, well coached. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t mind what happens at one of these private meetings, whether the public 
servants coach the Minister or the Minister coaches the MLAs. The Opposition, I know, will dig out the 
facts and if they don’t they are not going their job. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Not if they are coached. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — It is remarkable for the Member for Lumsden to suggest that any amount of pre-work 
done by a Committee could in any way stop a well-informed, hard-driving Opposition from getting the 
facts that they should get for the benefit of the public. Maybe the Member for Albert Park is having a lot 
of trouble getting answers, but it may not be that the information isn’t there; it may be that he is not 
asking for the information. 
 
It seems perfectly clear to me that the idea of having the meetings, in the manner suggested, is proper 
and appropriate. There is nothing wrong with a Minister and his officials meeting with caucus Members. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — You are lowering the morality of this House. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — All I can say is that the 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1894 

Member for Prince Albert West will be informed as to what may lower the morality of this Legislature. 
But I say to him that the conduct of the Crown Corporations Committee this year, as a forum where all 
Members both Government and Opposition have asked questions, has been livelier (and I think if you 
are not too busy waving the article, you can see that it says that too), livelier than it has been for many 
years. It is livelier because the Government Members were asking questions; livelier because the 
Government people were informed; livelier because they are asking questions; livelier because they are 
making Motions. Read the minutes and you will see Government Members moving Motions; many of 
them the Minister asks Committee Members to vote against. Now I know that perhaps would not have 
happened in your well disciplined days. 
 
I say to all Members that if that is the result of hard-digging by Government Members before a Crown 
Corporations Committee, that is a positively beneficial result. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — And to suggest that there is anything wrong with a Minister and officials meeting 
with people that, I say, is bad doctrine. I say it is destructive of the right of MLAs to get information, all 
the information they can, before they go into a committee meeting. 
 
I say that MLAs have an obligation to get information by asking public officials, by asking Ministers 
with public officials, in private, at private meetings, in public, at public meetings. An MLA must inform 
himself by whatever route he can use. To suggest that this is somehow wrong or iNDPpropriate is 
simply to indicate that Members opposite, when they were in government, made a practice of muzzling 
their MLAs. I invite anyone to look at the minutes for those seven years and see how many Motions 
were moved by Members of the Government side, how many new proposals were put forward by the 
Government side. Those are a matter of public record. I say their role was to be silent and to vote and I 
think that is an iNDPpropriate role for MLAs. I think that lowered the morale of this House and I think 
the idea of having a committee where people go well-informed and ask questions and challenge the 
Minister, as they do, is a role which adds stature and lustre to this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I say . . . 
 
Mr. Lane: — . . . they know the answers. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — It is obvious the Member for Lumsden has not been in attendance at the Committee 
meetings, because he would know that, in fact, the debate has been lively as the report indicated. 
 
Mr. Lane: — So is the Ed Sullivan Show very lively. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I will allow the Member for Lumsden to direct his remarks 
when he is on his feet. He obviously has difficulty keeping his mouth closed when he is sitting down or 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1895 

his mouth open when he is standing up. 
 
In short, I say to this House that the activities of the MLAs who have met with corporation officials, 
with their Minister, are perfectly proper activities; that they represent a proper and appropriate function 
of an MLA in discharging his obligations; that there is not a shred of evidence that this work has made 
them more silent in the committee meetings. There is not a shred of evidence that the committee 
meetings have in any way been less lively, less controversial, or that fewer questions have been asked; 
not a shred of evidence! I say that on the record the meetings have been better and the MLAs are better 
informed. That is what they are elected to do and they have done it. I call that good government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Members of the House that this is 
not the first time we have had secret meetings by the NDP. I remember the last time we had a 
controversial bill introduced in this House, it was on the Ward System. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I am talking about secret meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, but we are talking about what the Member for Wilkie raised on the Motion, the 
meetings prior to the Crown Corporations. We can’t just move all over the ballfield. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier talked about all the meetings that officials come into his 
office, he talked about meetings that individuals come in to see him, I am talking about the same kind of 
a meeting, no other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP called a secret meeting in this building to subvert the public of the city of 
Saskatoon and Regina to force and blackmail the hotline, to organize the public meetings so that they 
would force the public of Saskatchewan to accept the Ward System. That is the kind of secret meeting 
and this is the second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Hon. Member should realize that the Ward System is not mentioned here. 
When a Member brings it in it precipitates the answers back to it and the first thing we know we are on 
an open rink. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier tried to stand up here and tell us that the purpose of the 
secret pre-meeting is to inform the Members of the Legislature, to inform the Members of their caucus, 
to give them information. That is not what Mr. Rolfes says. Let me tell you what Mr. Rolfes says: 
 

This meeting was called, Mr. Rolfes defended, what has become known to Government MLAs as pre-
meetings on ground that they did not mean a Government Member may 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1896 

not later make his criticism public. It is not that we want to prevent any Member from bringing up 
anything, but if we can avoid the embarrassing of the Government then I think we have an obligation 
not to embarrass the Government. 

 
And that is the purpose of those secret meetings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — There is no other reason. The Premier stood up and tried to say, why back in those 
seven years of government, that those Crown corporations weren’t as lively. I attended those meetings 
for seven years. And to suggest that Matt Brecker and George Leith and some of the other Members, 
Dave Boldt and other Members of the Crown Corporation Committee from the Liberal Government, 
didn’t put forth more arguments and more ideas and more debates – I sat in three Crown Corporations 
meetings this year, one of the SGIO, and the only mention or the only words that the NDP said was 
when Mike Feduniak stood up to argue and debate something that one of the Liberals said. They never 
put forward one idea or never expressed one opinion, and don’t suggest they are any more efficient 
because I know they are not. In fact I think they are rubber stamps, and the biggest rubber stamps I have 
ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there are two real issues here. When you go into Crown Corporations 
it has been the tradition of the elected Members to treat officials very, very delicately. In fact, the 
official is not even permitted or supposed to speak in a Crown Corporation. The only time he speaks is 
with the permission of the Minister when he asks the permission of the Crown Corporations Committee 
and then asks the official if he will speak. And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is because we respect 
and defend as Members of this House, the right of privacy and the privilege of confidentiality and not to 
embarrass those officials of any Crown Corporation. 
 
When a Minister has Estimates in this House, he brings his officials in. Those officials are here for one 
purpose and that is to act as a resource to provide him with information that may not be on his fingertips, 
not to be subject to an inquisition by Members of this House, whether they be Opposition or 
Government. And these pre-meetings to have the Minister order his officials to come to a meeting and 
then have an inquisition by a pre-meeting of the NDP caucus, is to me despicable. It is a despicable 
practice, and there is no way that they can justify it. 
 
I am disappointed that the Premier is trying to make an analogy or comparison of the MLA seeking 
information from a Crown Corporation and comparing this meeting, like a dress rehearsal, and that is 
what it is, a dress rehearsal. Just like the play that is going to be put on tomorrow night, so we get 
together with the costumes, the makeup, the background, the hypocrisy, and setting the stage and setting 
the background. In other words, the dress rehearsal for what’s to proceed in a public meeting of a public 
corporation which is to provide public information. That’s the difference between this meeting and the 
meeting that the Premier is trying to talk about and I’m ashamed to have any Member stand up there and 
defend that 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1897 

practice. And I’m disappointed in the Premier because I thought the Premier would stand up and say, I 
regret this. I don’t think the Members had any intention of doing wrong. But I regret this and I will see 
that it will not happen again. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just think of the treatment by that Government of civil servants. They have acted as 
if they only had a prerogative in questioning civil servants. I don’t want to stray too far from the subject, 
Mr. Speaker, or you will call me back to order. But I question whether a Member in this House should 
use them to bring in votes. Another member of the civil service was helping a campaign manager, thus 
bringing them in to be the exclusive prerogative of a political party. This is against the very rights and 
the very principles of an independent public service. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what a businessman must think, who is negotiating with 
SEDCO or has made a loan from SEDCO, a man who perhaps may not be sympathetic to the NDP. I 
wonder what kind of a cloud is over SEDCO today? I wonder what kind of suspicions that that particular 
businessman has, that here before the public discussion a staged, dress rehearsal, a secret pre-meeting of 
the Crown Corporations Committee is held where Members of the NDP caucus are able to enquire into 
the business of that corporation, not the business that’s made public, not the business according to the 
Members themselves’ statements, not the business of the corporation that is to be made public, but any 
business of the corporation. I wonder how many of those businessmen really today, have confidence in 
the confidentiality of the officials of SEDCO? I wonder how many men made a loan from SEDCO and 
are wondering what collateral and what his assets and what the terms and conditions of that loan have 
been revealed to Members of the NDP Government. And it may be nothing. But any time you hold a 
secret meeting, prior to a public meeting to set the stage and indoctrinate a portion of the Government 
Members, then surely every businessman in Saskatchewan must have some serious reservations about 
the confidentiality of such proceedings. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame them. And I’m going to say 
that I am disappointed that the Premier would make an analogy or a comparison of this dress rehearsal 
with a meeting of MLAs with Government officials attempting to get legitimate information and 
legitimate briefing. And the Members themselves, including the Chairman of the Crown Corporations, 
has said that that was not the purpose of the meeting. I invite all Members of the NDP to read the 
statement made by the Chairman of Crown Corporations. He did not say it was an education program, 
he did not say it was an information program, it was deliberately called to prevent embarrassment for the 
Government in the public discussions. And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to Government Members that no 
matter whether or not you support this Resolution or vote it down, that you’ve done irreparable harm to 
the system of Crown Corporations in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Irreparable harm. I suggest to you that there will be many, many questions asked 
about your method of government, about your treatment of civil servants and that there will be a cloud 
and a suspicion on the Crown Corporations in the Province of Saskatchewan unless you cease and desist 
from this practice. I urge you in all honesty, outside of the ranks of politics, outside the ranks of this 
particular Legislature. And I say that 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1898 

honestly, that you turn around and evaluate honestly that kind of policy. And I suggest to you that every 
Member on that side of the House knows that he is wrong. I suggest to you that every Member on that 
side of the House knows that that policy is wrong and I urge you to examine carefully the wisdom of 
your decision when you stand up to vote in this particular Motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, this debate reveals three 
characteristics of the Liberal Party. One is, Mr. Speaker, that they do not respect civil servants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — They suggest that somehow civil servants are weak-kneed, cowering people who have 
no integrity. The Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) who has just sat down, inferred that somehow 
the civil servants would reveal confidentialities that they should not reveal. That’s the attitude towards 
civil servants, that they should be weak-kneed and cowering people in the face of Ministers. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I said that the people of Saskatchewan would be 
suspicious whether they did or not and they will be suspicious. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — This is a debating point and the Minister is debating the statements made. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s debates of this kind, as I say, that reveal some of the fundamental 
philosophy of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan and that’s one, that civil servants should not have 
integrity or independence or pride in their work. They should bow and cower to a Minister of the Crown. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that you just ask any civil servant who has worked in Saskatchewan whether he 
would prefer the kind of conditions and atmosphere that prevailed while this Government was in office 
or while the previous Liberal Government was in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — And I say further, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the public servants in the Crown 
Corporations that they do have integrity, that they do not reveal information which is given to them in 
confidence. 
 
A second characteristic, Mr. Speaker, revealed by this debate which is held dearly, apparently by the 
Liberal Party, is that they really don’t want people to have freedom of speech, they really don’t want 
people to be able to move freely and communicate freely one with another. That somehow or other if a 
Member of the Legislature and a Minister of the Crown and public servants meet together they shouldn’t 
talk to each other, 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1899 

shouldn’t exchange information. That somehow that is wrong. 
 
The third characteristic, Mr. Speaker, is that the Liberal Party is opposed to freedom of association. 
Somehow or other it is wrong, if I judge by what they have said this afternoon, it’s wrong for Ministers 
of the Crown, public servants in Crown Corporations, Members of the Legislature, to meet together. 
Somehow that’s wrong. There is something sinister about that. That there is somehow, because they 
meet there’s a secrecy about it, some kind of conspiracy to subvert the public interest, because they meet 
together. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s consider the implications of that attitude. What does it mean for public servants 
and for Members of the Legislature and for Minister of the Crown? Does it mean that we cannot meet 
together except with the permission of the Leader of the Opposition or the Speaker of the House or the 
Premier of the province? Does that mean a Member of the Legislature or a group of Members of the 
Legislature can’t meet with the Minister or can’t meet with a public servant, except by first getting 
permission from some other source, some other official? Surely not, Mr. Speaker. Yet that’s the clear 
implication of what they’re saying. Does it mean, Mr. Speaker, that if a Member of the Legislature or a 
group of the Members of the Legislature ask me as a Minister of the Crown for information which I 
know is available, say from the General Manager of the Power Corporation, and I call the General 
Manager of the Power Corporation and say I have a group of MLAs who would like to meet to get some 
information from you, does it mean that can’t take place? Can’t happen? Or if I phone up the General 
Manager of a Crown Corporation and invite him to come to my office and say there is a group of MLAs 
here who want to meet, who want to get information that they feel you will have, does it mean that he 
can’t come or he shouldn’t come? Surely not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I take it, Mr. Speaker, that what is really sticking in the throats of the Members of the Opposition is that 
they are not working as hard as the Members of the Government. They are not working to prepare 
themselves for sessions of the Crown Corporations Committee. And I know that the Members on this 
side of the House are working hard. I know that they are asking me for information. I know they are 
asking me for information. I know they are asking to get information which they know is within the 
knowledge of the General Manager of the Power Corporation and the Managing Director of SEDCO and 
I freely invited them and the officials to meet together with me to exchange information. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I am quite prepared to extend that invitation to all Members of the Legislature on either side of 
the House, if they wish to get that information, in that particular way or if they wish to prepare 
themselves for Crown Corporations meetings. Whether they meet in private or whether they meet on the 
street or whether they meet in a meeting room that’s open to the public, I think is of little concern, one 
way or the other. The question is: are the Members of the Legislature free and uninhibited in their right 
to associate with other Members and Ministers and public servants? Are they free to ask questions and 
get information and to prepare themselves for the duties that they must discharge in a Crown 
Corporations Committee or in any other committee? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can ask ourselves three questions. One I have already dealt with. Is it wrong for 
meetings to be held between a Minister and officials and an MLA or a group of MLAs? Surely it would 
be wrong if that could not be done. Surely it would be wrong if the Members of the Legislature or the 
public 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1900 

service did not have that freedom to meet and to talk and to exchange information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a second question is: is any Member of the Legislature being restricted or inhibited 
from discharging his duties as a member of the Crown Corporations Committee? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) made a little 
confession. He indicated that he was labouring under some restrictions and inhibitions, but I take it it 
was nothing to do with any Member on this side of the House or any public servant or any Minister of 
the Crown. It was a difficulty of his own. 
 
I heard the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) shout out that people in the Crown Corporations 
Committee are asking questions when they already know the answers. Well, now that’s a strange 
exclamation of surprise from a member of the learned profession. All of the lawyers are taught not to 
ask questions unless you do know the answer, and I’m surprised that he hasn’t learned that lesson. What 
surely, is more commendable to a Member of the Legislature and the Crown Corporations Committee 
that he has done his homework so well that he knows what facts he is trying to solicit from officials. 
That he knows what answers have to be given because he knows what the facts are. 
 
Mr. Lane: — He knows they are going to be embarrassed. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — I take it, Mr. Speaker, that what’s really bothering them is that if the members of the 
Crown Corporations Committee will not go into the meetings and embarrass the Government that 
somehow that’s wrong and they are not doing their job. 
 
I think it’s quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that no Member of this Assembly and certainly no member of the 
Crown Corporations Committee is being restricted in any way from discharging his full duties as a 
member of the Crown Corporations Committee regardless of what any other members are doing, 
regardless of what they are reading, regardless of what they are being told by other people. All of the 
members of the Crown Corporations Committee are perfectly free to discharge their duties as they see 
best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third question is: does the Crown Corporations Committee function with less 
effectiveness because some Members of the Legislature have taken the trouble to inform themselves 
about certain aspects of the annual reports being considered or the activities of a Crown Corporation 
being considered? Surely the answer is, not at all! And if they undertake to inform themselves by 
attending meetings with the Minister before the Crown Corporations Committee meets or attending 
meetings with the Minister and officials before the Crown Corporations Committee meets and thereby 
informing themselves in that way, surely that does not restrict the effectiveness of the Crown 
Corporations Committee. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the evidence this year is that those Members 
of the Assembly who have been working hard and attending meetings and informing themselves have 
been very, very vigorous, very, very 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1901 

effective, in the Crown Corporations Committee. And the Committee is functioning, I think, as well as 
in any of the years that I have known it and perhaps better than in a good many years, because of the 
vigorous activities of the members of that Committee, particularly the Members who support the 
Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, I could not and I ask all Members not to support the position taken by 
the Opposition in this debate: to suggest that Members should be restricted in their associations; that 
civil servants should be restricted in their associations; to suggest that people should be restricted in their 
freedom of speech and exchange of information at meetings in offices behind closed doors or outside, in 
public, or wherever they may meet and wherever they may speak; and worst of all, Mr. Speaker, to 
suggest as Members of the Opposition clearly do, that civil servants should somehow be cowering, 
weak-kneed people who are at the beck and call and who are prepared to subvert the public interest and 
undermine their own integrity because they are attending a meeting which is not attended by other 
Members of the Legislature. Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong. We should say to the people of Saskatchewan 
that we do not accept this position of the Liberal Party, in their campaign against freedom of association, 
freedom of speech and further in their campaign to undermine the integrity of the public service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t intending on getting involved in this 
debate, because I’m not a member of Crown Corporations and I haven’t had much experience with the 
procedure of the House in that regard. However, after listening to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce (Mr. Thorson) speak I was moved to get on my feet because I’ve never heard such drivel in 
all my life. As well the emotional outburst of the Premier a few moments ago makes me only think that 
he protests too much and that the Government is very sensitive about this particular newspaper article. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it might be of some assistance to everybody if we got the debate back on to how it 
started and that is the newspaper article. The newspaper article dealt with secret meetings by 
Government Members, Government MLAs, with Crown Corporation officials to avoid embarrassing 
questions being asked at public meetings. That’s what the article has dealt with and that is what this 
debate is about. I should like just to quote two or three passages from this article, Mr. Speaker, and see if 
the Government is going to dispute them. The Committee’s Chairman said in interviews Wednesday and 
Thursday, “The meetings have been held to allow Government Members a chance to ask questions 
which they might not want to raise in public.” Well, of course, the purpose of the Crown Corporation 
meetings is to raise these questions in public so that there is a public investigation. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, he also claimed, that is the Member for Saskatoon Nutana (Mr. Rolfes), he also 
claimed the present Committee’s proceedings marked a drastic change – I am sorry, wrong paragraph. 
“It is not that we want to prevent any Member 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1902 

from bringing up anything but if we can avoid embarrassing the Government, then I think we have an 
obligation not to embarrass the Government.” Further, asked whether prior consultation might be 
construed as an attempt to limit embarrassing questions by Government Members, Mr. Rolfes replied, 
“Certainly, there is no doubt about that.” 
 
Now let’s look at some of the things that the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) has said. He has talked 
about freedom of speech. Well, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where do you have freedom of speech more, in a 
public meeting or in a private meeting held with a Government Member and a Government Minister? I 
suggest in the public forum. Secondly, we have the Minister’s comments about freedom of association. 
Well surely freedom of association is best dealt with in a public meeting, not where a chairman or an 
official of one of these Crown Corporations is directed by the Minister in charge to appear in his office 
and meet with Government MLAs – some freedom of association, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Further, there is a suggestion that we on this side have described civil servants as being weak-kneed and 
so on. That is just complete nonsense, Mr. Speaker, and does not even deserve to be commented on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Members opposite were truly performing the functions that they have been elected to 
do they would join with us and vote in favor of this Resolution. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, I was amazed first of all earlier today when I read this particular article 
on page 14 outlining the thinking and the comments of the present chairman of the Crown Corporations 
Committee. I was amazed also in the course of this debate that that Member didn’t see fit to get up and 
expand on some of the comments that he made in that particular report. Mr. Speaker, I was also amazed 
to listen to some of the comments, very brief, made by some of the Members opposite. The Premier in 
particular and the Member for Estevan (Mr. Thorson) who just took his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel, neither has any Member on this side with any member of the public or 
any Member of the Legislative Assembly or any combination thereof, seeking a meeting at any time 
with Crown Corporation officials for the purpose of discussing policy or for the purpose of seeking 
information relative to a problem or a request from their constituency or dealing with their constituents, 
or really any subject they wish. There is no question about that. That is so primary, Mr. Speaker, and so 
obvious that I think this is the kind of argument that the Premier has tried to make in this debate. This is 
the kind of argument that the Member for Estevan tried to make that we are arguing against the freedom 
of association. But to compare that kind of information seeking, Mr. Speaker, that kind of expansion on 
policy to the kind of dress rehearsal as was so well stated by my seatmate here, is nonsense. If that 
meeting were for information or was for policy clarification, or for a constituency problem, why in the 
world were they held just before the Committee meeting? Don’t tell this House, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
a coincidence. No doubt it isn’t a coincidence and I would hope the Attorney General and the Premier 
instead of treating this entire breach of privilege of the members of that Committee and of the Members 
of this House in such a cavalier fashion that they 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1903 

should immediately order their fellow Cabinet Ministers to cease and desist from that practice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I am very serious when I say this is a smear, as far as I am 
concerned, on this Legislature. It is a smear on their Party, it’s a smear on the political system. It’s a 
smear on the political system. Surely at a time when Watergate has demeaned the political process in the 
eyes of a lot of people in the States and in Canada, all we don’t need is a kind of move, a kind of activity 
that’s going on with these pre-meetings, these prep sessions, these dress rehearsals for Committee 
members, these secret meetings conducted by this Party and this Government and these Members 
opposite. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker! I say to you that we are all jeopardized and the integrity of that 
of the Attorney General and his objectivity is open to question by him allowing that Chairman of that 
Committee to hold a secret meeting prior to the regular meeting of that Committee. I suggest it is a 
cheap, chintzy, rotten practice and I would hope that they will stop it just as soon as we are through with 
this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Priority of Debate negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS – 11 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 
Coupland McIsaac Wiebe 
Guy Gardner Malone 
Grant Lane  
 

NAYS – 29 
Messieurs 

 
Blakeney Pepper Mostoway 
Dyck Michayluk Gross 
Meakes Thorson Comer 
Smishek Whelan Rolfes 
Romanow Carlson Lange 
Messer Robbins Hanson 
Snyder Tchorzewski Oliver 
Thibault Matsalla Kaeding 
Baker Faris Flasch 
Brockelbank Owens Mostoway 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Secret Meetings Re SEDCO 
 
Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister in charge of SEDCO (Mr. Thorson). I wish to ask the Minister if he held one of 
the secret meetings with the Government Members prior to the 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1904 

legitimate meeting of Crown Corporations with the intention of providing confidential information not 
available to the whole Committee? 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is ‘No’. 
 
Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. It was reported by the Chairman of the Committee 
that such a meeting was held. I was wondering what the information was that was provided. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, the question was whether I had any meeting in which I undertook to give 
information or intended to give information to other Members that I wouldn’t give to the Committee and 
the answer to that question is ‘No’. 
 
Mr. Guy: — My supplementary question is: did the Minister provide financial statements of all the 
companies in which SEDCO has equity? Did he provide the names of the companies which received 
loans and guarantees from SEDCO? Did he supply information given to the Government in confidence 
about the financial position of any company in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is ‘No’. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 171 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 
No. 171 showing: 
 

As of March 26, 1974, the amount of money that was paid by Government Departments, Boards, 
Commissions, Agencies and Crown Corporations to Ad Sask Agencies. 

 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I couldn’t quite figure out why the usually eloquent Leader 
of the Opposition was so tongue-tied on this particular motion. I came to the quick conclusion that it had 
to be because of the numerals 171, which in the minds of the Liberals opposite are bad numerals. But 
having said that I think that there is only one thing wrong with the motion to which I should like to 
propose an amendment to correct and that is there is no timetable for the request for information to Ad 
Sask Agencies. Presumably it is for the duration of the Government. I don’t think it has been in 
operation that long. What I would propose to do, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek, is amend it as 
follows: 
 

That the following words be added after the word ‘Agencies’ in the last line: ‘since January 1, 1971’. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The debate continues on the motion as amended. 
 
Hon. J. E. Brockelbank (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a couple 
of words on 



 
March 29, 1974 

 

 
1905 

the amendment and the motion. I think this amendment to the motion which has now been carried is a 
clear illustration of the point that we have been attempting to make today, that in order to get 
information you have to know how to ask a question. It is unfortunate that the Leader of the Opposition 
is unable to frame his questions in order to get the information. He has to depend on us to amend so that 
he can get the appropriate information. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, these questions are agreed upon and are made up by people in our office 
and I wasn’t aware that the date wasn’t on it. I appreciate the Attorney General putting forward this 
amendment and putting the question in order so that the information can be given to us. This happens 
often, it happened when we were the Government, and you would go across the table and the Clerk 
many times would hand back questions to people as illustrious as your own father when he was in the 
Opposition. 
 
Now a criticism of this kind coming from that particular Member and Minister is odd when I recall us 
putting him through the questions for his own Department. In all the time I have been in the House I 
have never seen a Minister who showed so much ignorance about his Department and had so much 
difficulty as that particular Minister. If I were he I wouldn’t point the finger at anybody on this side of 
the House or his side of the House suggesting that they do not know what they are doing, because I 
guarantee when your Estimates come up this time, you’ll have a chance to show your stuff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 172 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
172 showing: 
 

A copy of the Feasibility Study done by R. M. and R. H. Scrivener Ltd., relating to the proposed 
Choiceland Iron Ore Development. 

 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry): — Ordinarily studies done for the Government, unless it is 
contemplated at the time that the study is undertaken, are not made public. There are many such studies 
going on from time to time which the Government commissions have done. On that ground, Mr. 
Speaker, I would think it would not be a good precedent to follow to pass this motion. But in this case I 
may inform the House that the Government has not commissioned any such study by R. M. and R. H. 
Scrivener Ltd., referred to in the motion and so far as I am aware no Crown agency has commissioned 
such a study. So for that reason particularly in this case the motion should be defeated. 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word on this particular motion. 
It is unfortunate that the Government hasn’t done a feasibility study because a few months ago the 
Province of Alberta announced that they were going to proceed with the development of the Peace River 
Iron Development. By doing so 



 
March 29, 1974 
 

 
1906 

they may have cancelled once and for all the Choiceland iron deposit. They may well have put this aside 
for 10, 20, 30, 40 years, a major iron development for the Province of Saskatchewan. The Minister is 
well aware, as I was, that in a feasibility study when I was the Minister of Industry, by Kaisers Limited 
of Toronto, that the market availability for an iron ore deposit in western Canada, there was only room 
for one. The first one that has the opportunity to develop will be the only one developed perhaps for a 
long period of time and by cancelling that particular project two or three years ago may well have left 
that iron deposited in the ground for many, many years to come. I think it is regrettable if the Minister 
hasn’t commissioned a feasibility study and I urge the Government to proceed with one at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Minister the Scrivener Company have an interest in 
Choiceland Iron Mines and their feasibility study has indicated certain favourable features. I am a little 
surprised that the Government hasn’t taken enough interest in Choiceland Iron Mines to avail 
themselves of this report. 
 
Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Grant: — The only report they have is one they commissioned themselves, which suited 
themselves and didn’t paint too good a picture which is exactly what they wanted, then they flushed the 
Choiceland Iron Mines down the drain. In the meantime Alberta is gearing up and we all know that there 
is only room for one iron ore mine in western Canada to keep the steel industry going and if we don’t 
get off our nether regions or parts we are going to find that the iron ore mine is up in the Peace River 
country and not in Choiceland. I know there is an argument in favor of disregarding the boundaries in 
corporations such as a steel plant but after all Alberta hasn’t done too badly in the last few years and I 
don’t think we should feel sorry for them if they lose the iron ore mine and I think it is up to us to beat 
our own drums and I would hope that the Minister would show some more interest in Choiceland, 
because every day, and every way, it is becoming more and more feasible. The only thing that has been 
against it in the past, is the economics, the costs of getting that ore up and refining it. With ore prices 
escalating like everything else that day is going to come. And if we don’t get busy we are going to find 
that it is going to come in Alberta and not in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would strongly urge the Minister to get busy and have one of his departmental officials communicate 
with Scrivener and Company and get a copy of the report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:14 o’clock p.m. 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS

