


























































Hansard: April 03, 1974


2019 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

43rd Day 
 

Wednesday, April 3, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Newcomers Club 
 
Mr. G. B. Grant (Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery we have a group of ladies today 
whom I should like to welcome to the House through you and introduce to the Members. 
 
These ladies form the alumni of the Newcomers Club in Regina and they have had lunch in the buildings 
today and I hope their visit will be most educational and informative. 
 
I understand this type of organization exists in most Canadian cities. I know that it has been very active 
in Regina for a number of years. I think these ladies are to be congratulated for the good work they are 
doing in acquainting newcomers to our city and getting them settled down in their new locations and 
making them feel at home. 
 
I know that every Member joins with me in extending a very sincere welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, may I join with the Hon. Member for 
Whitmore Park by also extending a warm welcome to the ladies. I know that they have been in the 
building for some time and I do hope that so far their visit has been a good one. I hope that their stay 
with us this afternoon in the Legislature will be a useful experience. On behalf of the Government 
Members I do want to extend to them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, not only is Albert Park and Regina South 
one of the outstanding areas in the city, it is an area to which many of the newcomers come when they 
first arrive in Regina. They first get their taste of the friendly welcome that is extended to all 
newcomers. They fit in very quickly and rapidly and help to build this area of the city into one of the 
outstanding areas of the province. We are so pleased that so many of them have continued on. It has 
been my pleasure to meet with many of them in the past. We hope that they stay for a good long time in 
Regina and I want to join with the rest of the Members of the House in welcoming them here today and 
we hope that we will do them proud and hope that they will enjoy the activities of their Members in the 
Legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2020 

Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, not only do I welcome the ladies on behalf of 
those that may live in my constituency, but I think I am in the position to welcome them on behalf of the 
whole city. I want to echo the words expressed by the other Members and I am pleased that they have 
chosen Regina, and after last night’s announcement, we can say the fastest growing city in Canada. 
 
We hope that you will share and be part of this fine community for many years. 
 
A sincere welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

National Energy Board Hearings 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the 
Hon. Attorney General in his capacity as Deputy Premier. 
 
Yesterday, I was unable to be in this Assembly because I was making a presentation to the National 
Energy Board, arguing for the immediate curtailment of oil exports from Saskatchewan and from 
Canada. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is that the brief written by the Saskatchewan Waffle was the only written 
presentation from Saskatchewan. Why has the Government of Saskatchewan not chosen to make its 
position clear before these National Energy Board hearings? The only representative was one observer 
from the Department of Mineral Resources, who made no comments. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I am sorry I just can’t answer the question of the Member. I 
was under the impression that the Government was represented in National Energy Board hearings by 
Sask Power and it was felt that there ought not to be an additional brief by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Whether or not this is the particular one I am not able to say. All that I can tell you is that 
I shall endeavor to inform myself and advise either later or tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Richards: — As a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation also 
made no representations before these hearings. 
 

Federal-Provincial Agreement for Steel and Iron Development 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 
like to direct a question to the Attorney General, in the absence of the Premier. 
 
I wonder if he could confirm or deny that it was in fact the Premier of Saskatchewan who, at a sort of 
secret or private or privileged press conference, leaked the story of the $120 million steel and iron 
development that is slated, we hope, for the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2021 

Could he confirm or deny that it was the Premier, who leaked that story and is he aware that these 
contracts, these agreements, have in fact been signed between the province and the Federal 
Government? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would advise that I cannot confirm or deny that the Premier was 
involved in a press conference with respect to this matter. I am afraid I am just not privy to that 
information. 
 
With respect to the contracts, my information is that they are either signed or about to be signed by all 
the parties involved. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Incidentally I will confirm that it was the 
Premier who had this press conference. 
 
I would ask the Attorney General that if in his opinion – let me say first that everyone welcomes this 
great development and this great example of co-operation between the Federal Government and the 
Provincial Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — And we also ask the Attorney General if he is not aware that this negotiation has been 
going on for some time, previous to any agreement about oil between the Provincial and Federal 
Governments? I am asking him the question, is it a fact that negotiations have been going on for some 
time long before the oil situation arose or the conference about oil was held? I also ask him if he doesn’t 
think that it was rather a sleazy way to carry on, it was, I think, a cheap attempt to announce this before 
the Prime Minister would announce it when he comes out West. As a matter of fact I think that the 
Prime Minister would have made this a joint announcement. 
 
As I say, I am concerned and I hope that this premature announcement has not, in any way, prejudiced 
the negotiations that in fact have not been concluded. This agreement has not been signed. I hope it is 
signed. My question is, that I would hope that the Attorney General will agree with me that this was 
rather cheap politics and I hope that it doesn’t prejudice or act in a detrimental way to this very 
important agreement that is being negotiated and is not complete. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would answer as follows: To my knowledge I think this has been the 
objective of governments for a long time to try and make a strong iron and steel industry based here in 
western Canada, in Saskatchewan. I believe that some discussion has been in progress, certainly before 
the latest round on energy. In my judgment, however, the position taken by the Provincial Government 
on implementing Bill 42, and the negotiations particularly by the Premier and the Minister in charge of 
Energy for Saskatchewan, were probably the single most important factors for the conclusion of this 
particular important announcement, for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I made no comments about the nature of the announcement. 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2022 

I have given my answer to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in that regard. All that I can say is, that I 
am sure that any announcement of this nature would not prejudice the all but concluded, if not 
concluded, arrangements made up-to-date and I think the important thing is that all Saskatchewan 
people and the Prime Minister, as the Prime Minister of Canada, should welcome the fact that we do 
have this tremendous $120 million expansion for our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Choiceland Iron Ore Development 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to have the opportunity to direct 
a question to the Premier, but while he was well enough yesterday to make the announcement he is sick 
today, I believe. I thought that he would be feeling better today as a result of that announcement. I also 
find that the Minister of Mineral Resources is absent. It is an off coincidence where there is such an 
important subject before us. So I will have to direct my question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, because I believe that he is familiar with the situation. 
 
Does this announcement mean that the Government will be going full steam ahead now on the 
Choiceland iron ore development, because it would seem logical since the announcement included the 
announcement of a $28 million reduction plant here in Regina, and a reduction plant isn’t much good 
unless you have the ore. I wonder if the Minister would comment on this. 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, the need for additional 
supplies of iron ore for the IPSCO mill and the expansion of the steel industry in western Canada, of 
course, has been identified for some time. My information is that both the IPSCO Company and others – 
and I can say with certainty, the Government of Saskatchewan – have been investigating all possibilities 
with respect to an increased supply of iron ore. 
 
That investigation, I may say, has been world wide. It includes, of course, an investigation of what is 
known about the deposit of iron ore that is now under the control of a company, identified as Choiceland 
Iron Mines Limited. We have also identified other sources of iron ore very near by. 
 
I think the prospect of the immediate expansion of the steel industry in Saskatchewan, brings much 
closer the day when we will be using iron ore from a Saskatchewan source, in steel mills in 
Saskatchewan and in western Canada. Whether or not it will come from that deposit now under the 
control of one company, is not certain. 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Would the Minister indicate to us whether the 
Government has given consideration to acquiring a major interest in the Choiceland deposits? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, all such matters of that type are being considered with respect to this 
question. The position 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2023 

of the Government, the position of other people, ways to work in joint ventures and so on, all of those 
things are being considered and are the subject of investigation and discussion. But I have no 
announcement to make about any conclusion to any such discussions or negotiations. 
 
Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, has the Minister any knowledge of such a proposition having been turned 
down by the Government of a major participation. 
 
Mr. Thorson — There have been various proposals and counter proposals. 
 
Mr. Grant: — That’s not my question. I am asking if you are aware . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, I don’t think we can have any debate on questions. 
 
Mr. Grant: — . . . of the turning down of any proposal whereby the Government would become a major 
shareholder in Choiceland? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — A debate like that would be better on Estimates when they come up. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Telegram From Jean Marchand Re Grain Movement 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would just like, very briefly, to read a 
telegram which was forwarded to the Premier from Jean Marchand, Minister of Transport, and it reads 
as follows: 
 

On March 14 Members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan sent a telex to Prime Minister 
Trudeau urging action to expedite export grain movement. Steps taken include government 
contribution towards repair of 2,400 damaged boxcars and program for purchase of 4,000 grain 
hoppers. Also, as outcome of meeting of Emergency Committee consisting of Government agencies, 
railroads and grain-handling companies, steps have been taken to have unit grain trains assembled and 
operated. 
 
Some branch lines made inoperable by snow conditions will be temporarily closed to enable full 
resources to be concentrated on moving maximum possible volumes on main lines. And it is intended 
farmers affected by this move will be given alternative delivery point privileges. 
 
I am also convening a National Conference on April 10 to discuss car supply problems at which 
representatives from the Federal Government, railways and shippers, will be present. Over the longer 
term it is the aim of myself and of my colleagues to work as quickly as possible towards a 
transportation system that will reduce and ultimately eliminate our 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2024 

Current problems. 
 
Signed: Jean Marchand, Minister of Transport. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I make no comment on this at this time, I just simply read the telegram to inform the 
Members of the House that we have received a reply. 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, if I may just make a brief reply to that statement. 
 
We are very pleased with the contents of the telegram and would like to indicate that we originated the 
telegram in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —Order, order! The Leader of the House was not making a statement, he was reading a 
telegram for information, a statement was not given. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, surely we have the right to comment on the telegram if he has the right to 
read it. The comment that we wanted to make was that we sent the original telegram. We are happy they 
are buying 4,000 hopper cars; we are happy that the Federal Government is taking action. 
 
Of course, the Attorney General wouldn’t make a statement because he . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I am not going to permit a debate when the House Leader brings 
information for the Members and he said that he was not making any comment, but just to advise 
Members that he received a telegram. I don’t think we can have debates on things like that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I am prepared to live by your ruling, but quite 
obviously the Members opposite are quite anxious to make a comment. With your Speaker’s indulgence, 
and with the Members’ indulgence on this side, as far as I am concerned, let the Opposition make their 
comments and perhaps I could make a brief comment in rebuttal and we could move on to some other 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Then we are getting into debates on Orders of the Day and I don’t think that is a good 
practice. If we want to have a debate it should be a substantive motion. I think information supplied is 
the same as when a Minister tables a document, whether it is the annual report of a company and he just 
tables it, it is not debated then and I don’t think we can start debates of this kind. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I think the case in point here may be a little bit 
different in that the telegram was in response to a telegram initiated by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. 
Gardner). And while it was read by the Attorney General, and perhaps he did not comment very much, 
but had he merely tabled it that would have been one thing, but he did read it. I suggest that it wouldn’t 
be too severe a deviation from 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2025 

actual practice if the initiator of the telegram had a very short comment on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The chair has no knowledge of who instigated the telegram, who initiated it or 
anything else. All the information that I have is what I heard when the telegram was read. And as to 
what Members have done otherwise, I have no knowledge, but I don’t think it should be debated at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I think there is nothing in this Blue Paper that gives the Minister or 
anyone else the right to read a telegram. If he has something to lay on the table and under the rules of 
this House, he has the right to lay it on the table. It is traditional that Ministers have the right to make an 
announcement and we have a right, on this side of the House to comment. 
 
That amounted to an announcement. He didn’t table it and that amounted to an announcement and I 
think you are being very unfair if you don’t let our Member make a comment on it. It is not a debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I should like to point out that there is nothing in the Blue Paper about tabling papers 
whatsoever, that is true. Under the rules of the House Ministers can make ministerial statements. The 
rules of the House do not permit a reply by the Opposition, but our tradition of courtesy has allowed it. 
This is not a statement of the Minister, it is reading a copy of a telegram received by a Minister of the 
Government. So it is not a ministerial statement, it is a statement from a Government Minister, from 
another Parliament. 
 
Therefore, I say it is not a ministerial statement and it is not debatable. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in that sense I suppose it isn’t a ministerial statement, perhaps, but 
that reply came to the Premier of the province in response to a telegram which was read before the 
Orders of the Day in this Legislature some days ago, by the Member for Moosomin. So in that sense it 
does involve and does deal with the business of this particular House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, the Speaker doesn’t know who sends telegrams and who doesn’t, but there is 
lots of time to discuss the issue on Estimates or other places if they don’t wish to have a motion. I rule it 
out of order at this time. 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, we are going to abide by your ruling, but I should 
like to ask you a question. 
 
Under what particular terms of reference of Standing Orders gives any Member of this House the 
privilege of reading a telegram? Whether it be the Attorney General or a Member from this side. 
 
Is it your ruling that any Member of this Legislature can stand up and read a telegram, or read any 
statement? If it is 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2026 

a privilege of a Minister of the Crown to stand up and read a telegram or read a statement, then certainly 
it is also the tradition of this House that a Member of the Opposition has the privilege of responding to 
that particular telegram. 
 
You say there is no rule for that. There certainly is no rule, that I am aware, that gives the Attorney 
General the privilege of reading a telegram any more so than any other Member of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would rule that the Attorney General, Leader of the House, was reading a telegram 
received from a Minister of the Federal Government for information of the House and he has said that he 
wasn’t prepared to comment on or debate it at this time. It was just information announcing that action 
would be taken later jointly between the Federal Government and the province or provinces. 
 
That, at this time to me is not debatable because when Government policy is decided it can be debated 
among the Members at that time. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Is it conceivable then that we could read a telegram in this House, is it understood that 
we can read a telegram in this House? 
 
Mr. Speaker — The Ministers can make statements and the Minister on this occasion read a telegram 
for information. I think the Hon. Members are well aware of the rules without me having to go into the 
details on them. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Can we read a telegram for information in this House? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Why not? What gives him the right and not us the right? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think the Hon. Leader of the Opposition knows there is a difference between 
Executive Council Members, they must assume responsibility for government jointly and collectively. 
Private Members have only to assume the responsibility for themselves, they are not jointly and 
collectively responsible for other private Members, which Ministers are. There is a difference in the 
rules and I am sure the Hon. Member having been a Minister is well aware of the fact. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I am well aware that the Members of the Government have the right to 
make announcements in this House and this is a responsibility which they don’t always follow to 
announce in this House something that has to do with decisions of their Government for the information 
of this House and the information of the public. I think they go beyond that when they read information 
not to do with this House, that information had to do with the Federal Government. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It was a telegram sent by 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2027 

the House, Dave. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Well, if it was sent by the House, the House is not the government. It was a telegram 
sent by this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s his point. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — No, that is not the point. The point that the Speaker makes as I understand it, is as 
Members of the Treasury Bench, as Members of the Government, you have certain privileges that are 
not available to the ordinary Members on either side of the House and with that I agree. 
 
You read a telegram that was the result of something that was done by this Legislative Assembly, by the 
whole House and I say as Members of this House we are all equal and we have the right to comment on 
it. That is all I have to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If we strictly follow the rules or adhere to the rules at all times any ministerial 
statement cannot be replied to because there are no rules for this, it is done by courtesy not by rules. And 
therefore, I think that I have been quite lenient on many occasions and allowed extra questions and 
statements and also prefaces to questions and so forth. But I don’t think I can allow a debate on this at 
this time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. J. Messer (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 79 – An Act to Regulate 
the Ownership and Control of Agricultural Land in Saskatchewan. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased today to place before you and this Legislative Assembly, 
The Farm Ownership Act, 1974. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — This Act . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — . . . is not . . . 
 
Mr. Messer: — I am sure the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) will have an opportunity to debate this, 
if he gives me an opportunity to give second reading to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act will set an example for other provinces and indeed other countries to follow in a sound 
approach to the control of land ownership. 
 
As you are well aware, Mr. Speaker, this Government first began to take steps to deal with this problem 
in 1972. The subject was the centre of much controversy. At that time, some, and indeed the Members in 
Opposition, the Members who sit to your left, questioned the need for control of land ownership. This 
Government stated at that time that although non-resident ownership of land was not a major problem in 
1972, the time was just around the corner when Canadian citizens all across Canada would have to be 
prepared for major developments which would and 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2028 

might change the situation. That time, Mr. Speaker, has come. 
 
With the affluent economy in the farming sector, particularly in relation to grain production we now see 
interest being shown from non-resident people in the purchase of land in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, persistent reports keep coming to me from interested sources that show there is activity 
emanating from German, Japanese and Arab concerns in the purchasing of large tracts of land, 
agricultural land in the neighboring Province of Manitoba. 
 
Closer to home there has been a good deal of concern expressed to me by residents in the northeastern 
part of this province over the purchase of land by Americans in the Torch River area. This agricultural 
land is apparently being purchased as a hunting preserve to be utilized exclusively by American 
sportsmen and residents can see the day when they no longer will be able to hunt there themselves and 
the land will lie idle because the owner won’t bother to farm it nor is he interested in farming that land. 
 
There has been ample evidence, Mr. Speaker, of concern from other areas within the province, mainly in 
the southern portion and particularly in the southeastern portion. 
 
A delegation of most concerned farmers met with the Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), the Premier 
and myself, three or four weeks ago expressing to us the activity in their area which apparently was 
emanating from the United States of America to purchase a large tract and a large block of land, and that 
some several millions of dollars had been made available in order to negotiate obligations and contracts 
of sale. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that everyone will agree that the time is now here when immediate action is 
necessary to develop a sound policy of land and farm ownership, a sound policy of land and farm 
ownership before the current economic circumstances lead to the destruction of our agricultural industry 
as we know it today in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the last year and one-half we have seen wheat prices rise from $1.75 per bushel to $5.75 per bushel, 
with further increases a possibility. In the same period flax prices have increased five-fold. Durum 
wheat prices have increased from $1.75 per bushel to an excess of $8 per bushel. The prices of rape seed 
and other crops have increased in proportion and it is uncertain at this time what the long-term prospects 
may be. 
 
There is presently extreme optimism in Saskatchewan and in the rest of Canada and indeed in other 
countries about the prospects for grain markets in the next few years. This enthusiasm has led to sudden 
interest on the part of citizens around the world to invest in assets tied to primary agricultural 
production. 
 
If we look anywhere in western Canada we see dramatic increases in land values. Many areas of the 
province are now reporting land sales as high as 10, 12 and even, yes, as high as 15 times the assessed 
value of land. The tremendous capital gains in farm property in the last 18 months will continue to 
attract the interest of those with large amounts of capital to 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2029 

invest. We are also in a period when many people and corporations outside of this province have large 
amounts of capital at their disposal, particularly the large corporation. 1973 had been a year of record 
breaking profits for most of the major corporations on the North American continent. These corporations 
are looking for other areas to invest their wealth, to further increase their profits as they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may ask why the Government wants to stop land speculation and the takeover of the 
agricultural industry by non-residents and by non-agricultural corporations. There are several answers to 
this question. 
 
First, this Government believes that in the terms of real benefit to society, efficient one-two and three-
man farms can produce food as cheaply and as efficiently as any other form of farm business 
organization. History has shown time and again, and in particular in the United States that costs of 
production are not significantly lower in the long run when large corporations involve themselves in 
agricultural production and in many instances it is the contrary, and prices in fact rise because of the 
monopoly situation that is able to develop in favor of those large corporations. 
 
The main benefits to these corporations come from bargaining power within the market place. Their 
ability to influence market prices for inputs and for products and from the huge capital reserves which 
these corporations have available to them from other industries. These corporations are involved in 
agriculture for tax benefits, for the profits to be made in land speculation and for the power and 
influence that they can gain in other sectors of the food industry. They are not in agriculture so that 
consumers may have the benefit of lower food costs. 
 
Second, this Government is concerned about the consequences of any industry and particularly such a 
crucial area as food production becoming controlled by large corporate interests. We are all too familiar 
with the price manipulation and collusion and the much talked about corporate rip-off that occurs in any 
sector of our economy where a few large corporations are able to gain effective control of one 
commodity. 
 
Never has this been so evident as in the last year. We have witnessed inflation rates which were greater 
than the real increase in our gross national product, in other words, the real income for the working 
people in Canada in 1973 decreased. Yet, at the same time, corporate profits showed the largest increase 
ever. The result has been a major distribution of income away from the working people, the sick, the 
aged and the needy. The increased profits to corporations have benefited the rich who own the shares of 
these corporations and also has satisfied the obsession for growth in the minds of the management of 
these corporations. 
 
We can be sure, Mr. Speaker, that if control of agricultural industry ever fell into the hands of a few 
powerful corporations the industry would not be operated and developed in a manner that would benefit 
the people who live and work in this province producing our primary products. 
 
Third, I should like to ask you, Mr. Speaker, who should control the agricultural resources? Should it be 
local people, the people involved on a day to day basis in agricultural 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2030 

production and who depend upon agriculture for their livelihood or should it be the people from other 
countries and other parts of Canada, non-resident aliens to the Province of Saskatchewan and Canada? 
Are the farmers of Saskatchewan here to work for a minimal salary to benefit a few people in other parts 
of the world or are they here to participate in and maintain the industry they have worked so hard to 
establish for themselves? And to the benefit of Canada and to other future generations and other 
countries of the world? 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, this Government believes that agriculture with its 75,000 family farms has been 
and will continue to be the backbone of this province. Farmers have been willing to commit their entire 
working lifetime to the production of food. There have been many years of low income and major 
problems. The governments of Canada, the general public and the consumers have often been unwilling 
to support farmers in their time of need. This Government believes that farmers of Saskatchewan, and 
other residents of Saskatchewan are entitled to protection from competition and capital resources 
accumulated in other industries and in other countries. 
 
Fifth, Mr. Speaker, this Government believes that to develop a sound rural economy in this province, it 
is essential that agricultural assets be owned and controlled by people who will spend a major part of 
their time in the area where agricultural production takes place. And by people who will be spending a 
major portion of the income generated from that agricultural production in the towns and in the cities of 
this province. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, I ask you to consider the question, who should own and control Saskatchewan 
agricultural resources, the residents of Saskatchewan or corporations such as the Canadian Pacific 
Railway Company or Marathon Realty? No doubt, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the 
other Hon. Members in the Opposition will argue that the Canadian Pacific Railway and the other 
corporations have every right to own agricultural resources. This does not surprise me. 
 
The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan has always supported large corporations. They saw nothing wrong 
with giving our forest resources to a large corporation from New York. They support oil companies in 
North America even in the year of the greatest energy crisis of our time, the crisis which by coincidence, 
Mr. Speaker, happened during the period when one company for example, Exxon, made the largest 
profit in history, $2.4 billion after taxes. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, unlike the Members opposite, the 
Members who sit to your left, this Government believes that the interest of Saskatchewan residents and 
indeed the ordinary people everywhere should come ahead of those large corporate interests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — This Government does not intend to stand by and see food prices driven upward and the 
farmers’ incomes forced downward and farmers forced off the land by the intrusion of the industrial 
sector into agricultural production. 
 
In 1972, this Government foresaw the problems that might occur if steps were not taken to protect 
ownership of farm land in Saskatchewan. We introduced a White Paper, in the form of a Bill to be used 
as a basis for discussion on this question. 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2031 

A special intersessional committee of the Legislature was appointed to discuss the question of land 
ownership, to review data and to make recommendations. This Committee Chaired by the Hon. Member 
for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) and comprised of Government as well as Opposition Members, traveled 
about this province as well as into the United States. They held hearings, received briefs and 
submissions from concerned individuals and interviewed people affected by or involved in corporate or 
absentee ownership of agricultural enterprises. 
 
The report of that special committee was tabled in the Legislature during the spring session of 1973. The 
Bill that is before you now has come forth as a result of a long period of deliberation, study and 
consultation with farmers, with farm organizations and representations from many other interested 
groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to outline briefly the objectives of this Bill and how they will be achieved. 
 
The Farm Ownership Act, 1974, will enable people living in adjacent areas to Saskatchewan to compete 
freely for the ownership and capital of farm land while protecting them from unfair competition from 
corporations and other interests outside agriculture or located outside of the province. To accomplish 
this objective the Act restricts the ownership of land by non-resident persons and non-agricultural 
corporations. 
 
Non-resident persons are defined as persons who live outside Saskatchewan for more than one-half of 
each year. Agricultural corporations are defined as corporations including co-operatives, which are 
primarily engaged in agricultural production and at least 60 per cent owned and controlled by resident 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
The Bill recognizes many special circumstances in which non-residents should be allowed to own 
Saskatchewan farm land. The Act does not require persons who now own land to dispose of that land. 
Residents of Saskatchewan may continue to buy land as they have in the past and should they decide 
later to retire or leave the province for whatever the reason may be, they may continue to own that farm 
land. Persons who are closely tied with farm operations or farm land as a result of being born and raised 
on the farm or having parents or brothers or sisters, or aunts or uncles, who were closely involved with 
the farming operation are given special consideration. 
 
The Bill allows any person who has lived and farmed in the province for a period of five years or more 
to transfer the land he farmed to a spouse, son, daughter, grandson, granddaughter, aunt, uncle, brother, 
sister, niece or nephew, or spouse of any one of those regardless of their place of residence, who may in 
turn keep it for their lifetime. 
 
Special consideration is also given to those people who farm close to the Saskatchewan border and who 
have land in Saskatchewan which is an integral and essential part of their farming operation. These 
people are for the purposes of the Bill, given the same rights and privileges as Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Non-residents who are not close relatives and who inherit land and who are not closely tied to that land 
will be required to dispose of the land. However, they are granted a period of 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2032 

five years in which they may either establish residence in Saskatchewan, in which case they may keep 
the property or obtain a buyer for the property willing to give them a fair and equitable price. 
 
People who are interested in moving to Saskatchewan and establishing a residence here may apply to the 
Farm Ownership Board for a special three year exemption. This exemption allows these people a period 
of time to acquire property and establish operations in a pre-operation for their move to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government recognizes that small land owners are not trying to affect the agricultural 
industry or hurt the province and are not likely to do so. Therefore, any person regardless of the location 
of his residence and regardless of any other restrictions of the Bill may own property having maximum 
municipal assessment of $15,000. To give some examples of the impact of this upper limit, any person 
regardless of location of residence may own up to three-quarter sections of the best and highest assessed 
land in the province. Or he may own, for example, five-quarters of land assessed at $3,000 per quarter or 
15 quarters of land assessed at $1,000 per quarter. 
 
The Farm Ownership Act also restricts land ownership by corporations. Corporations are not allowed to 
acquire land which would cause their total land holding to exceed one-quarter section or 160 acres. 
However, the Government recognizes that certain types of corporations are owned and controlled by 
farmers and Saskatchewan residents and should be given special consideration. 
 
Many farmers in the past have incorporated their farm businesses either as companies under The 
Saskatchewan Companies Act or as co-operatives under The Co-operative Production Associations Act 
in order to establish multiple operator units to transfer farms from one generation to the next or for a 
variety of other reasons. These corporations are considered by the Government to be sound and 
legitimate farming operations and worthy of special consideration. 
 
Therefore, The Farm Ownership Act defines an agricultural corporation as a corporation which is 
primarily engaged in the business of farming and which is at least 60 per cent owned and controlled by 
farmers who are residents of the Province of Saskatchewan. Corporations and co-operatives that can 
meet these criteria are considered by the Government to be a legitimate farming operation and are 
therefore not restricted by this Bill. 
 
The Government also recognizes that non-agricultural corporations have a legitimate need for certain 
amounts of land that are being used for non-agricultural use. For example, corporations may need land 
for the location of plants, or the location of service stations or for other purposes, potash, peat moss 
operations and the like. Corporations requiring land in excess of the limit of 160 acres may apply to the 
Farm Ownership Board for special permission to acquire the necessary property over and above that 
minimum. 
 
The Special Committee on the Foreign Ownership of Land appointed by the Legislature, recommended 
that non-agricultural corporations should be required to dispose of land within a reasonable period of 
time. The Government agrees with that 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2033 

recommendation and therefore The Farm Ownership Act as it is before you now; requires that all non-
agricultural corporations dispose of land owned in excess of the maximum allowed, within a 20 year 
period of time. 
 
To ensure that credit to agricultural operations is not restricted as a result of this Bill, The Farm 
Ownership Act allows creditors to acquire title to property by foreclosure or other means for non-
payment of debts and to hold that property for a period of up to two years. Where there is good reason 
for the creditors to hold property longer, such as to enable the former owner to acquire the necessary 
capital to buy the land back, the creditor may apply to the Farm Ownership Board for an extension of the 
time period. 
 
The Act, Mr. Speaker, establishes a Farm Ownership Board to see that these provisions are carried out in 
a fair and most equitable manner. Anyone not satisfied with the decision of the Board or with the 
administration of the Act may appeal to the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Farm Ownership Act is dealing with a very complex and a most important matter. And 
I want to clarify the intent of my Government in some sections of the Act. 
 
In determining how much land a non-resident person owns any land held by the spouse or dependent 
child will be included. The maximum will be $15,000 assessed value for the whole family, not that 
amount for each of them. 
 
Subsection 4 of Section 11 is intended to permit all normal trust company operations to continue 
unhampered so long as any lands held in trust are held for Saskatchewan residents, or for other reasons, 
other persons, who are entitled under the Act to hold such amounts. 
 
Section 14 of the Act requires an annual disclosure statement from each corporation holding land in 
excess of the normal maximums allowed under the Act. This disclosure is necessary to keep the task of 
enforcing and administration within reasonable bounds. 
 
However, it is intended that after an initial disclosure has been made, corporations having no change in 
their holdings during a year, will be able to file a simple statement to that effect. The Board may exempt 
some corporations from annual disclosure or require filing every two, three or five years, as long as the 
Board is satisfied that the intent of the Act is being carried out by those corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to sum up I believe that The Farm Ownership Act of 1974 is the most forward looking piece 
of legislation introduced by any government in Canada in the area of ownership and control of Canadian 
resources. This Bill will become a guideline for other provinces to follow. 
 
Other provinces in Canada have been looking at and have attempted to grapple with the problem of non-
resident ownership for some years. Prince Edward Island has legislation to restrict ownership of land by 
non-residents. British Columbia has recently introduced land use legislation to protect its rapidly 
dwindling agricultural land. Ontario and other provinces are presently studying the problem and looking 
for 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2034 

solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concern is not only restricted to Saskatchewan residents or Canadians. I recently had 
the pleasure of addressing one of the farm organizations in North Dakota and the national convention in 
Milwaukee. It was obvious to me in my discussions with them that farmers in the United States are most 
concerned when they see the control of more and more of their agricultural resources in the hands of 
non-residents and large corporations. 
 
Various attempts have been made to keep the ownership and control of agricultural resources in the 
hands of farmers but many problems have been encountered. Canada, I think, has been fortunate to have 
been able to observe the experiences in the United States and to learn from their efforts. 
 
I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that in years to come Canada will look back at the problems of land 
ownership and how they were solved. And like medicare and hospitalization, government insurance, 
Land Bank, these programs and those in many other areas, it will again be recognized that Saskatchewan 
led the way and others followed. 
 
It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, a very great pleasure for me to move second reading of an Act to Regulate 
the Ownership and Control of Agricultural Land in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, we know that in many cases we’ve been blaming the 
Arabs for the energy problems and maybe this is justified. But to blame the Arabs for this Bill, I think 
everybody would have to agree is a bit far-fetched. That’s just going a little too far, to say that we have 
to have this Bill to protect our farm land from the Arabs. Now I think that’s a statement that he should 
have turned over to the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) and let him read it and let him take credit 
for that one. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this is typical NDP scare tactics, they are using these tactics to try and indicate that 
there is some desperate plot by someone to grab our farm land and, of course, that just isn’t the case. 
 
The Minister mentioned hunting and the fact that Americans would be coming up and buying land for 
hunting. This Bill doesn’t mention any recreation land restrictions and that’s perhaps one of the 
deficiencies, one of the major deficiencies of this Bill. He talks of the danger of corporations owning our 
land and I think he knows as well as everybody in this House, that the corporations, not agriculture 
corporations in this province that are in agricultural land, he could count them almost on his fingers. He 
didn’t give any statistics to indicate this. He very carefully avoided statistics, because he knows as well 
as anybody else that the land owned by corporations is not increasing in this province, it is decreasing. 
The large corporations, Marathon Realty and CPR are trying to get rid of their farm land, they are selling 
it as quickly as they can. He has the statistics on this and he knows as well as everybody else. 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2035 

He also knows, Mr. Speaker, when he talked about the White Paper that he brought in two years ago. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a Bill is a Bill, and a White Paper is a White Paper, and they are two different things. 
There is no doubt that what we had in 1972 was a Bill. It wasn’t a White Paper. I’ll agree, Mr. Speaker, 
that it was a bad Bill, it was a vicious Bill, it met unanimous disapproval throughout this province and it 
was withdrawn, but it was a Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill we are looking at could well be one of the most significant of this Session and this 
Bill requires very careful scrutiny, not only by the people of Saskatchewan, but indeed by all Canadians. 
And what we have to look at, of course, is the intent of the Bill. This is of prime importance. A close 
examination indicates that the intent of this Bill is the same as the original Bill in 1972. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — And we must remember that the 1972 Bill was universally unpopular. Does it matter 
really, Mr. Speaker, whether a Canadian living in Carberry, Manitoba is called a foreigner or a non-
resident? They called him a foreigner in the original Bill, now they are calling him a non-resident, but 
it’s the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Does it really matter whether this Canadian can own four-quarters of land or one-
quarter or none at all? Does it matter whether he has two years to dispose of his land or five years or 
ten? Mr. Speaker, these are details of the Bill and the details I will agree are not as stringent as the 
original Bill and the Minister spent a good deal of time explaining the details of this Bill. But the details, 
Mr. Speaker, are not important. The intent of this Bill, and make no mistake, the intent of this Bill is to 
restrict ownership of Saskatchewan land from other Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: —It is an attack, Mr. Speaker, on Canadianism, it’s an attack on federalism and it can 
further balkanize this country. 
 
We would recall, Mr. Speaker, that the first Ministers just finished an oil conference where they 
compromised in the interests of Canadianism and we must give them credit for it. 
 
Now we have this NDP Bill which is doing exactly the opposite. It shows the inconsistency, Mr. 
Speaker, of this Government and it shows their true intentions when it comes to agriculture land and 
their true intention, Mr. Speaker, is the complete domination of the agricultural land of this province by 
the NDP Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — You will recall that the Legislature appointed a Foreign Ownership of Land 
Committee and the Minister mentioned this casually but he didn’t really say much about it. They 



 
April 3, 1974 
 

 
2036 

did a lot of work, they did a good job, they had meetings all over the province and some in the United 
States, they consulted with people from all over the province, they studied the problem in depth and as a 
result of this, Mr. Speaker, it’s very significant that no member of this Committee recommended 
restrictions on Canadian ownership of farm land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — It doesn’t matter whether they are NDP, Liberal or what they are, not one of those 
members indicated that they wished to see Canadian ownership of Saskatchewan land restricted. No 
member wanted this, because it discriminates against Canadians and they weren’t in favour of it. 
 
The recommendation of the Committee was completely ignored in this regard. And of course, the 
desires of the people of the province were ignored because the people of the province indicated what 
they wanted to the Committee. But in spite of all this, the NDP went ahead with this Bill to restrict our 
farm land from other Canadians. And this, Mr. Speaker, is their true intention. It is more obvious now, 
than it was in the original Bill. When they brought in the original Bill they could withdraw it and say, 
well, we really didn’t know what the people wanted. Now they have no excuse. They had the Land 
Ownership Committee. They know what the people want, they know what the Committee recommended 
and they did exactly opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — And the strange thing, Mr. Speaker, about this whole Bill, is that it doesn’t effectively 
restrict American ownership. This is rather the strange part. According to the Bill that we have before 
us, an American farmer living at Bowbells, North Dakota, could buy ten sections of farm land around 
Meadow Lake, 400 miles away, because he lives within 20 miles of the border of Saskatchewan. 
However, a Canadian farmer living near Virden, Manitoba who may have had three or four generations 
of Canadian ancestors, would have his holdings restricted at Maryfield, Saskatchewan, 30 miles away. 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, if you consider this inconsistent? Why 20 miles, what’s so magic about 20 
miles? But this is what the Bill says. An American is not subject to our Canadian laws, not subject to our 
income tax, not subject to the responsibilities we have here but if he lives in the United States within 20 
miles he can go 400 miles up inside Saskatchewan and buy all the land he wants and he is not under 
restrictions of this Bill where some Canadian living outside of our borders in Manitoba or Alberta these 
restrictions apply. This, Mr. Speaker, is discrimination of the worst kind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — This Bill simply does not differentiate between Canadians and people of other 
countries and this is the real thing that is wrong with this Bill. In this Bill they are lumped together and 
called non-resident. In the original Bill they were lumped together and called foreigners. Mr. Speaker, a 
skunk by any other name smells just as bad, in this case and I think you’ll agree. 



 
April 3, 1974 

 

 
2037 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — You’ll note also that Clause 19 of this Bill allows the NDP appointed board some 
very severe and objectionable powers. A person suspected of being a non-resident, staying outside the 
province more than 183 days may have his books and papers and records examined. Other Canadians, 
not Americans, other Canadians will be subjected to this snooping and harassment from the NDP 
Government. It is a vicious type of a means test when a person has to, a Canadian has to, have this kind 
of a test to see if he was outside the province over 183 days, what his holdings are and have these 
subjected to scrutiny by the Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill strikes at the very fibre of our Canadian heritage. In many countries throughout 
the world people are not free to move from one area to another, they are not free to own property where 
they want in their own country. We don’t want to be moving in that direction. Once a Bill such as this is 
passed, once it becomes the law of Saskatchewan, it is a relatively simply matter for the NDP 
Government to make regulations making this Bill even more onerous. We cannot support this kind of 
treatment of our Canadian neighbours from the other provinces in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that I would like to look at further in the Bill and at this time I 
beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:26 o’clock p.m. 


