
























































Hansard: March 20, 1974


1669 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

33rd Day 
 

Wednesday, March 20, 1974 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. D. F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to other Members of this House, a large group of students from King George 
School in Moose Jaw. They are seated in the east gallery and are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 
Segall, Mr. Murray, Mr. Guidos and Mrs. DeLeyssac. These school children have had a tour of the 
Legislative Buildings and I had the opportunity to meet with them for a very short time and found them 
a very bright and interested group. I hope that they enjoy the proceedings in the short time they will be 
here this afternoon and that they have a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to the Assembly on 
behalf of the Hon. E. I. Wood, 32 Grade Eight students from Cabri. I understand they are seated in the 
west gallery. They have had a tour of the building as well, and I understand I will be meeting with them 
at 3:15. I hope I shall be able to attend on behalf of Mr. Wood. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like through you and to the Members of this House 
join with my colleague from Gravelbourg in welcoming the students to the Legislature, from Cabri. As I 
mentioned earlier, redistribution has done wonderful, grand and marvelous things and under the new 
redistribution Bill, Cabri will be on the far western part of the Morse Constituency. Besides taking this 
opportunity to welcome them to this Legislature, I should sincerely like to welcome them to the new 
Morse Constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in introducing to you 
and to the Members of the Legislature, some 30 Grade Eight students from the W. C. How School in 
Albert Park. Their teacher, Mr. Olson, is with them. They had a tour of the building until 1:30 and at 
3:00 o’clock I shall have the pleasure of meeting with them and speaking with them for a moment or 
two. I hope that they enjoy their stay here. I hope they are enlightened greatly by the proceedings this 
afternoon. This is the fourth section of that group of outstanding students, from an outstanding school, in 
an outstanding area of town. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1670 

Hon. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Member for 
Moose Jaw North in welcoming the group of students from Moose Jaw. I had the opportunity before 
being obliged to move to colder climes, to live within a few doors of one of their instructors, Mr. Henry 
Murray. I am acquainted with a number of others who are here today, undoubtedly, and I want to pass 
on my best wishes for a valuable and fruitful afternoon to them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Allan — Provincial ‘C’ Hockey Championships 
 
Mr. P. P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to once again to bring to the 
attention of this House, another accomplishment by a team from Allan, in the field of hockey. 
 
The Allan bantam boys as of last night became Provincial ‘C’ Division Champions for the province. Mr. 
Speaker, this bantam team thoroughly trounced an international team based at Wilcox to the tune of 17 
to 11 in a two game total point series. This same team which twice before won the Provincial 
Championship, was coached by Mr. Jack Fritz and managed by Mr. Stan Olszewski. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to join with the Member in 
congratulating the team from Allan. Wilcox has won so many provincial championships and this is the 
first occasion for Allan, we conceded very willingly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Appreciation of Condolences — McPherson 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before calling the Orders of the Day I should like to convey to the Members, part of a 
letter which I received today. The last paragraph reads: 
 

Please convey my thanks to Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Steuart and all the Members of the Assembly for 
their kindest remarks. 
 
Sincerely, 
Edna McPherson, Robb and Brent. 

 
QUESTIONS 

 
Fertilizer Plant Located in Alberta 

 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 



 
March 20, 1974 

 

 
1671 

like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). 
 
A few days ago there was an announcement of a fertilizer plant being located in Alberta in co-operation 
with the Alberta Ammonia Limited and Farmland Industries of Kansas City, the biggest fertilizer plant 
ever built, a $325 million investment, 3,500 employees during the construction period, 275 permanent 
employees. 
 
I should like to ask the Minister if the Province of Saskatchewan made any approaches to have this plant 
locate in the Province of Saskatchewan? As you know, the Province of Saskatchewan is the biggest user 
of fertilizer in western Canada. If he did carry on any negotiations, what was the reason that the plant 
decided to locate in the Province of Alberta rather than in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Member is 
very fully informed. The main market for the product of such a new fertilizer plant will not be in the 
prairie areas. There is already an abundance of productive capacity to serve all of the prairie area with 
the existing fertilizer plants on the prairies. The major market will be in the United States. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan was not negotiating with anybody with respect to this particular 
fertilizer plant, but we have carried on negotiations, and received a number of inquiries, from people 
who want to establish fertilizer plants close to the supply of the basic raw materials. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, while we have an abundance of gas in this Chamber, we don’t have a sufficient supply of 
natural gas within the province to support a fertilizer plant. That is the main obstacle in locating one in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. A few days ago the Minister 
of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) announced or recommended the nationalization of the fertilizer industry in 
the Dominion of Canada. First of all we have had the confiscation of the oil leases in Saskatchewan, the 
timber industry. The NDP have recommended . .e . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Will the Hon. Member ask his question please. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I want to ask the Minister if this is the policy of the Government as a whole or just 
the policy of the Minister of Agriculture, of the nationalization of the fertilizer industry and if it is, then 
certainly that is the reason that we will never get a fertilizer industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, in order to establish a fertilizer plant you have to 
have ammonia and you produce nitrates and so on, and the basic constituent of that is the natural gas, 
and we simply don’t have enough of that to establish such a plant in Saskatchewan, unless we are going 
to see our own consumers go short of natural gas in the future. 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1672 

That is a fact that the Member will just have to accept because it is the truth of the situation. 
 

Senior Citizens Highrise in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I would like to address to 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs, and I will address it, I presume, to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Messer) in his absence. 
 
It concerns a proposal for a highrise apartment for senior citizens to be constructed in the University 
area of Saskatoon. 
 
The question is: is there any provincial funding currently involved in the form of provincial 
contributions to the mortgage? 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot be positive about it, but I am 
certain there is no provincial funding for the apartment. If the Hon. Member would allow some time for 
me to check more thoroughly I can give him a more substantive answer tomorrow or later today. 
 
Mr. Richards: — That is satisfactory, Mr. Speaker. 
 

American Takeover of Saskatchewan Farm Land 
 
Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
It was brought to the people of Saskatchewan’s attention yesterday, some very serious facts and 
statements made by the Minister of Agriculture regarding huge takeovers of farm land in the Province of 
Saskatchewan by Americans. I think this is quite serious and I think that we, in this Legislature, should 
know just exactly what is happening. I should like to ask the Minister if this is so and if he could let us 
know, who the people are, where they are buying it and how much they are buying, and what he and his 
Government are planning on doing to protect the agricultural and rural way of life in Saskatchewan for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I have not, to my knowledge, said that we are aware of huge purchases of 
land taking place in the Province of Saskatchewan. What I did say was that I have had indicated to me 
by a number of individuals and groups of people that there are attempts being made by non-resident 
Saskatchewan people to purchase large tracts of land within the province. They have gone as far as to 
appoint agents who are resident in Saskatchewan, to seek out and find blocks of land or areas where they 
may be able to purchase large blocks of land and have committed to them certain sums of money in 
order to carry through those purchases. 



 
March 20, 1974 

 

 
1673 

Mr. Speaker, these undertakings have been conveyed to me by resident farmers and groups of people in 
Saskatchewan. The Government is certainly concerned about it, but we are not aware at this point in 
time as to whether there are large tracts of lands being committed to these offers. 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. It seems quite apparent, again, that the Minister 
of Agriculture is again being misquoted. 
 
Are we right to assume then that the Minister of Agriculture has tried to soften up the people of the 
province, to scare the people of the province and frighten them into the acceptance of a Foreign 
Ownership Land Bill, which may be coming forth this Session? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Member for Morse that we are not trying to soften up or 
scare the people of the province in any way. I am simply stating the facts that farmers and legitimate 
citizens in Saskatchewan are concerned about offers and endeavors that are now underway in regard to 
purchasing land. I would suggest to the Member for Morse if he is a conscientious Member, he would be 
seeking some sort of legislation that would be able to guarantee those people that those kinds of things 
would not come about. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Road Bans and Special Permits 
 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 
inform the House of the fact that road bans have been issued as a normal procedure. However, it has 
been brought to our attention that a tremendous amount of farm products, especially grain, is still on the 
farms and has to be hauled. 
 
Hence we are trying to postpone some of these road restrictions wherever possible. I should like to 
suggest to any Members who get complaints or requests that they direct the farmer or any trucker of 
necessary or needed produce, to our permit office and there will be no difficulty in getting a permit in 
spite of the fact that some bans have already been announced. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. R. Robbins (Minister 
of Finance) that Bill No. 29 — An Act to Establish a Saskatchewan Development Fund be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. P. P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, the other day I gave some reasons why I thought the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund was a good idea, why it should be endorsed by both sides of this 
House. I just have a few more points that I should like to make about this Bill. 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1674 

Last weekend I had occasion to meet a constituent friend of mine. It seems that last year a foreign based 
insurance and investment company talked his wife into investing in a retirement savings plan. She paid 
into it for over one year; then financial misfortune struck the family. When she turned to the company to 
get her money back, and after reading the fine print of the contract, she learned the cold, hard truth — 
she was entitled to no money. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, should this be allowed? Surely it would have been better for her to invest 
in this province and in a Saskatchewan based company, much like the proposed Saskatchewan 
Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I refer to a letter in a recent issue of the Letter Box in the Regina Leader-Post. In the 
letter, the writer talks of the many people gouged by, what he calls, hotrod registered retired savings 
plans. Surely such a letter only strengthens what I already said, and that is that Saskatchewan citizens 
will certainly welcome the opportunity safely and secure to invest in the Saskatchewan Development 
Fund for the continued growth of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will certainly be supporting this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a couple of words. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I don’t quarrel with the Saskatchewan Development Fund, but I do quarrel with 
the one principle that is expressed in this Bill of a guarantee by the Saskatchewan taxpayer of any 
investor who goes into it. 
 
I think the private investment companies have a certain degree of expertise and experience, the NDP do 
not have this kind of expertise. They have hired a defeated candidate, a former school teacher, to 
manage this. 
 
I think if any of us look at the NDP record why should the taxpayers of Saskatchewan guarantee an 
investment of $10 million worth $6 million to Intercontinental because of a political philosophy of the 
NDP Government. There are all kinds of opportunities to invest by Saskatchewan citizens in 
Saskatchewan Government bonds or Canada Savings Bonds, but the principle of guaranteeing a political 
party which is famous for socialist experiments in losing causes other than government monopolies, is 
one, that I don’t think Saskatchewan taxpayers should be subjected to. There are all kinds of 
opportunities with private investors. Mr. Speaker, I don’t quarrel, I’ll repeat, with the concept of setting 
up the Saskatchewan Government fund but I think that that fund should be able to stand on its own feet. 
It should be able to stand on its own feet in relation to the investments that it goes into. It should have to 
be careful and cautious with the investor’s money and certainly it should not be guaranteed by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer who has no investment in that fund. 
 
Hon. W. A. Robbins (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to allay any of the fears 
that the Member for Milestone has with respect to the individual he made reference to. That person will 
not be 



 
March 20, 1974 

 

 
1675 

handling the investment of the funds, it will be done through the Finance and Investment Branch of the 
Department of Finance and under the jurisdiction of a person whom I think he knows quite well. He has 
been in the public service of Saskatchewan for many, many years. 
 
I should like to make a brief summation if I may with respect to Bill 29 and the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund and make some comments with respect to some of the criticism and comments we 
have heard from Opposition Members. I think it was the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) who 
make the suggestion that he didn’t think I really believed what I was saying when I introduced this Bill, 
and Mr. Speaker, I would be one of the first to admit that I had another proposal that I thought was 
better but it wasn’t accepted. I am hoping that the other proposal will eventually hit the House 
somewhere along the line. I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, to the economy of Saskatchewan that 
people invest funds in the province, that is a difficult problem and has been ever since the province was 
formed regardless of what government was in power. 
 
I want to make reference again to the Saskatchewan Savings Bond issues which started in 1961 and ran 
through to 1968. There were $105,182,300 of those bonds issued. There are only 10,615,000 of them 
outstanding now, slightly over 10 per cent. It is one of the major problems we have had. Reasonable 
retention of investment funds to maturity dates or investment over reasonably long periods of time is 
needed to attain stability. The assumption is, and we’ll only know as we gain experience in relation to 
this, that the Saskatchewan Development Fund will give people the opportunity of investing money in 
Saskatchewan through an equity set up in which they will achieve some growth. There is no guaranteed 
assurance that that will occur. There is always risk involved. There is risk involved in terms of the 
operation of any open end trust. This fund will have a modest guarantee on it. I cannot see why 
Members of the Opposition would take umbrage at the modest guarantee. It is really an interest rate. 
This guarantee in itself should help to allay some of the fears some investors might have in relation to 
approaching a new fund. 
 
Frankly I am a bit surprised that some of the Members opposite took the stance they did in relation to the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund. Some of them showed that they were fairly strongly opposed. I 
suppose I shouldn’t have been surprised. I note that the Leader of the Progressive Conservatives in 
Saskatchewan has commended the Government for bringing in the legislation but after all they are 
Progressive Conservatives and these fellows opposite, Mr. Speaker, are just Conservatives who go under 
another name. I should perhaps remind the House that the people opposite were the same people who 
opposed Hospitalization and Medicare and Government Insurance etc. There were all sorts of dire 
predictions. I would remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that for example, Government Insurance has 
returned $10,198,187 to the Government Finance Office and the province in earnings since it was set up. 
But I think perhaps more important 90 per cent of the $49 million of investment funds held by 
Government Insurance is invested in bonds and securities in the province and that is pretty important. I 
think it is vital that we keep that fact in mind. 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1676 

In presenting this Bill for second reading in this House I clearly stated that the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund would be buying debentures, mortgages and bonds along with equity investments. 
That pool of funds will be represented to the individual people who make the investments in the form of 
equity shares issues to them. This is exactly what Trust Companies do with the funds they receive from 
their investors, when they sell term certificates, etc. 
 
I think I should make a brief comment with respect to the availability of a registered retirement savings 
plan. I am sure that every Member in this House knows that large sums of money flow into registered 
retirement savings plans and particularly in recent years. I am sure most of the Members of this House 
also have registered retirement savings plans of their own. If they haven’t they should be investigating 
the implications of that sort of thing. No one is saying, I think, on the Government side that this will 
solve all the problems. Obviously it won’t necessarily do so immediately, in any event. Of the funds that 
now normally flow out of the province we might be successful in retaining at least a portion of such 
funds within the province and that in itself is important. I think it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund will not completely stem the flow. Obviously it won’t. In fact it is 
stated in the Bill that some of the funds of the Saskatchewan Development fund will in fact be invested 
in other Canadian provinces. However, if it tends to reduce the outflow in any reasonable manner 
whatsoever it will be useful to the economy of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) argued that we already have 100 open-end 
investment type companies selling in Canada and in Saskatchewan. Just to make sure he was accurate 
because I haven’t found him too accurate sometimes in relation to figures, I checked the financial pages 
last night and I counted exactly 100 mutual funds listed on the financial page, so you hit it right on the 
nose Hon. Member from Wilkie. One would think since he apparently operates on the premise and I am 
assuming that this is true, that he operates on the theory ‘that competition is the life of trade’, a little bit 
more competition shouldn’t hurt. Perhaps some real competition is necessary in this particular situation. 
A reduced sales commission rate without front-end load and without encashment charges and a 
guaranteed rate of return, which is very modest, may well supply some much needed competition to the 
industry. Mutual funds have generally not performed very well and I think there are Members in this 
House who gave evidence of such situations and I have seen a good deal of evidence of people often, in 
my opinion, where a certain amount of what one might term misrepresentation occurred because they 
were given to understand or to feel that their funds would be absolutely safe. We might be critical of 
them as individuals and say that they didn’t check the matter closely enough but nevertheless I think it is 
reasonable to say that mutual funds have not performed up to the expectations aroused in the general 
public by those people who were and are selling such securities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Whitmore Park said he did not feel the fund would succeed and of course 
he is entitled to his opinion and I frankly believe that is an honest opinion. 



 
March 20, 1974 

 

 
1677 

Nevertheless, I point to the record I have mentioned previously where some reasonable measures of 
success did occur. I think he said something about danger of investments in shrimp boats off shore of the 
Florida coast. I thought for a moment he was going to start singing the song “Red Sails in the Sunset”. It 
reminds me of Harold Wilson’s comment in the recent British election where he made reference to the 
fact that the Conservatives were talking about ‘reds under the beds’ and when he discussed 
nationalization of oil he said they, the Conservatives, were talking now about ‘reds under the seabeds’. I 
do not personally expect spectacular results from the Saskatchewan Development Fund and frankly I 
would be much happier if the growth is reasonable and gradual in its aspects. We are not going to have 
salesmen travelling from door to door. There were some comments with respect to that particular item. 
We are going to be using regular investment channels. That is my understanding in relation to how this 
fund will be placed before potential investors in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 29. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 36 
Messieurs 

 
Blakeney Pepper Mostoway 
Meakes Michayluk Gross 
Romanow Thorson Feduniak 
Messer Whelan Comer 
Snyder Kwasnica Rolfes 
Kramer Engel Lange 
Thibault Robbins Hanson 
Larson Tchorzewski Oliver 
Baker Cowley Feschuk 
Kowalchuk Taylor Kaeding 
Brockelbank Faris Flasch 
MacMurchy Owens Richards 
 

NAYS — 15 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart Grant MacLeod 
Coupland MacDonald (Milestone) Lane 
Loken McIsaac MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 
Guy Gardner Wiebe 
Boldt Weatherald Malone 
 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Conditional Sales Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to this Bill I support the 
general intentions of the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) to 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1678 

Improve the administration of The Conditional Sales Act. I only ask that he continue to give his 
attention to as much effort as possible in dealing with The Conditional Sales Act and another Act that 
relates to it, The Bill of Sales Act, to deal with the general registration of documents on this kind. It is 
still not functioning as smoothly as we would like to see it function but I recognize some of the 
problems he faces and commend him for any changes that will improve it. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 
No. 26 — An Act to provide Assistance for the Promotion and Development of markets for 
Agricultural Products produced in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few closing words before 
we give second reading to this Bill. I want to direct my remarks to the comments that were made by the 
two Members opposite who spoke on the Bill, the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) and the 
Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). Hey said very little, which is par for the course for them, in 
regard to the specific Act that we are considering at this time, Mr. Speaker. They did, however, make 
some very cursory and general comments that related to the Act. 
 
I believe the Member for Moosomin said that he certainly wasn’t against the grants that would be 
provided to the individuals or to the groups who would receive consideration and support and help by 
the activities of the Act but he opposed the Government domination that these people would have to put 
up with. I believe his colleague, his seatmate, the Member for Cannington also referred to the same 
Government domination that they purport to have seen in this Bill. In fact I believe both Members said 
that there was no opportunity for farm organizations to have individuals sit on the Board of Directors or 
on the Market Development Committee. In fact there was no opportunity for individual farmers to have 
representation on that Market Development Committee and they went to some effort to try and establish 
in the minds of, certainly not the Members of this Legislature because they know better, but at least in 
the minds of the people of Saskatchewan that we were implementing a Market Development Committee 
which would totally block off representation from farm organizations and farmers. 
 
I should like, Mr. Speaker, to bring to the attention of the Members to your left, especially the Members 
of Cannington and Moosomin, Section 5 of the Bill which relates to the formation of the Market 
Development Committee. This Section says that there is the right to have five members on the 
Committee, one of those members will be the Deputy Minister of Agriculture or whomever else the 
Minister may designate. The second is to be the Deputy Minister of Finance and the third is an employee 
of the Department of Industry and Commerce, appointed by the Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
The other two members will be people who will be appointed by the Minister. And I want to assure the 
Members opposite that it is the full intention of the Government to appoint those other two members, 
either after consultation with farm organizations or to make certain that they are directly related to the 
farming industry in the province, 



 
March 20, 1974 

 

 
1679 

so that we have a Market Development Committee that is made up of five members. Yes, the Majority 
of the members are representatives from the Government but I think that is the way it has to be when we 
are administering taxpayers’ money to make certain that those people respond and answer to the 
Minister of Agriculture to see that that money is handled in the way that the Minister advises them to 
handle it. 
 
Those Members, Mr. Speaker, did take the opportunity as they often do to talk about, I think, irrelevant 
matters in relation to the Bill. But I believe the matters deserve some comment and some response from 
the Government and especially from the Department of Agriculture and myself. Both Members went on 
to quite some extent and quite some effort to refer to trips and tours and insinuated that there was 
wastage being carried on within the Department of Agriculture because of staff moving about Canada 
and North America and in some instances about the world more than they did when they were the 
Members of the Government. Now, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the dismal efforts of the former Liberal 
Government in regard to agricultural development in the province I should think they would be the last 
to criticize the activity within the Department now because staff moving about I think has put 
Saskatchewan on the map in this world and I think that we have, by their travelling about, encouraged 
other kinds of production to take place in Saskatchewan and certainly make it more attractive to 
undertake the processing of a good many primary products and find markets for those primary products 
which was simply not the case a few short years ago under a Liberal Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to continue the debate for a great period of time but I do want 
to turn in particular to a personal matter that was raised, I believe, by the Member for Cannington, for he 
suggested that perhaps I was touring about the world at the expense of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, at the expense of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and he specifically referred to a 
National Farmers Union Convention that I attended about a week ago in Milwaukee. He asked whether 
or not I was willing to give an accounting of who paid for that trip to Milwaukee. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that is an irrelevant question to ask. I’m sure that Ministers of the Crown when the Members to your left 
were the government, accepted invitations to go to various places both in Canada and outside of Canada 
into the United States. I know the former Premier did on a number of occasions and I’m certain other 
Members who are now sitting to your left as Opposition Members as Ministers also found themselves 
south of the Canada-US border talking to various groups of people in relation to perhaps their attitudes 
in regard to government or Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I took a great deal of pride in being invited to the National Farmers Union convention in 
Milwaukee. It’s probably the largest Farmers Union organization in the world and they were certainly 
seeking out, wanting to pursue some of the undertakings that we have put into place in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One thing they are most interested in was the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission and the need for 
such land transfer and tenure of land in the United States of America. 



 
March 20, 1974 
 

 
1680 

Also the pursuing of orderly marketing rather than trying to destroy and tear apart an orderly marketing 
system as we have in Canada, the Canadian Wheat Board being the most significant, they are trying to 
implement an orderly marketing system so that they can get away from the private free enterprise system 
that their farmers are now subjected to in the marketing system of farm products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to close by saying when the Member for Cannington asks for full disclosure and 
give full accounting of who paid for that trip to Milwaukee, I want him to know that I left Regina to 
attend a fertilizer conference in Toronto, which I think was directly related to government business and 
the portfolio that I hold as Minister of Agriculture. I flew from Toronto to Milwaukee and from 
Milwaukee back to Regina. And I want to let him know that whether or not I thought or the Government 
thought it was a legitimate expense of the people of Saskatchewan or the Government of Saskatchewan, 
the fare that was incurred from Toronto to Milwaukee and Milwaukee to Regina was paid for my 
myself. I would suggest that perhaps that is not unusual and exceptional to the Members opposite 
because I’m sure that if we wanted to check back in the records we’d find that they in no way paid for 
their fares. 
 
But at any rate, Mr. Speaker, that is an accounting that the Member for Cannington asked for in regard 
to my particular trip to Milwaukee which he may have in his mind felt was not legitimate government 
business, whether it was or was not, it was paid for by myself so that there should be no reason to 
subject me to criticism or the Government for taking that trip. 
 
I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:38 o’clock p.m. 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS

