



















































Hansard: May 06, 1974


2952 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

65th Day 

Monday, May 6, 1974. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

WITHDRAWAL OF SERVICES BY NURSES 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health): — I want to make a statement Mr. Speaker, before the 

Orders of the Day. I have been advised by the Saskatchewan Hospital Association that certain hospitals have 

been affected by a withdrawal of service by the registered nurses. At this hour the exact number of hospitals 

affected is unknown. I deeply regret the action taken by the nurses and I want to assure this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan that the Government stands ready to assist the two parties in finding a mutually 

agreeable settlement to the dispute. 

 

At the outset I want to point out that the collective bargaining in this case is between the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Association SHA and the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses who appear to be bargaining on behalf of 

the nurses. The Government, while naturally interested in the negotiations, is not directly involved in the 

bargaining process. Other than having an observer sitting in on negotiations and the Department of Labour is 

assisting the two parties with conciliation services. 

 

I am told that the SHA was advised by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses that hospitals individually would 

be given sufficient official notice of any contemplated strike action and that a sufficient number of nurses 

would remain on duty to provide adequate emergency hospital services. My information is that very few 

hospitals received more than 15 hours notice. In fact, some were notified after 3 p.m. yesterday afternoon 

that the strike action would take place. 

 

There appears to be some confusion as to how many nurses are officially represented by the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses. I am told that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has certification at only one hospital, 

Rosthern Union, SUN has certification for twelve in scope positions at Rosthern. Eight hospitals are certified 

under the Staff Nurses Association, that is St. Joseph's General Hospital, Estevan; Maple Creek Union 

Hospital; St. Peter's Hospital at Melville; Regina General Hospital; Pasqua Hospital; Saskatoon City 

Hospital; St. Paul's Hospital, Saskatoon and Wilkie Union Hospital. These hospitals account for 1,049 in 

scope nursing positions. The Canadian Union of Public Employees has certification for registered nurses at 

Arborfield Union Hospital, St. Anthony's Hospital at Esterhazy and Uranium City Hospital. (Nurses 

belonging to CUPE have not withdrawn their services.) Thus, roughly 1,100 nurses out of 2,629 are 

represented by the Staff Nurses Association, Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and CUPE. The other, more 

than 1,500 are represented by informal associations which are not certified. Only twelve out of the 134 

general hospitals in the 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2953 

province are nurses represented by the SNA, SUN or CUPE. 

 

However, I understand that at a meeting in Saskatoon early this year representatives from a number of staff 

nurses associations agreed that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses bargain on their behalf with the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Association. 

 

Negotiations began on December 10, 1973 with a six-hour session. The parties met on the following day for 

three hours, then there was a break in negotiations to January 3, 1974 when a one-hour meeting was held. 

More than a month passed before another one-hour meeting was held on February 5, 1974. Again, there was 

a long passage of time before another meeting was held on March 26, a four-hour meeting, followed by a 

two-hour meeting on March 27. On April 5, there was a three and a half hour meeting. A total of seven 

meetings, totalling only 20 1/2 hours of meeting time over a period of almost four months. Because so little 

progress had been made, the Saskatchewan Hospital Association negotiating committee called on the 

Department of Labour for conciliation services. This set in motion a series of meetings on and after April 25. 

Conciliation efforts are continuing. 

 

Changing demands by the nurses appears to have been one factor in the slowness of negotiations. For 

example, the original proposal by the Nurses' Union called for a 41 per cent increase in wages, plus fringe 

benefits on a one year contract. I understand that the Union's latest official proposal as of April 5, demanded 

30 per cent plus fringes on a one year agreement. The latest official increases offered by the SHA would 

increase the starting rate as of January 1, 1974 by 22 per cent and the top rate, as of July 1, 1974, by 20 per 

cent. And by January 1, 1975 (less than eight months away) the starting rate would increase by 33.6 per cent 

and the maximum rate by 35.4 per cent, based on a two year contract. 

 

The last collective bargaining agreement between the SHA and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 

Association was settled amicably on a basis of a seven per cent increase in 1972 and six per cent increase in 

1973. This agreement established a starting rate of $580 per month, with $615 after one year of service and 

$650 after two years of service. The latest official offer made by the Saskatchewan Hospital Association on 

April 25, 1974 was as follows: Effective January 1, starting rate would be $707; after one year of service, 

$724; after two years of service $747; on July 1 of this year, $707 starting; $724 after one year; $747 after 

two; $780 after three years of service. On January 1, 1975, $775 starting rate; $795 after one year of service; 

after two years $820; after three years $850; after four years of service $875 per month. 

 

The extension of ranges from a three-step range to a five-step range (that is the payment of top wages are 

two years of service to after four years of service) was a request of the nurses and has been granted by the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to wage increases a two per cent improvement in the fringe benefits has been 

offered, plus a cost of living increase of one per cent wage increase for each one per cent increase in the cost 

of living over nine per cent in the year 1974. That increase would apply as of January 1, 1975. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2954 

The fringe benefits offered in the last SHA proposal include increased overtime provision for double time 

after the first four hours overtime — it was one and half times for all hours worked. Secondly, double time 

for working on regular days off — it used to be one and a half times. Thirdly, increase in standby pay on 

days off from the present $3 to $4.50, effective January 1, 1974 to $5 effective January 1, 1975. Fourthly, 

increased shift differential payment from the present 12.5 cents per hour to 16 cents per hour on January 1, 

1974, 18 cents per hour effective July 1, 1974 and 20 cents per hour, January 1,1975. The fringe benefits 

offered represent a further two per cent in increased benefits to nurses. 

 

I should point out that nurses in certain government institutions represented by CUPE and nurses in 

government services represented by the Saskatchewan Government Employees' Association, have already 

signed a two year contract on the following package. Effective October 1, 1973, starting rate of $640 and 

goes to $779. Effective October 1, 1974, $698 and goes up to $849 per month. Nurses in the public service 

receive four weeks vacation after twelve years service. Next year they will have four weeks vacation after ten 

years of service. However, nurses in the general hospitals, now enjoy four weeks annual vacation after three 

years of services. 

 

One of the issues that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has been most adamant about is that the rates of 

pay for certified nurses assistants has been sharply increased, narrowing the gap between what is paid to the 

CNAs and to registered nurses. SUN has insisted that there be a 25 per cent differential between the two. 

The latest SHA offer would re-establish this 25 per cent differential as of July 1, 1974, on the top rates and 

would increase it to 27 per cent as of January 1, 1975. The agreement reached with the SEIU provides a top 

rate of $624 per month for CNAs in 1974 and $689 in 1975. Top wages offered to the RNs would be $780 

and $875 respectively. 

 

The Union has asked for an hourly rate of $5 per hour. The SHA has offered $5.06 per hour as of January 1, 

1975. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the relationship of the offer made to the nurses to the increase in the 

cost of living. As of January 1, 1972 when the last agreement was reached the cost of living index for 

Canada stood at 136.7. by March of this year the index climbed to 160.8, an increase of 17.6 per cent for 

Canada. The rate of increase for Saskatchewan was less. As of January 1, 1972 the Saskatchewan cost of 

living index stood at 126.3. By March of this year it had increased to 143.3, an increase of 13.5 per cent for 

Saskatchewan. The 1972-1973 collective agreement gave the nurses an increase of seven per cent for 1972 

and six per cent for 1973, for a total of 13 per cent. Almost exactly matching the increase in the 

Saskatchewan cost of living. 

 

The SHA wage offer for the coming two years represents a 35.4 increase and offers protection against the 

excessive cost of living increases, by building in a cost of living adjustment tied to increases in the Canadian 

cost of living index. An increase in the cost of living over nine per cent in 1974 will be matched by a 

percentage basis for 1975. I understand that the SHA has offered to refer the dispute to a mutually acceptable 

impartial mediator with the understanding that the parties could consider agreeing to the recommendation of 

the mediator on either a voluntary or binding basis. This offer 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2955 

has been rejected by the union. 

 

My investigations have satisfied me that the SHA bargaining committee has made every effort to bargain in 

good faith and to arrive at a mutually agreeable settlement. In spite of the walk-out which has occurred 

today, I understand that the SHA is ready to continue negotiations. I want to urge the nurses to instruct their 

negotiating committee to return to the bargaining table as soon as today's walk-out is over. 

 

By the way, I'm led to believe that the walk-out is only for today and that the nurses will return to their jobs 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion it has come to my attention that some nurses have been told that there have been 

meetings held between some officials and myself along with other Cabinet Ministers. I want to assure the 

nurses and this House that no such meeting has taken place, nor has any request for such a meeting been 

made to me. 

 

I believe that if the parties will get back to the bargaining table, the present impasse can be broken and a 

mutually satisfactory agreement can be reached. I urge both parties to return to collective bargaining 

processes. 

 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the most amazing 

announcements that I've heard in this House. That the Minister of Health comes into this House and makes a 

direct attack on the nursing profession of this province. An attack on the profession of nurses and an attack 

on their demands and an attack on their tactics, and an attack on their union, I've never witnessed anything 

like it in this House before. 

 

The Minister of Labour did not come in this House and make the same kind of statements about the 

construction industry. I never heard any other Minister come into this House and talk about the many study 

sessions that have been held in Sask Tel or Sask Power or whatever. But in this instance the attack on the 

nursing profession that has just taken place is the most amazing thing I've seen. 

 

This particular problem, the nurses going on strike, and the Minister started out by saying he has regretted 

the action taken by the nurses, and he made it very clear that he regretted it because he felt that they were 

absolutely at fault and this is not true. The nurses have a very serious grievance. The grievance was brought 

out today when they find that they are forced to come to loggerheads with this Government. The nurses had a 

very difficult time. Politics has been involved to keep them from having their union and their bargaining 

agent recognized. They went all the way to the Supreme Court. They've been fought all the way and now 

they have an attack on them again today and the Minister questions whether SUN even represents the nurses. 

There is absolutely no question that it's the Minister of Health that is responsible for the nurses going on 

strike. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — He knows very well that SHA 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2956 

bargains with the nurses, but he in fact as Minister of Health puts up every dollar to pay for those nurses. 

SHA, the Saskatchewan Hospital Association has been put in a straight jacket by the Minister opposite. We 

have mentioned this before, we mentioned it in Estimates the other day, that this Government is putting 

hospitals in a straight jacket, they are putting a squeeze on hospital spending and it's an impossible situation 

with the eventual losers being the nurses. They have a very legitimate grievance about differential and about 

pay rates. 

 

MR. SNYDER: — . . . Sask Power inflationary! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The Minister of Health has taken sides. If the Government opposite is willing to 

give 15 and 20 per cent and then expect the Nurses Association to accept this without question from the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Association, this is the most tragic situation that I've seen in this House. I just can't 

believe that the Minister would come in here and say the things that he has said about the nursing profession 

and all this is going to do is to create more problems in the days to come. The nurses are certainly going to 

be very saddened to hear that they have lost the support of government and the Government is against them 

in making these kinds of statements about them. I'm just very disappointed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

INCREASE IN MILK PRICE 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, as the Members of the 

House will be aware, Friday there was an announcement by the Saskatchewan Milk Control Board that there 

was a need for an increase in the price of milk by five cents a quart because of the increased cost to the 

producer and to the processor. The costs, particularly to the producer, have increased very significantly in the 

last year because of the increase in the price of feed supplements and so on. There has also, Mr. Speaker, 

been a very clear indication of a decrease in the milk production on a per month basis in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. For example, in the month of March the production of milk decreased by 11 per cent, which 

again leads to an indication that there is a need to encourage milk production in the province in order to 

assure an adequate supply. 

 

Milk, Mr. Speaker, is one of the very important staples that are necessary in our diet in this country. Our 

Government recognizes that this five cent increase is a large increase to absorb in one sort of increase, and in 

light of that, effective midnight tonight, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan will be providing a 

subsidy of three cents per quart in order that the increase in the price of milk will not be increased by such a 

significant amount in one move. The subsidy of three cents per quart will be of great benefit to the consumer 

of milk, that is to all families in the Province of Saskatchewan. This will be a cushioning effect, Mr. 

Speaker, in order that the impact of the increase will not be so severe. There will be a further increase in the 

price of milk of one cent in July because the subsidy will then decrease. The purpose of the subsidy is to 

cushion the impact, as I have already said. At that time we have to consider the change in the cost of food, or 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2957 

the increase in the cost of food, and reassess the situation at that time again. 

 

So I am pleased to announce to this House at this time that as of midnight tonight the Government of 

Saskatchewan will be providing a subsidy of three cents a quart for milk to the customers in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, this is obviously a day of surprises as the Government 

changes its tactics and makes an about face from one attacking the unions. It is a very surprising situation 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Months ago we had an announcement by the Government opposite that it was going to totally absorb the 

proposed beer price increase and now when we have a basic staple as the Minister has called it, a staple food 

for the people of Saskatchewan, he is not going to absorb all the increase. He is absorbing only 60 per cent of 

the increase, three cents out of five, and the two cents added to the cost of milk is going to hit the lower 

income people for the Province of Saskatchewan. It is going to hit, of course, those people who need milk as 

a basic supplement for their diet for nutritional purposes. 

 

It is a very surprising position that the Government is taking as its priority that beer comes before milk and 

beer comes before bread. The Government opposite has refused in the past to . . .  

 

MR. COWLEY: — Hogwash! 

 

MR. LANE: — Will the Hon. Member please wait until we are finished. He has contributed nothing to the 

House, why should he add anything to these particular remarks. 

 

Again, we are very, very shocked at the priorities, that the Government would put beer ahead of milk and 

beer ahead of bread. The very staple foods, the very staple necessities of life have not been assisted by the 

Government to any extent but they have gone on record where their priorities stand. Their priorities are 

shocking, their priorities are amazing and their priorities are stupid to say the least. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

NEW GRANT FORMULA FOR POLICE 

 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask a 

question of the Acting Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Messer). 

 

I have received this morning a copy of a letter addressed to the Hon. E.I. Wood, Minister, from the town of 

Moosomin and I have heard complaints of this from other areas, but apparently the new grant formula for the 

police equalization grant is going to be very difficult for a number of towns of this size in the province. The 

gist of this letter is that last year they got a $3,538 grant for police equalization. They were notified 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2958 

in the last few days that this year they will get $17 and as the letter points out they will be losing about 

$3,500. 

 

I wonder if the Minister would have his officials investigate the equalization grant for towns of this size 

because there seems to be some serious drawbacks in the grant formula and they are apparently suffering 

quite severely from the new grant formula as far as police and equalization is concerned. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Acting Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will. 

 

LEADER-POST STORY RE FISHERMEN 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to direct to the Acting 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In the Leader-Post last Saturday there was a very deceptive story under the title "Fishermen to Receive 

More", which announced an increase of one to three cents per pound of fish from the Fish Marketing 

Corporation in 1974, relative to 1973. The question to the Minister is: is he prepared to reply to this kind of 

deceptive story which fails totally to take note of the fact that fish prices have declined since 1971, overall 

prices, and further, when can we expect from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan the report, which I 

understand is in preparation, following from the Minister's announcement, the actual Minister's, Mr. 

Bowerman, announcement on February 28th of the Provincial Government's fisheries program? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Acting Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of 

the story that appeared in the Leader-Post, nor am I aware of any changes in policy with respect to DNS. 

However, I will certainly run down the story and run down the question and see if I can supply an adequate 

answer. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is quite satisfactory that the Minister do check into it. It was 

a story which appeared on page 3 of Saturday's Leader Post. 

 

To repeat the question which I had also asked in connection with the first question — in a press release 

issued on February 28th the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan said that a study was being prepared on the 

Provincial Government's own fishing policy. Would the Minister also tell the House, either now or at a later 

time, when that report will be available to the public? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I shall have to supply the information at a later time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 131 — An Act to amend The 

Department of Finance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, just a few brief 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2959 

comments with respect to Bill 131. 

 

The proposed amendment to Section 39 of The Department of Finance Act specifies that every revenue 

officer will be required to account for all public moneys received by him. For a number of years concern has 

been expressed by the Provincial Auditor that there are insufficient safeguards to protect public revenues 

which are collected by motor licence issuers. Issuers are designated as revenue officers and as such are 

required to sign application forms stating that they must deposit all moneys collected in the performance of 

their duties. However, in instances where defalcation of funds has occurred some doubt has arisen 

concerning the adequacy of this form of contract. 

 

The intent of this legislation is to make it clear to all concerned that revenue officers are under obligation to 

account for public moneys collected. 

 

A further amendment increases the Provincial Auditor's salary as necessary because the amount of the salary 

is specified in The Finance Department Act, and thus, could only be altered by amendment to that Act. 

 

With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 131. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I only have a remark or two to this Bill. 

 

First of all I am very pleased to note that there are some changes being made. This particular officer was 

appointed after the present Government came into power and we would be very pleased to notice that the 

Government is starting to pay attention to what he says. Each year he has recorded rather extensive 

deficiencies in the administration of the finances of the Province of Saskatchewan. These have been recorded 

each year in the Auditor's report. 

 

We are very pleased to notice that this amendment appears to be in response to a suggestion by the 

Provincial Auditor. The only comment that I have to make is that this officer who is so important to the 

administration of the finances of the province, and is very important to let us, (that is the Opposition), and 

therefore the people of Saskatchewan, know really what is going on inside the workings of government. His 

office being so important should, I think, attract something of a higher salary. If the office of the 

Ombudsman is deserving of a salary of $27,500 as proposed by another Bill before the House — and I am 

sure he is worth it, because he is a very worthwhile and dedicated individual — I am now speaking as to the 

individual involved, if he is worth $27,500 certainly the Provincial Auditor is worth not one penny less than 

that because his duties are so significant to the operation of the Government of Saskatchewan, that a salary 

of less than that tends to indicate to us that his worth to the people of Saskatchewan is less. We don't think 

that that is correct. We, therefore, suggest that a salary of $27,500, exactly the same as the Ombudsman, 

would be more than appropriate and we are pleased to see that the Government is starting to pay some 

attention to what he says. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2960 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I just add one word. 

 

I think that it is interesting to have the Members opposite to tell us what they think that the Provincial 

Auditor should be paid, but I think that in this regard as in many others, I would advise the public to have 

regard not to what the Liberal Party says, but what they do. I think we all know what they paid the Provincial 

Auditor when they were in office. The increases have been very substantial. And I think we well know their 

assessment of the worth of the Provincial Auditor as they have recorded it in Statutes each year when they 

were in office. We well know that in fact they not only paid the Provincial Auditor a relatively smaller 

salary, but they also starved his office of staff. They failed to provide him with the staff which he continually 

asked for. And when we, in Opposition, suggested that they should provide more staff, or that the salary 

should be higher, these proposals were on all occasions, rejected. 

 

I think it is all very well for the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) to make these comments. I note 

very well that the finance critic didn't make them because he was in the House prior to 1971. Nor did the 

former Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). He didn't make them either, very wisely, because he was the one 

who proposed to this House the relatively small increases in salary which were habitually proposed during 

their term of office. 

 

I think that I would simply suggest to all Hon. Members and particularly to the public that they have regard, 

not to what is now said by the Member for Albert Park, but what was in fact done by the Liberal Party under 

the financial leadership of the then Provincial Treasurer, now Leader of the Opposition, when they were in 

office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is something that the Premier surprisingly ignores that it is 

not until his Government took office that the Provincial Auditor's responsibilities and their existence 

increased dramatically and that he has now become probably the last bastion of government spending sanity 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — Certainly not necessary under the previous government. The necessity of the Provincial 

Auditor obviously has increased dramatically in light of the spending extravaganza brought to the public 

attention by the Provincial Auditor; the waste and mismanagement and incompetence of the Government 

opposite has been brought to the attention of the public by the Provincial Auditor, the extent of which is 

unparalleled in the history of this province. There is no doubt that because of the spending programs and 

policies of the Government and its lack of concern for good fiscal management, that perhaps the Provincial 

Auditor should be paid several hundred thousand dollars and give him a percentage of what he draws to the 

public's attention, because he would be well ahead for finding and probably be one of the wealthiest people 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2961 

There is no justification for paying the Provincial Auditor less than the Ombudsman and the Government 

opposite knows it. The responsibilities of the Provincial Auditor, in light of the actions of this Government, 

are considerably more onerous than they are for the Ombudsman. We strongly suggest that the Government 

opposite reconsider its placing a lower priority on the position of the Provincial Auditor than that of the 

Ombudsman. 

 

HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I have now heard the 

nonsensical speech from the Member for Lumsden about paying the Auditor several hundred thousand 

dollars a year as a salary. 

 

I am appalled by the type of arguments put forward by the Members opposite in opposition to this Bill. I 

don't think there was any time when they were the administration of this province that they ever paid the 

Auditor a 20 per cent increase in his salary. I think that it has been clearly illustrated, Mr. Speaker, in the 

debates of this House that the Auditor's office has been starved by the Members who sit opposite, when they 

were the government. I think it is quite clear that this Government has met the requests of the Provincial 

Auditor for staff; that this Government has responded to the Public Accounts Committee's suggestions. 

Consequently I can see no justification for the remarks that are coming from across the floor. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to hear the comments from the Members opposite. 

 

The Auditor was paid $19,000 a year when the Liberal administration was in power, the last year they were 

in power. I am surprised that the Member for Albert Park didn't criticize the Government for raising the 

salary this high — 20.7 per cent in his mind is inflationary, 15 per cent is inflationary for the Power 

Corporation group. 

 

Therefore, if he were consistent at all he would be arguing that the increase was too large. That increase is 

$4,198 and the increase equals the actual income of the minimum wage earner in this province per annum. I 

think it is a substantial increase and I think the Auditor will be pleased with it. 

 

The argument that Northern Saskatchewan is involved here in a large measure — the Member for Lumsden 

brought this point out, he thought he brought it out anyway — a Task Force Report from the Department of 

Finance was made available to the Auditor long before he went up there for the audit with respect to the 

items that were raised. He was made well aware of them because of the study put on by the Department of 

Finance prior to the actual audit occurring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are my final comments with respect to the Bill. It just shows how ridiculous the 

Opposition can be when they make comments such as they have made. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2962 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 130 — An Act to amend The 

Ombudsman Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a fairly simple Bill designed to increase the salary of the Ombudsman from 

$25,000 to $27,500. 

 

To put this in perspective, Mr. Speaker, I might mention a similar officer of the Crown, the Provincial 

Auditor, who in 1969 was paid $17,000 per year and in 1970 was paid $18,020 per year and in 1971 was 

paid $19,100 per year. You will note that those increases are in each case $1,000 per year. In the latter year it 

is $1,100 per year. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, I think will be regarded as relatively modest increases. I think we must remember that 

times have changed in the sense that costs of living have increased and professional people are able to 

command larger sums than these relatively small sums paid to this particular official in 1969, 1970 and 

1971. 

 

The Ombudsman was recruited from the Bench of the Magistrate's Court. He was paid initially a salary of 

$25,000. It is anticipated that there will be increases in the salaries of magistrates. These decisions are under 

review. All of these decisions are under review. We are proposing for the Ombudsman an increase of $2,500 

per year, which under the circumstances is, I think, a reasonable increase. And with that in mind and having 

regard to the relative position of the Ombudsman and the magistrates, the figure of $27.500 appears 

appropriate. 

 

Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 130, an Act to amend The Ombudsman Act, 1972. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word about this 

particular Bill. Let me go on record saying, as far as the individual is concerned, the Ombudsman, without a 

doubt he is a very fine individual and is approaching the task that he undertook in this regard with sincerity 

and with energy. I think he is doing as well as can be expected under the circumstances, under the terms of 

reference and under the power that he has been given in the Act. Again, I want to go on record as saying, in a 

province of less than one million people, with 60 well-paid MLAs and 18 extremely well-paid Cabinet 

Ministers and one very well-paid Premier, I think the office of the Ombudsman is absolutely and totally 

unnecessary. The Government, of course, uses it to hold up to show how democratic they are, how open to 

the public they are. Again, if you study this, you find that most of the complaints that the Ombudsman has to 

deal with, in fact I would say almost all of them, could be dealt with by government officials without the 

necessity of going through an Ombudsman or anyone else. Give the MLAs, and there has been some move 

by this Government, more staff, more back-up, more research on a year-round basis, so that they can perform 

their duties in a more practical and better way. I am talking about all MLAs now. If they do their job, and 

they are given the right, the same rights as an Ombudsman is, then the same privileges, the same 

responsibilities, this particular office, and this job is totally and absolutely unnecessary in this province. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2963 

It is, in fact, window dressing on one hand and on the other hand it is an admission by the Government 

opposite that they have developed such an insensitivity to the ordinary needs of the public and they have 

developed such a bureaucratic structure, so much red tape, that the only way an ordinary citizen can pierce 

this is by going to an individual like the Ombudsman. To me this is an admission of failure. It is also an 

admission by the Government opposite of the lack of esteem in which they hold ordinary MLAs. I again 

want to say that I don't think this position is necessary, I don't think this office is necessary. But having 

established the office, and having obtained the services of the individual to act as Ombudsman, then I have 

no objection. I would support the idea that he be given an increase. And in regard to the size of the increase 

being offered to the Ombudsman and the size of the increase being offered to the Provincial Auditor, they 

are in keeping with the general increases that the Government opposite is giving to its own staff. They are 

comparable as when we were the government. We gave increases if they were $1,000 a year, that was 

comparable to increases that we were giving to other people in our services and comparable to increases that 

the private sector were giving. 

 

Again, in passing, I find it strange that the first time this Government seems to become responsible in regard 

to handing out the funds of the public, it's when they are picking on the nurses in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. However, since I wouldn't want to stray from the contents of this Bill, I want to say that we 

will support the increase given to the Ombudsman. Again, I want to go on record, and I'll go on record every 

opportunity I get to say that this office is unnecessary, it is a waste of taxpayers' money and it could be and 

should be carried out by the elected representatives who receive $12,000, $13,000 or $14,000 pay and other 

perquisites to do exactly, at least 90 per cent of what is reported in this book having been done or attempted 

to be done by the Ombudsman. When you look at a great many of these complaints and they are serious 

complaints, you will find that the Ombudsman doesn't have any jurisdiction, and the little complaints that he 

could handle, again should have been handled by the Members that sit opposite or the Members that sit on 

this side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. M. FEDUNIAK (Turtleford): — Would the Hon. Member allow me a question. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Certainly. 

 

MR. FEDUNIAK: — Since you are saying that this position is unnecessary, what is your stand on the 

Senate? 

 

MR. STEUART: — My stand on the Senate is that they should be put to work. They could do a great deal 

of work and they should be put to work, but they are not. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question that I would like the Hon. 

Premier to deal with in his response in closing debate on this Bill. That is the question of how we are going 

to deal with the report of the Ombudsman. According to the Statute 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2964 

creating the office, he is to report to the Legislature, in fact he is appointed by the Legislature and he reports 

directly to us. But such are the rules of the House that I am finding it difficult in some cases and this is one, 

to determine where and how we are going to examine the office to determine whether or not it is doing the 

job and how it might be improved and so on. If we are allowed to do so only on item 1 of this particular Bill, 

it leads me to the conclusion that in each year in which the Ombudsman receives an increase in salary by 

Statute we will have the opportunity of examining his report. If the Government should decide in some year 

that no raise was justified for a variety of reasons, including a reduction in the cost of living, then I would 

think that that year we might well be deprived of the opportunity examine the reports of the Ombudsman. 

 

The only other opportunity appears to be in the Estimates, but the difficulty with dealing with it under the 

Estimates, is whenever we come to a point under the Estimates which is Statutory, there seems to me to be 

some implied restriction on the examination we can make of that. If I am wrong, I hope the Hon. Premier 

will indicate that to me. But it seems to me that when we are talking about reports to this Legislature there 

should be some specific place where officers appointed by this Legislature are to be dealt with. In the case of 

the Provincial Auditor, that matter, which is a report directly to the Legislature, that is referred to a Select 

Standing Committee. The Committee then reports back to the Legislature and we debate the motion to 

accept or concur in or receive the report of the standing committee. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope the Premier will direct his attention to that particular matter so that if not now, 

certainly in the future we may have some appropriate method of receiving and discussing fully the reports of 

officers who report directly to this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, we have perhaps wandered a bit from the principle of 

this Bill — to nursing and to the appropriateness of the office of the Ombudsman and the manner in which 

we should report. 

 

May I say that I understand the comments of the Leader of the Opposition. It may well be that the office of 

the Ombudsman is, at least in his conception of things, superfluous to our system of government in 

Saskatchewan. He seems to feel that it is an evidence of failure on the part of a government by appointing an 

Ombudsman. I would rather wish to phrase it not as evidence of failure, but as evidence of fallibility. I think 

that governments are fallible even a government headed by the New Democratic Party, strange as that seems. 

It is entirely possible for a government which has many thousands, indeed some tens of thousands of public 

servants, to have persons not conducting themselves in the manner in which they should and in a way which 

is rather difficult for an MLA to unearth. 

 

Accordingly I see no particular objection to the idea of an Ombudsman, in fact I think that we will see over 

the years that the officer is performing a useful function. 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

 

2965 

I would think however, that we shall have no way of knowing just how useful this officer is unless he serves 

under governments of different stripes. I fancy that what the Leader of the Opposition is doing, in his 

frequent comments on the office of the Ombudsman, is laying the groundwork for the abolition of the office 

should the people of this province be unfortunate enough to elect a Liberal Government at some time in the 

future. I think that this would be a most unfortunate thing to happen in this province. It would be a second 

minor catastrophe following a major catastrophe. I am hopeful, therefore, that the Leader of the Opposition 

who represents Prince Albert West will simply not have any opportunity to foist upon the people of 

Saskatchewan his particular views as to the usefulness of the office of the Ombudsman. I am reasonably 

confident that that will be the case. 

 

With respect to the points raised by the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), it is my understanding of 

the situation that the office of Ombudsman can be discussed under the Estimates of legislation. This, I think, 

is true of other people's services to this House, the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly is paid out of that vote 

and if you wish to discuss his office and performance of his office, I think that's the place to do it. The 

Ombudsman is appointed and reports to this House and if you wish to discuss his office and his conduct of 

it, then I think that's the vote. 

 

We have a number of people who are government employees in respect of whom it is sometimes difficult to 

find a place to discuss their affairs. One thinks of the Workmen's Compensation Board. The chairman of the 

Workmen's Compensation Board has the status of a superior court judge under the Statute and it is 

sometimes difficult to discuss the affairs of the Workmen's Compensation Board. It has traditionally been 

done under subvote 1 of the Department of Labour. We don't have well defined methods of discussing all of 

these matters. But such as they are, I would assume that the appropriate place to discuss the Ombudsman is 

the consideration of the Estimates on Legislation where in fact money is voted for the office. 

 

With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I again move second reading. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF CUBS 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of introducing to the 

House and to you, Mr. Speaker, members of the Broadway 48th Cub Pack who are here visiting us tonight, 

along with their leaders, Mr. Frank Baker, Mr. Lewis Creusot. We welcome them and we are sorry you can't 

stay longer. We hope you have enjoyed it, fellas. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 6, 1974 

 

2966 

THIRD READINGS 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Acting Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved that Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend 

The Urban Municipality Act, 1970 be now read a third time. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to speak briefly on Bill 87 and 

express the regret that we have that the Government, with its majority, did not see fit to introduce into the 

legislation some sort of an amendment which would avoid the conflicts which exist with various levels of 

government when senior officials of one level of government are permitted to operate as senior officials or 

Members of the Legislature in another level of government. We note that the Parliament of Canada does not 

allow Members of the Legislature to run for election. We regret that the Government did not see fit to take 

up the proposal of the Opposition either that an amendment be made or that they meet together for the 

purpose of working out something reasonable to allow at least some flexibility in the Act. We regret that the 

Government was so rigid in dealing with the Opposition on what we think is a reasonable attempt to bring 

some common sense to this question of conflict of interest. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

MESSAGE FROM LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR FOR FURTHER ESTIMATES 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits Further Estimates of certain sums required for the 

service of the Province for the twelve months ending March 31st, 1975, and recommends the same to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Thorson 

(Minister of Industry and Commerce): —  

That His Honour's Message and the Further Estimates be referred to the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:08 o’clock p.m. 

 


