
























































Hansard: April 09, 1974


2139 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

47th Day 
 

Tuesday, April 9, 1974 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. N. E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to introduce 
to you and to the Members of this House 30 Grade Ten students from Wishart High School, seated in the 
Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Millham. Wishart is situated in the 
constituency of Wadena, the constituency of Mr. Speaker. It is my particular pleasure to introduce this 
group to the Assembly today. Wishart is situated in the Shamrock School Unit where I personally taught 
school for a number of years. Although it is one of the smaller high schools within the Shamrock School 
unit, they have made their mark, not only in the academic world, but they certainly made their mark 
equally well in sports’ competitions and other activities. 
 
I want to welcome them to the Chamber today and although this is Private Member’s Day and we will 
not be dealing with legislation at least in the earlier part of the day, we hope the debates will be worth 
their while and they will gain a greater appreciation of the parliamentary process as a result of their visit 
here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
Members of the Assembly twelve adult students from the Wascana Institute of Arts and Sciences in the 
constituency of Regina North West. They are located in the Speaker’s Gallery with their instructor, 
Bonnie Scott. 
 
This visit I understand, Mr. Speaker, serves as an introduction to their study of democratic government. 
We extend a warm welcome to them and express the wish that their stay here today well be educational 
and informative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Loss of Jobs in Oil Industry 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, there has been much in the news about the loss 
of jobs and the closure of many small businesses in the oil field. Last week and the prior week I know 
that the Government has met with a delegation representing the small independent oil companies and 
representing various people in the service industries that work in the oil development fields. The 
question I should like to ask the Government, Mr. Speaker, is that now the Government has an 
opportunity to consult with them about the obvious problem that exists, is the Government going to do 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2140 

anything to change the oil policy so that these businesses will not be forced to leave Saskatchewan or be 
forced into bankruptcy? 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will answer in the absence of the Premier and 
the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley). I would simply say this that my understanding is that a 
number of meetings have been very fruitful. We expect that Government policy in this area, that a 
further clarification will be made very shortly, within the matter of the next few days by the Minister of 
Mineral Resources. 
 

Increase in Pay Requested for Motor Licence Issuers 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question here 
that properly I guess should be directed to the Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins) who would be my first 
choice, or the Premier as my second choice, so I’ll ask the Attorney General. Does the Minister realize 
that with the extra work involved in filling out the Motor Vehicle Licences this year and other rising 
costs, that issuers are probably getting less than the minimum wage for the work they are doing? Would 
the Government consider an immediate increase in the 40 cent fee paid to motor vehicle licence issuers 
throughout the province? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I would answer to the Hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, that an increase was in fact 
effected last year from 20 cents to 40 cents, based on the representations of certain MLAs. I appreciate 
that the additional work does entail additional time for them and I will take the question under 
advisement and discuss it with my colleagues to see what, if anything, can be done. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — As a supplementary. Would the Minister check also with the neighboring provinces 
and I think he will find that we are substantially behind in the amount that we are paying these people. 
 

Government Commitment to Senior Citizens re Report 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I should 
like to direct this question to the Premier, but in his absence I will direct it to the Minister of Social 
Services (Mr. Taylor). I presume the Government met, or representatives of the Government met at noon 
today with representatives from the Senior Citizens’ organization. We met with them earlier and they 
indicated their intent to meet with the Government and I presume the Minister is aware that their 
requests cover what the Government intentions are in regard to the findings of the Commission on 
Senior Citizens that was set up. My question to the Minister of Social Welfare is: could he give the 
House any assurance that the Government is in fact, and in the face of the tremendous revenue they have 
this year, prepared very shortly to give some commitment to the old age pensioners, the senior citizens, 
that they will take action in a substantial way as a result of the Commission that was set up by the 
Government at the request of this House? 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2141 

Hon. A. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this Government in 
this, as in other reports presented to it, to treat the report with all seriousness and to take such action as is 
necessary. The Member opposite should know that the report was made public within a couple of days 
of it being presented to the Government. We haven’t had time to study it as a Government. However, I 
can assure the Member that we will be taking some action within the weeks and months ahead. What the 
action will be I cannot tell him at this time, but it will be announced in due course. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I am sure the Hon. Member is aware that 
when they received the report on the plight of the senior citizens that the Budget had not as yet been 
presented. I ask if the Minister is aware that the Federal Government is now prepared to share in any 
increase in supplementary allowances or any other allowances to senior citizens? And in light of that is 
he prepared to say that the Government will in fact, in this fiscal year, consider giving an increase in 
supplementary allowances or in old age pensions to our senior citizens? 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the Member must have available to him some information that is not 
available to the Government. The indication which we have received from the Federal authorities is that 
they are not prepared to cost share except on the basis of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. Once again, 
we are considering the options and we will be making a decision. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware that they are doing this in British Columbia and I am aware 
that they will do it here if you ask them. But if you are so inept that you don’t ask them or don’t put this 
in, then of course they won’t do it 
 
Mr. Taylor: — They are doing it in British Columbia under the Assistance Plan and that is exactly what 
I finished saying. The only part that is cost shared is for those who fit the means test under the British 
Columbia Assistance Plan and not the total. When he speaks of government not acting, this Government 
acted in 1963 to establish an institute on senior citizens as the result of a then commissioned report. 
When the now Opposition came into power one of its first acts was to abolish that division of 
government. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask a question on that? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No, we have had our three questions. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Well, I think it is subject to the same matter and it would be worthwhile if the 
Minister got some information from his own newspaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We have had two or three 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2142 

questions and we have had two or three supplementaries, I don’t think we can stretch it. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, your ruling . .  
 
Mr. Steuart: — The old age pensioners don’t care how they get the pension as long as they get it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Tabling of Agreement re Iron and Steel Complex 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, on behalf of the Premier, it gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to table for the Members of this Legislature a true copy of the duly executed 
agreement between Canada and Saskatchewan for an establishment of an integrated iron and steel 
complex for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement says that the objectives are to ensure the viability of the 
existing iron and steel industry in Saskatchewan; to expand and diversify iron and steel production and 
to provide a substantial increase in the number of employment opportunities in the province. Other 
aspects of the detailed agreement are set out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement says that the capital investment costs as estimated will amount to $120 
million in Saskatchewan and the agreement says that it will involve 1700 direct new jobs for the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I emphasize the words ‘direct jobs’. One only can speculate as to the 
number of indirect jobs that will spin off as a result of this particular complex and the fact that they are 
new jobs. Canada will provide up to $35 million in direct assistance and Saskatchewan will provide up 
to $10 million in direct assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government, we appreciate the co-operation given to us by the Prime 
Minister, Mr. Trudeau. I might say that a big vote of congratulations, however, must be given to Premier 
Blakeney for negotiating this deal for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by simply saying that by the use of Bill 42, by the 
skilful work of the Premier at the recent Energy Conference, the result is this direct source of pride for 
all Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2143 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me first say that we are very pleased that the announcement has now 
come out in the open and that some Minister of the Crown on the other side is prepared to stand up in 
the open and admit that they are willing to go along and make this announcement. I should like to join 
with the Attorney General in congratulating the Prime Minister and the Federal Government, since they 
are putting up $35 million compared to $10 million by the Provincial Government. I also wish to say 
how pleased we are that there will be 1,700 jobs, if indeed all these things come to pass, directly from 
this new iron and steel development. I would point out that this may make up for some of the jobs lost 
because the NDP-Blakeney Government cancelled the iron mine deal that we had set up and the 
Athabasca Pulp Mill. Between these two great projects, paper now, as you know, has tripled in price and 
is in such short supply, this would have given us approximately 4,500 jobs direct, so this is pretty poor 
compensation, two and one-half or three years later. However, again I say that this is an example of 
co-operation between the Federal Government and the Provincial Government. I would also point out 
that negotiations have been going on since before July of last year, long before there was any oil crisis. I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, if this is the best the Premier can offer as a trade-off for having given away 
about $40 million worth of revenue for the Government of Saskatchewan in oil, if this is an example of a 
trade-off then the people of Saskatchewan have been pretty badly served. However, I am glad this has 
come to fruition, I am happy that it’s going on the table and we look forward to receiving more details in 
the days ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 24 — National Grasslands Park in Southwestern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington) moved, seconded by Mr. Gardner (Moosomin): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to enter into negotiations with the 
Government of Canada and reach an agreement for the establishment of a national grasslands park in 
southwestern Saskatchewan. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I have the opportunity to speak to this Resolution. I don’t 
feel that it is an earth-shaking matter but I do feel that it is a subject which is of concern to a number of 
people in Saskatchewan, I think probably in all the country and Canada. It is something that many 
people in the future will be pleased if we are able to take some action upon. Of course, what I am 
referring to is the Resolution that would, if passed, suggest that we establish a national grassland park in 
southwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want in a relatively brief period of time, Mr. Speaker, to discuss some of the conditions that I think 
must be lived by and adhered to if this is going to be a successful agreement between the province and 
the Federal Government to establish a park and to establish it on a basis that is suitable for the people 
who live in the area. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2144 

I want to start first, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I believe such a park is necessary because in 
southwestern Saskatchewan there exists the only native prairie area that is still untouched by the plow in 
North America. I believe that we should, at this time in our history, preserve at least part of this area. 
 
I want to now set out at least several conditions that I think must be met and having consulted with a 
number of the people that live in the area, I think that all of these are important if we are to have a 
successful agreement. 
 
1. I would suggest that there should not be any expropriation of the range area that exists. 
 
2. I would suggest that the right of an owner to pass his land, or the right to live on the land and use it 
(and I refer to this because much of the land is Crown land), that this land must be able to be passed on 
to his heirs. 
 
3. If the person wishes to sell at fair market value of this land, he should also not only be paid the full 
price of the land but he should be given assistance to be able to relocate his farm buildings and his 
facilities necessary for agricultural production. 
 
4. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the park itself must allow continued grazing. 
 
I know that there are some conservation groups that would oppose this suggestion, but I do not think that 
in most cases their opposition is based on factual information. Certainly the park itself would allow 
grazing in order to prevent fires that could be devastating to the area. 
 
I think what also should be considered is that in past history the land itself was grazed by buffalo and 
therefore, I don’t think that the fact that it is grazed in a proper manner and not overgrazed would be 
anything to deter from the natural beauty of the park itself. 
 
Grazing itself, Mr. Speaker, may be a problem and a number of public meetings should be conducted in 
that area. It certainly appears that there are a number of concerns to the cattlemen who live in the area. 
Certainly these policies will have to be considered, if we have a park, to negotiate between the province 
and the Federal Government, the wishes of the people currently using the land must be considered. One 
thing that I would suggest in this regard, that does seem to be a problem, and that is that some individual 
cattle owners are concerned about the establishment of a large park because this would involve the 
mingling of a number of different types of cattle together and some of the ranchers in the area have 
developed extremely high-quality herds of their own and, therefore, I think in some instances we would 
have to consider still having separate pastures in these cases. 
 
I want to say a word about the provincial mineral rights which exist in the area currently because this 
seems to be one of the chief stumbling blocks as far as the agreement is concerned at the present time. I 
would suggest to the Government opposite that we, as a province, should be prepared to give up our 
mineral rights in the area of the new national park, on the 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2145 

condition that if in some future time in our history a mineral development is economically required or is 
feasible, that in that event, the province would once again have the mineral rights as the sole heirs to the 
province. I don’t think this would be unreasonable. 
 
One of the conditions that the Federal Government has currently for establishing a national park is 
simply that the province turn over the mineral rights to them and I think this could be done on the basis 
that these mineral rights revert to us should it be desirable or feasible in the future to develop coal 
mining or oil, etc. 
 
I also would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the establishment of such a park could have considerable 
economic affect on the area. There would be many millions of federal dollars spent that currently don’t 
come to our province on tourist development and it would in turn create a substantial number of jobs in 
the tourist industry. Secondly, it would create a number of permanent jobs in the area simply because of 
the maintenance of facilities which would have a very, very substantial and beneficial effect on a part of 
Saskatchewan that is extremely sparsely populated. I think that in this sense if we are able to establish 
even a few permanent people in maintenance, tourist facilities in that area, that that is a good thing for 
Saskatchewan because this is one of our most sparsely populated areas. 
 
I have briefly covered some of the things that I think are important and as I said, Mr. Speaker, at the 
beginning of my remarks, I think it is important now that some public discussion take place on the 
subject with the prospect, hopefully, that a decision will be arrived at within the next few months. The 
people in the area are concerned about the park and they are unable to make definite plans under current 
circumstances. I would simply suggest that negotiations between the province and the Federal 
Government continue, with the people of the local area being carefully consulted. Currently much 
uncertainty regarding future policy in the area exists. This is partly due to the Federal Government, 
partly due to the province. This is making future planning difficult for many of the people that live there. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, before moving the Resolution, I want to say that I believe the park is feasible, 
as much of our current base for agricultural purposes in Saskatchewan, or for all of Canada, at least for 
the next few years, can be farmed much more intensively than it is in producing the necessary 
production for agriculture that we require. I think if we use our land to a much greater intensive purpose 
that this will keep more people on farming and I see no reason why we need that area for all of 
agricultural production. Of course, that is based on the assumption that grazing rights would still 
continue there. 
 
On this assumption, Mr. Speaker, surely we can set aside a relatively small portion of our original prairie 
area as a monument of what our country once was. 
 
With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. 
Gardner), this Resolution. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2146 

Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — I would just like to say a word or two about this 
because the idea of a grassland national park in southern Saskatchewan has been discussed for many 
years with the Provincial and the Federal Governments; and this Resolution is urging the Provincial 
Government to re-open negotiations for the fact is they have been closed off. In other words, take a lead 
in attempting to have this park become a reality. 
 
Now, let me say very clearly that some of the stipulations placed on the development of this park by the 
Federal Government were unacceptable when we were the government and if they haven’t been changed 
I’m sure they would be unacceptable to the Government opposite, and in this we would agree with them. 
At one time the request of the Federal Government was that the province put up all the land and most is 
Crown land, but I don’t think that’s an insurmountable problem. They also insisted that the mineral 
rights revert to the Federal Government. I don’t agree with this. They also insisted at one time that there 
would be no grazing rights, in other words, ranchers who now have some of this land leased from the 
Provincial Government and are grazing cattle, would have their leases cancelled and those ranchers 
would have to remove their cattle. Now that was unacceptable then, and I presume it is unacceptable 
today. So I really don’t think that there is any great difference in the attitude of the Government or the 
Opposition in regard to the development of this grassland park. 
 
However, I have a feeling, in Press reports and in discussions with Federal-Liberal politicians and 
Ministers (and the Minister himself) that the attitude of the Federal Government has changed and they 
are now prepared to make some concessions that they were not prepared to make several years ago. 
They are very determined and very keen and enthusiastic that this area be set aside as a national park, 
and I’m told that it will be the only grassland park in Canada, and possible the only grassland park of its 
kind in North America. Agreeing with what the Member who moved this Motion (Mr. Weatherald) said, 
I think it would be a shame if we are not able to negotiate between the province and the Federal 
Government to set aside this relatively small amount of land to show this generation and future 
generations exactly what this prairie province and this great grassland area was all about before it was 
changed and turned into urban sprawl and all the things that are happening to it. I favor the development 
of this grassland national park, however, I favor it on the lines of practical and sensible use. I think that 
the mineral rights, if not left with the Provincial Government, at least there should be an agreement that 
they are held in abeyance. I think the Provincial Government should be prepared to agree and the 
Federal Government agree that there would be no development of mineral rights, whether it’s for oil or 
coal or any other mineral, unless there could be some mutual agreement somewhere in the future, 
because none of us know, neither our officials nor the officials of the Federal Government, nor Members 
of this Legislative Assembly, nor Members of the House of Commons, what the situation will be five, 
ten, fifteen, twenty or fifty or a hundred years down the road. It may well be that the minerals that may 
be there, may be very, very necessary for the people of the province and the people of this nation. If 
such an event arises, neither this Government nor the Federal Government should have tied their hands 
so as to make the development of those resources impractical or 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2147 

impossible. However, I don’t believe that the Federal Government is justified in asking the province to 
turn the mineral rights over to them. To me this implies that the Federal Government is more genuinely 
concerned possibly about the future of that park, or has now, or will have in the future, a better 
conception and a better understanding of whether those minerals, if there are any there, are needed for 
the people of this province or of this country. And I am convinced that the people of this province, 
through their government, whatever government it is, have just as keen an understanding and just as 
great an appreciation of the need of those minerals, or just as keen an understanding if those minerals 
should be left undisturbed and the land be left undisturbed as a group of bureaucrats or a group of 
politicians who happen to be centered in Ottawa, or happen to be Members of the House of Commons, 
rather than the Members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So, I think Members on this side, as the Mover of this Motion indicated, are aware, as are Members on 
the other side, of the problems that have existed in the development of this grassland park. We all are 
aware and appreciate the stand the Federal Government has taken and the problems that the stand they 
have taken have posed both for the government of the day and the government of a few years ago when 
we sat in the Treasury benches. However, the only difference that exists today and that existed a few 
years ago, is that there are indications that the Federal Government is so anxious to have this area set 
aside that they are ready to sit down and negotiate some of the things that they evidently weren’t 
prepared to even consider a few years ago. 
 
I would join with the Member for Cannington and say I would ask the Provincial Government to re-open 
these negotiations, or reactivate them and we would be prepared to support them very strongly: (a) in the 
development of this grassland national park; (b) in the proposal that the cattlemen using that area, not be 
pushed out and that the proposal made by the Federal Government, as late as two years ago, that they 
would allow the cattle or the ranchers to stay in there for five years of ten years, that this is not 
acceptable. I think that it must be a much longer term than this. In fact, I think that the Provincial 
Government must always have equal say in the multi-use of that land. Certainly equal say in regard to 
the rights of ranchers and in the rights of the development or non-development of mineral resources. 
 
However, I am convinced that if the Provincial Government is prepared to take a new look at the 
negotiations that something can come of this, and I think it is worthwhile making an extra effort because 
I think that what will result for the province is not just setting aside a few thousand acres of grassland 
almost in its original state, but I think that as a tourist attraction this, in the future, will be of great 
benefit, not just to the people of that area, certainly to those people, but to the people of all the province 
as well. We are now in the process of discussing even setting up of a new department concerned almost 
totally with the development of the tourist industry, and the development of a second national park, with 
all the money that the Federal Government will pour in, with all the advertising that the Federal 
Government will use, both nationally and internationally, is bound to result in some great benefits to this 
province and to the people of this province. I think the differences of opinion and the strong and sincere 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2148 

differences of opinion about the use of the land that exist between all of us here as people responsible in 
the first instance for the welfare of the people of the province, and the people in Ottawa responsible for 
the larger scene, the good of the people of this nation, I think they can be resolved and I would urge the 
Government to attempt to do this, and if they are in the process (and they tell us that they are negotiating 
this), then I think they should be prepared to take another look at this or renegotiate it. I hope the 
Government does not use its power to amend this and commend themselves on the wonderful job they 
are doing and heap abuse on the Federal Government because of the attitude they have taken. I don’t 
think this will avail us anything, I think this may be good politics, or it might be good politics in the 
ranchland area, but I don’t think that it will achieve what we are trying to achieve and that is the 
development of a grassland park in the Province of Saskatchewan, if we can do it. Now it may very well 
be that we can never agree to terms of the Federal Government. If that’s a fact, certainly we couldn’t 
agree with them when we were the Government, and if they are not now prepared to change their minds, 
or soften their position, recognize our problems, recognize our responsibility, then it may well be that 
we never will see the development of this grassland park. But I think it is worth some give and take and 
I would hope the Government would think about this and to give them an opportunity to think about it, I 
would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 26 — Guaranteed Monthly Income for Senior Citizens 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University) moved, seconded by Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): 
 

That this Assembly calls for immediate government consideration of guaranteeing minimum monthly 
income levels for senior citizens of $350 per individual and $550 per couple, as recommended in the 
Report by the Senior Citizens’ Commission. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it is an honor as one of the younger Members of this House . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before the Member proceeds I would like to ask him if he has a seconder for this 
Resolution today? 
 
Mr. Richards: — Why, is that of substance, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Pardon. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Is that of substance to whether I can or cannot deliver the speech? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, we established 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2149 

a precedent with respect to the Motion concerning the northern food allowances on Friday on which I 
could deliver a speech having no seconder, but, Mr. Speaker, I do today have a seconder for this Motion. 
I understand, Mr. Ted Malone, representing the Regina constituency is prepared to second. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, I want to make it quite plain that we didn’t establish any precedent the other day. 
What we did establish was a motion which was improperly sent up. That is why I am asking the Member 
today, but if he has a seconder he may proceed. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I am prepared to second the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — That’s fine. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, before being interrupted I was proceeding to introduce this Motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! No talking back comment was called for. The Hon. Member knows better than 
that. When a Member of this House stands up and pulls something on the Assembly as a whole as was 
done the other day, the Chair has the right to see that it doesn’t happen again. For to say that you were 
interrupted was not called for. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, as I was introducing this Motion, I was stating I considered it an honor 
to have been requested by this organization to deliver their petition to the House, a petition signed by 
over 200 senior citizens of Saskatchewan from the following communities: Moose Jaw, Montmartre, 
Whitefox, Zenon Park, Tisdale, Yorkdale, Invermay, Archerwill, Watrous, Imperial, Colonsay, Young, 
Simpson, Prince Albert, St. Brieux, Pineview, Debdon, Shellbrook, Blaine Lake, Hafford, North 
Battleford, Meota, Paradise Hill, Frenchman Butte, Battleford, Wilkie, Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
conjunction with that motion, I wanted to introduce what I trust will be the first to state within this 
Legislature concerning the Senior Citizens’ Commission Report. I would like to introduce this 
discussion by referring back to the beginning of pension legislation, back in 1925. 
 
In that year Mackenzie King was elected a minority Prime Minister of the Liberals with 121 seats as 
compared with 116 Tories and 24 Progressives. Also elected at that time were two independent Labor 
Party MPs of which Woodsworth was one and Heaps the other. And it came to the question of those two 
people who I suppose in the context in politics in the 1920s were considerably more radical than my 
image is today, it came in the context of that situation that they had to decide which they were to 
support, whether to support Meighen or whether to support Mackenzie King, whether to support the 
Liberals or whether to support the Tories. The crux of the issue was whether either one of them would 
introduce pension legislation and it was a very dicey thing. Mr. Meighen said quite adamantly that he 
was not interested in introducing pension legislation at that juncture and then when it came the turn of 
the Liberals they were very reluctant as to whether that kind of radical issue could be faced at that time. 
But finally Mackenzie King, desperately needing the support in 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2150 

order to form the government, agreed. Legislation was introduced but he assured Mr. Heaps and Mr. 
Woodsworth that he very much doubted if the legislation would pass through the Senate, because the 
Senate had a Conservative majority and it would doubtless turn down such flaming, radical legislation. 
Anyway, Mr. King went ahead. He introduced legislation providing $20 a month to people who were 
British subjects over 70 years of age, who had resided within Canada for the previous 20 years, thereby 
excluding a large number of the immigrants on the prairies who had not obviously resided within 
Canada for more than 20 years and also, naturally, there was a means test. 
 
Now in the context of 1974 that legislation must sound laughable in its pathetic attempt to try and 
address itself to the problem of poverty among the old, but at the time and I should like to quote from 
Senator McCormack, an Hon. Senator in the Canadian Parliament at the time: 
 

The men who promoted the Bill do not represent a body of people in this country who are prepared to 
contribute to it. They are representative of a body of so-called labor who do not want to encourage and 
practise thrift. They are men who want to burn the candle at both ends. Spend all you make and when 
you are 65 or 70 and unable to work go to those people who have been living well-ordered lives, who 
have been practising the good old habit of thrift. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was the predominant sentiment in 1925 and I wonder just how much further we have 
come in 1974. Albeit we don’t have that miniature level of pensions in 1974 but we still do have a 
situation in which the poverty of the old is one of the crying injustices and shames of the society we live 
in and we seem to be quite prepared to live with it. In Saskatchewan, for example, as of March, 1973 
there were 97,000 pensioners, 60,000 of whom qualified to receive the Guaranteed Income Supplement. 
In Canada as a whole 58 per cent were qualified to receive that supplement and of those receiving the 
supplement nearly 50 per cent received the maximum supplement. 
 
And now with the indulgence of the House and assuming that the pages have distributed some material I 
should like to read into the record some of the statistics on low incomes in Canada which were taken 
from a Statistics Canada document which I think in a very summary way indicates how shamefully our 
society is prepared to blithely accept poverty of the old as something completely natural. 
 
The first figures which I think are of interest is to give the incidence of low income for family units, 
unattached men and unattached women and as an indication of what percentage of people in each of 
these categories by age are poor. Now the criterion for poverty which I will be using for this data is the 
criterion used by Statistics Canada which is those people who spend over 70 per cent of their income on 
the basics, food, shelter, clothing. Now, Mr. Speaker, as representative, those age 14 to 24 — 28 per cent 
are classified as poor; of those 25 to 34 — 14 per cent; of those 35 to 44 — 16 per cent; of those 45 to 
54 — 16 per cent; of those 55 to 64 — 24 per cent; but if we use the age 65 as the criterion of when one 
is old and it is a very arbitrary division because we are all getting older every day, using that criterion 40 
per cent of those between 65 and 69 are poor; and of those over 70 of the whole family units, families 
and individuals — 54 per cent. Of those who are old, half, by 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2151 

these federal criteria, are poor. 
 
If we look at unattached men, 47 per cent of single men between 65 to 69 are poor; 66 per cent of those 
over 70 are poor. For women, 62 per cent of those between 65 and 69 are classified as poor; and for 
those over 70 fully 71 per cent are classified as poor. For families which implies a couple still living 
together, 31 per cent of those are poor between 65 and 69; 42 per cent of those over 70. 
 
Another way to look at this, Mr. Speaker, is to say let us look at the poor and who they are and what 
percentage of the poor fall into the category of being old. Well, if we took a poor family, fully 27 per 
cent of families classified as poor are families that are also old. Whereas by that age group only 13 per 
cent of the population falls into it. Only 13 per cent of old families are over 65 but fully 27 per cent of 
the poor families have got heads whose age is over 65. If we look at it in terms of individual males 45 
per cent of all poor single men are over 65; 48 per cent of all single women who are classified as poor 
are over 65. 
 
Statistics by themselves don’t mean very much but I think that simple kind of statistical profile has been 
repeated again, and again and again. Now in this Legislature almost exactly 24 months ago, the Leader 
of the Opposition, the Hon. Dave Steuart, moved a motion requesting the establishment of a Senior 
Citizens’ Commission. In due course such a commission was established and last month that 
Commission reported. This is the first time in this Legislature that there is going to be an occasion for 
consideration by the Government and the other parties in the Opposition of those recommendations. 
 
Now the first recommendation which was made by the report is an organizational one concerning the 
establishment of a separate agency. I find the argument largely convincing but, however, I think that is 
not the primary thrust. I am afraid, although money can be the root of all evil, in terms of what we, in 
this Legislature, can imply and can do, is willingness to allocate money to the pensions, to the incomes 
of the old, who cannot reasonably be expected to earn their income through work. That is the most 
important commitment that we can make. 
 
Now you go through the Social Service’s budget — 6.9 million advocated for public assistance; $1 
million allocated for construction of a special care homes; another $5.5 million allocated for allowances 
for residents of special-care homes who will largely be senior citizens. That totals $13 million. We could 
proceed to allocate out the cost of medicare which is being spent upon the health care of senior citizens 
and the cost of hospitalisation which I haven’t got the figures on. 
 
But expensive as these programs are and if we add it all up it will be a large amount of money, we still 
get this shocking situation with respect to the number of our poor who are old and the number of old 
who are poor, and so it comes down, are we prepared to perceive the major shifts in government 
spending which are going to be involved if we are to lift the old out of poverty. I don’t have any very 
precise estimates of the implications of the recommendation within the Senior Citizens’ Commission but 
if you will be aware, Mr. Speaker, it recommended a monthly income of $350 as a minimum for single 
individuals and $250 per spouse or $500 per couple. Mr. Speaker, those figures 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2152 

imply $4,200 a year for an individual; $6,000 for a couple. They imply figures in the order of twice what 
is currently being received by old age pensioners under the Guaranteed Income Supplement. It could 
well mean in order to achieve those income levels, expenditures out of the Provincial Treasury in the 
order of $100 per month per pensioner, on average. It even assumes that one could effectively manage to 
recoup funds from those who could afford to pay it through income tax. We may well be talking about 
expenditures out of the Provincial Treasury in the order of $75 million as a very cursory initial estimate 
of what it might cost to fund and to achieve the recommendation of the Government’s Senior Citizens’ 
Commission Report. 
 
I don’t want in any way to hide the fact that it is costly to achieve the pension levels recommended in 
that report. It will be costly to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in one way or another. Although assuming 
that we can’t extract the rents from our resources and that we can prevent the corporate exploitation of 
our resources, I would submit that we of this province can afford to lift our senior citizens out of the 
state of poverty in which they now live. It is primarily a question of whether Saskatchewan people as a 
group consider that to be of sufficient priority to be worth spending $75 million upon. I don’t think the 
argument hangs on the question of whether or not we can have federal cost-sharing. Federal cost-sharing 
would be very nice, especially if it’s a sum of that magnitude. But we didn’t introduce medicare and we 
didn’t introduce hospitalisation on the basis of cost-sharing. If we want seriously to imply a change in 
the values of our society such as that we consider the poverty of the old to be a stain that we will no 
longer live with, we should, I would argue, be prepared to establish the precedent in this province and let 
the rest of the country come kicking and screaming along as has happened many times in the past. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my motion requests the Government consider it as the appropriate form of a Private 
Member’s Resolution, it is not an adamant resolution, it is, I would submit, a humble and a modest 
resolution that surely could command the unanimous support of Members in this House. If Members 
find, if the Government Members on the Treasury Bench find that the Commission recommendations 
are too rich for their blood, they might revert back to the relative poverty line as recommended in the 
real poverty report prepared in part by one of the employees of the Government, Brian Hill, who is now 
director of Policy and Research for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. That, recommended that 
a poverty line be established at 50 per cent of the average living standard of Canadians. We might try 
and work out what the implications of that were. Nonetheless, I think there is no excuse for not, in this 
year of relative government largess of wealth, being prepared to make that major budgetary allocation 
ending poverty of the old that is implicit in this resolution. 
 
Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one brief final comment upon the issue of 
seconding a resolution. Mr. Speaker, you asked, and I agree, that you are certainly within your right as 
to whether or not I did have a seconder for this Resolution. I would submit, however, that the procedures 
are being used by Members of both sides of this House in order to suppress what should be legitimate 
debate in this House on what I consider to be substantive resolutions that 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2153 

I have introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think if the Member wants to debate rules we should have a motion to debate 
that, it cannot be done on this motion. We can’t have two debates on the one motion. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly abide by your ruling. I think the point in your standing 
up, once again dramatizes the problem which I, as an individual Member, have in this Legislature, that is 
speaking and speaking and finding forums from which legitimately and within the parliamentary 
procedures to make the points that I want to make. 
 
With respect to this motion, Mr. Speaker, I requested that the NDP caucus second it and they refused. I 
consider it to the credit of the Liberal Opposition, that Mr. Malone has agreed to second this Resolution. 
In taking my seat, Mr. Speaker, I move this Resolution, seconded by Mr. Malone. 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a word or two about 
this Resolution. I think that what we need to do is first take a look at what the Resolution says. It asks 
that the Government give consideration to raising or guaranteeing that an old age pensioner of single 
income have at least $350 a month in Saskatchewan and a married couple have at least $500 a month in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I find the attitude of the Government opposite very interesting. To begin with, we have in Canada the 
highest non-contributory old age pensions in the world. These have been brought about by and large by 
a Federal Liberal Government. Having said that, I think we all agree just as with the minimum wage, I 
don’t think any of us would want to subject any old people to try to live on the non-contributory old age 
pension. So we have set up in this country a series of supplementary pensions administered by the 
provinces, cost-shared by the Federal Government. 
 
If you look back over the record of the NDP and their predecessor the CCF, and compare it to other 
provinces and to the Federal Government, you will find that the CCF and now the NDP have been great 
talkers about humanity first. They have been great talkers about helping our senior citizens but their 
actions have never, never measured up to their words. Some of the Members over there say ‘What do 
you do?’ Well, I’ll tell you one thing that we did when we became the government in 1964, we did away 
with the most vicious means test that had been implemented by the CCF for 20 years. The most vicious 
mans test that the old age pensioners were subjected to anywhere in this nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — There are Members sitting over on that side of the House right now who were 
supporters of the old CCF Government, who year in and year out kept on the law books the toughest and 
most vicious means test that you could find anywhere in this nation before they would give the old age 
pensioners of this 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2154 

province so much as a $5 bill in any one month. 
 
I find this also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Government opposite this year brought in a Budget — 
$900 million — by any comparison the largest budget ever brought before the people of Saskatchewan. 
It is also interesting to notice that by their own admission they will take in, in revenue, not $900 million 
but closer to $1,100 million. So they are going to have a surplus of at least $15 or $200 million, and in 
fact, if they told the truth, they will have a surplus this year of $300 million. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — How do you figure that out? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — How do I figure that out? You have got $150 to $200 million in oil revenue that is not 
being considered in the Budget, the Premier said that himself. You have got calculations for the E & H 
sales tax of $107 million, and I guarantee you, it will be closer to $115 million. You have got the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation that last year and the year before and for the six years before that, half 
the net profits which this year would have amounted to $8.5 million that was taken into provincial 
revenue. The Provincial Government decided this year not to take any of the net profits of the SPC into 
revenue. That was another $8.5 million that you very casually left out of the Budget picture. There is no 
question that you will have $200 to $300 million extra revenue. 
 
But nowhere in that Budget can you find one five cent piece to implement the recommendations of the 
Commission that was set up by the Government by unanimous consent of this Legislative Assembly to 
study and report on the problems of our senior citizens and recommend to the Government, steps or 
measures that could be taken to alleviate the problems that our senior citizens face in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. Nowhere in that Budget is there one five cent piece allocated for this very important task. 
 
The question is: Didn’t they have the money or did they have other higher priorities? Well let’s look at 
some of their priorities. 
 
We have already indicated and shown and the public of Saskatchewan know it just by looking at their 
daily newspapers, their weekly newspapers, listening to the radio and watching the television, we 
already know that this Government is going to squander anywhere from $10 to $15 million in publicity, 
in advertising, most of it put through Dunsky’s, a Montreal advertising agency, who will reap a profit of 
anywhere from $2 to $3 million from this Government. We know already and the Government has as 
good as admitted it that a great deal of this advertising is for no other purpose than to increase and 
enhance the image of the NDP political party. So there is $15 million. The Member for Saskatoon said 
that this program, if they institute it in one year might cost $75 million. They have $15 million right 
there. 
 
Now the Government boasts that they are going to hire an extra 1,100 new employees this year. We 
know they have already hired 2,000 new employees since they have been the Government. So let’s look 
at that priority. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2155 

Mr. Speaker, if those new employees are to aid and assist in carrying out the program that the NDP are 
going to introduce of assistance to the working poor, then I say, good. They will be necessary and we 
will support them. But, if most of them will be attached to Minister’s offices and as we have seen in the 
Premier’s office. The latest figures show for example, that when we were the Government, the Premier 
of this province had about 8 or 9 executive assistants and planners at a cost of a little over $40,000 a 
year. Our present Premier, Mr. Blakeney, has about 35 executive assistants and special planners, at a 
cost of over $400,000 a year. And we know from the admission of the Government and from newspaper 
reports that these people can be sent to Nova Scotia or to British Columbia or to Alberta or anywhere in 
Canada to assist the NDP in their election efforts in those provinces so we see the real priorities of this 
Government emerging. Mr. Speaker, the real priorities are to spend untold millions of dollars for one 
reason and that is to attempt to ensure their return to office whenever they call the next election. 
 
I want you, Mr. Speaker, and I want the people of this province to add that priority up and to stack that 
priority up against the priority and the reasonable demands of the senior citizens of this province. Add 
those two priorities up and then take the results and hold them up against the claim of the NDP to be the 
humanitarians in this province, to be the people that put the needs of people first and the needs of 
politics for their party second. When you add it up and you look at it honestly, practically and cold 
bloodedly, you find that once again the NDP hold themselves up to the public as being absolute 
hypocrites; that their policy is hypocritical, and their claim to be concerned about our senior citizens is 
absolutely hypocritical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of the stand they have taken becomes even more apparent when it is 
recognized that the Federal Government will share half this cost. Now the Minister of Social Welfare 
(Mr. Taylor) got up and attempted to say, oh, they will only do it if it is under this program or under that 
program. I said in my little talk before the Orders of the Day, and I say it now, that the senior citizens of 
this province who are attempting to live on the old age pension plus the niggardly and mean 
supplementary allowance dished out by this Government, they really don’t care where that extra money 
comes from. They don’t really care under what program you call it as long as they get the money in a 
decent and dignified way. 
 
So don’t try and confuse the public because you can’t confuse us, you can’t confuse people who really 
know what they are talking about that the Federal Government would not in fact share the cost of the 
proposal put forward by this Resolution and the proposal put forward by the report — the Report by The 
Senior Citizens’ Commission, tabled January, 1974. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there is any question and if there had been any questions, they disappeared 
when the Hon. Member for Saskatoon University stood up and said that he tried to get someone from 
that caucus to second his motion. Here is an NDP political party that claims that they have the interests 
of the old folks and the old people and the senior citizens at heart. Look at those back benchers, they sit 
there and not one of them would even second the motion. Not one of them would even take the 
necessary democratic and parliamentary steps to say, let’s have a debate on this. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2156 

An Hon. Member: — Did you second it? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Not one of you. The Hon. Member for Saskatoon Nutana is it — he won’t be there long 
— so there is really no use in trying to learn his name or his seat because he will be gone in the next 
election. He likes to talk about his concern, about the old people. He likes to talk about his concern of 
being a real humanitarian. Not one of those back benchers had either the concern for senior citizens to 
second the motion, or if they did have the concern they didn’t have the intestinal fortitude to buck Mr. 
Blakeney and Mr. Romanow that put on the iron curtain and said, “You boys back off, we are not going 
to second any of the motions by this fellow.” We are not going to get into a debate about the senior 
citizens and what we haven’t done for them. We are not going to talk about it. 
 
As a matter of fact, here is what will happen to the Motion. As soon as a Member over there gets the 
opportunity, he will stand up, he will try to amend it or he will amend it to point out how wonderful they 
have been to the senior citizens. I ask the senior citizens to take that piece of paper, that amendment, 
home and try to eat it, I ask those senior citizens to take that amendment home and try to pay for their 
drugs or to pay for anything else with it. It won’t go very far, but it might make those Members opposite 
feel a little glow of piety, a little glow of self-justification for the fact that they didn’t even have the 
decency to second this Motion and allow this Legislative Assembly to debate it. 
 
The interesting part is, had they attended the meeting that was called for and brought about by the 
pensioners themselves at 1:30 or had they discussed this with the Members of their Government or in an 
open or secret meeting, they would have known that the old age pensioners themselves have said this to 
the Government in their brief. They have said, “We don’t expect you to do this all in one year, if you do 
it in two years we will be very satisfied”. In fact, in speaking to us some of them said, “if the 
Government would just show some serious intention of taking this responsibility and seriously, then we 
will know we are on the right track”. One of them said the Government said they are not going to do 
anything about this until the Session is over. Well, they are a little worried. They don’t trust you, and I 
don’t blame them. Let’s find out how this study even came about. 
 
The senior citizens came to this House and they presented a petition and the petition was put before the 
House by the Member for Saskatoon who is now the Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins). We stood up in 
the House and we put forward a Resolution asking that this study take place. That the Government 
sponsor this study. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Word for word. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Word for word out of the petition, you bet we did. The petition came from the senior 
citizens not from the Member for Saskatoon and not from that side of the House or this side of the 
House. 
 
In our Resolution we put in word for word exactly what the senior citizens wanted. The Resolution 
passed unanimously. Why? Because the Members opposite didn’t have the nerve to show 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2157 

their true colors and vote against it. But then what happened? Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing happened. 
They did nothing. It went on for weeks and weeks and then months. And it wasn’t until Mr. Joe Phelps 
who used to be a Member of the CCF, an MLA, if he is still a member of the NDP, I don’t know, but he 
was a member of the old CCF government. A very powerful member and a very strong member. It 
wasn’t until he put a fire under them, it wasn’t until he stirred them up and reminded the Government 
that they had themselves voted unanimously to set this Commission up. Finally the embarrassed 
Government agreed and set the Commission up. 
 
Now, the Commission carried out their study and they reported back in January, they reported several 
days or several weeks before the Budget was brought into this Legislative Assembly. A $900 million 
Budget plus, plus, plus. I say plus, plus, plus because I tell you and I tell the people of this province that 
this Government will never stick to the $900 million, they will spend at least another $100 million in 
supplementary allowances for issues that concern them and concern their own political party. They had 
every opportunity, if they were serious and sincere to include something in the Budget to show good 
faith to the senior citizens and good faith to the people that carried out this study and made these 
recommendations. But they did not choose to do it. Today they sit there embarrassed as they should be 
because they are being forced by that Member and by these Members and by the senior citizens 
themselves to face the facts, the very, very difficult question for some reason. I don’t know why it is 
difficult. I can’t understand them. They have got money for everything under the sun. They have got 
money for everything that you could even imagine. They have got money for everybody and anybody. 
They have got money for people that haven’t even asked for the money yet. But when it comes to our 
senior citizens a group incidentally who gave them, I think, a great deal of support and had great hopes 
and great aspirations that this Government would do something for them. Why they haven’t done it, I 
don’t know. Why they don’t even talk about it, I don’t know. But the facts are obvious, they haven’t 
done anything about it, they don’t intend to do anything about it because they brought the Budget in. We 
now might force them to do something about it and I hope we do. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, to give them an opportunity to think over their sins of omission, probably to have a 
few more caucuses, and listen to some voices of humanitarians that are not dead on that side of the 
House, I beg leave to adjourn this debate so that when we come back in this House and talk about it 
again they will have a positive attitude for a change and will be ready to do what they weren’t ready to 
do three hours ago, or three days ago, or three weeks ago, and that is to tell the senior citizens of this 
province what, if anything, they are prepared to do about them. 
 
I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Adjournment negatived. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t give us leave to adjourn the debate. That is fine. If that is 
the order of the day this is the first time that this has been introduced and it is the first time we have had 
a chance to speak on it. If that is the name of the game, fine! We will continue to speak on it. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2158 

I think then since obviously the Members have not even considered the report by the Senior Citizens’ 
Commission I had better read it into the record of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell the Members opposite that it is a long road that hasn’t 
got a turn in it and I’ll say this to the House leader, who is not in here, that we have seen something new. 
We have seen that a Member has asked leave to adjourn debate . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Wait until he comes in. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Obviously he and the Premier aren’t going to be bothered with the House this 
afternoon. Oh, here is the leader of the House. I want to point out to him that this is something different; 
something new. If that is the way that you are going to play this game then that is the way that we will 
play it. You have a majority, you have 45 Members and you can use your majority today, you can use 
your majority arrogantly as you have today, to push aside the legitimate wishes of the Opposition; you 
can use your majority as you have in this debate to try and throttle and muzzle the Member for 
Saskatoon (Mr. Richards). You wouldn’t even second the Motion. You tell us that you want to speak on 
this. You didn’t want to speak on it enough to second the Resolution to get it in front of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I say that the rules badly need changing. They need changing very badly 
when this sort of thing, when 45 arrogant Members can attempt to muzzle the legitimate Opposition 
whether they are one or 15, then I say that it is time we take a really serious look at the rules of this 
House. 
 
Don’t tell anyone in this province or in this House that you wanted to speak on the Resolution, you 
didn’t even want it brought before the House. 
 
I will just read the title of this. It is called “If You Feel Change is Possible”. It is a report by the Senior 
Citizens’ Commission, January, 1974. 
 
Mr. Dyck: — Take it as read. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Take it as read, he said. I know, Mr. Dyck the Member for Saskatoon somewhere, and 
he will be the Member from nowhere when the election is over, would like to take it as read. Obviously 
he hasn’t read it and obviously, like all the rest of the Members over there, he doesn’t care that much for 
it or for the senior citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2159 

Mr. Steuart: — 
 

January 31, 1974. 
 
Honourable Alex Taylor, 
Minister of Social Services, 
2240 Albert Street, 
REGINA, Saskatchewan. 
 
Dear Sir: 
 
Since our appointment in February, 1973, as members of the Senior Citizens’ Commission, we have 
considered it a privilege to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The field of Senior Citizens’ concerns if overwhelming. 

 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, not overwhelming to those Members but overwhelming to the senior citizens 
themselves. 
 

Therefore, to assist us in our work it became necessary to decide on certain priorities. It became 
abundantly clear shortly after our travels began, that we had taken the right direction. Now, at the 
completion of our study, we are thoroughly convinced that we are reflecting the voice of the people in 
this province. We believe the recommendation will provide a vehicle that will allow the elderly to 
regain their lost position in the mainstream of society. 
 
It is our conviction, that with time, the proposed Agency will undoubtedly become part of new, 
broader human service systems in this province. This Agency can and will lay the necessary 
cornerstones for proper building in the future. 
 
We began as a nine-member Commission in February. An original member, Mr. Joseph Thain, 
resigned in March, 1973, and Mr. Jim Alexander was appointed in his place. Mr. Randy Wallace was 
an original member of our Commission until March, 1973, at which time he began to work with the 
Provincial Government. Our work and study continued with an eight-member Commission. 
 
We would emphasize the need for love and understanding as a basis for all decisions concerning the 
elderly. We urge your commitment to action. 
 
We present this report to you in confidence that the Government will immediately work towards 
implementing the Agency for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yours very truly, 
G. Bruce Wartman, 
Chairman, 
Senior Citizens’ Commission. 
 
We, the undersigned members of the Senior Citizens’ Commission, hereby submit the report of our 
findings, conclusions and recommendation in fulfilment of the responsibility given to us in Order in 
Council 134/73. 

 
This is signed, Mr. Speaker, by Mr. G. Bruce Wartman, 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2160 

Mr. Vansickle a very independent individual — Elizabeth Ross, Joan Fogal, Don Benson, John 
deMoissac, Jim Alexander and Vern Lester. 
 

The Senior Citizens’ Commission takes this opportunity to express special thanks and appreciation to 
our researcher, Brian Hansen, for the thorough, creative work he has done in research, organizing and 
writing, as well as for his loyalty, co-operation and optimism. 
 
We thank Carol Kaip, our Secretary, for her patience, co-operation and considerable secretarial talent 
which has made our work much easier. 
 
We thank Gary Grieves for helping to organize our study areas and often working with the members at 
inquiries. We express particular thanks and appreciation for the photographs he has done which appear 
in this report. 
 
Dianna Burns and Pat Zacharias came to do special research for the Commission during the last half of 
the term. They have both given valuable service and in doing so have been most co-operative and 
congenial. 
 
We also wish to express our sincere appreciation to all those other people in the province who have 
spoken and written to us about Senior Citizens’ concerns, and especially the Senior Citizens who 
spoke from their knowledge and years of experience. 

 
Obviously since the Members have not read this I will read the contents. On page 2 we had the 
members; on page 3, the acknowledgements. 
 
The report, “Old Friends” it is called and I am sure, Mr. Speaker, they won’t find many old friends on 
that side of the House. This is on page 7 and I will deal with “Old Friends”. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — . .  Davey . .  
 
Mr. Steuart: — I beg your pardon. If the Hon. Member has something to say I will be glad if you want 
to stand up and I will answer any questions. In fact I think the old pensioners would be very happy if 
you stand up and said a word for them sometime. You had your opportunity, you could have seconded 
the Motion, you could have stood up and you could have been a hero. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — . .  second the Motion. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — We did second the Motion, Mr. Premier. You weren’t here. 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Why didn’t you let your seconder speak? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Oh, he will get his chance. 
 

In February of 1973, the Provincial Government appointed a nine-member Commission. 
 
I might point out, Mr. Speaker, they only did that after they 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2161 

were forced to do that by a Resolution introduced by the Members of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — 
 

The task of this Commission was to study and report on the needs of the elderly. 
 
This report is based on the study and impressions of the members in their short year of investigation. 
 
This final report contains the major recommendation of the Senior Citizens’ Commission. 
 
In order to acquaint you with the older person, it is important to know just how many people this 
includes in Saskatchewan. 
 
All of the numbers we will use in our count are of elderly people 65 years or more. 
 
It is somewhat difficult to say this report isn’t about anyone under 65 years. 
 
This report is about all people who believe they’re getting older. 
 
Guess that includes everyone. 
 
At this moment, one in every ten of us in this province 
is over 65 years of age. 
 
For a total of approximately 98,000. 
 
One in every ten over 65 years of age 
is over 85. 
 
Approximately 9,800 people in this province were born in or before 1888. 
 
A lot of things have happened since 1888. 
 
Many things will still happen. 
 
Much change is to come. 

 
And I am sure the individual who wrote that page, Mr. Speaker, didn’t really know the NDP very well if 
he thought those changes would come very rapidly. 
 
Now the next page is a page of an elderly lady here with a wash tub, living in a very modest little 
cottage. Page 13 goes on to say: 
 

It is interesting to know something about changes after you become 65 years of age. 
 
I would like the Members to note this very well. 
 

You generally have less money. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2162 

This year there are some 60,000 people over 65 years of age receiving a supplement in addition to 
their Old Age Security. 
 
Some 25,000 receive the full Federal supplement. 
 
Today a single person on Old Age Security plus full supplement receives $183.99 every month. 
 
A married couple over 65 on Old Age Security and full supplement receive $351.02. 
 
This figures out yearly to $2,207.88 if you’re single and $4,212.24 if you are married. 

 
Just before page 15, for you people who are following me, there is a picture of an old gentleman with his 
eyes quite wide open. He is sitting on a bed and he looks a little surprised. I think he just got the news of 
what the NDP are not about to do. I show that, this is very interesting. I think that he just got the news 
that the NDP would not even discuss his need for extra allowances after the senior citizens presented 
their brief to them this afternoon. Now on page 15: 
 

Many people have ideas about poverty. 
As many, we suppose, as the number of poverty lines these people draw. 
 
Ask yourself if $2,207.88 is enough yearly income for any single person? 
 
Can a couple live in 1974 on $4,212.24. 
 
We believe a majority of Saskatchewan people over 65 years of age are living in a condition of 
poverty. 
 
This situation is not unique to older people. 
 
Poverty cuts across every age. 
 
Many people are remarkably insensitive to the real facts of poverty, in Saskatchewan 
 
in Canada 
 
or any nation. 
 
We urge the province to continue it’s efforts Federally toward the establishment of a Guaranteed 
Annual Income Program for all people. 
 

We believe that $350 for individuals and $250 for each person of a couple are the minimum acceptable 
monthly levels of guarantee for the aged in Canada. 
 
I am not sure why the Members opposite find this so humorous. I don’t think the people who make this 
report, people who live below these incomes find it very humorous at all, especially when they know 
that Members of this Legislative Assembly earn $13,000 or $14,000 or $15,000 plus the other incomes 
they have. The next page says: “If wishes were horses.” On page 21 it says: 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2163 

Commissions are established for a number of reasons change is supposed to be one. 
 
More often they are established so government can do nothing for a time. 
 
Time and time again reports are shelved, having no prior commitment, 
to get dusty and forgotten 
so no change comes. 
 
Is this Commission any exception? 

 
The question that this Commission asks of this House, unfortunately, is being answered in part by the 
lack of action of the Government and the Members opposite. On page 23: 
 

If a study committee is established shortly 
after our report, as in the past, 
 
and sees only how long 
the government can safely rest 
 
before 
considering 
 
one or two 
of the more minor changes recommended, 
 
they will miss entirely the importance of the main recommendation. 
 
Bureaucrats and their struggle to preserve 
 
stand strongly, resisting change. 
 
This is where the only opposition will come. 
 
We have seen many recommendations, many reports, committees and study groups thrown out by the 
bureaucracy’s resistance to change. 

 
And unfortunately in this attitude, Mr. Speaker, the Government opposite seems only too willing to 
co-operate. This is where the only opposition will come. We have seen many recommendations, many 
reports, committees and study groups, thrown out by the bureaucracy’s resistance to change. 
 

We like to believe, have faith in, 
the process of democratic change. 
 
When so few at the top 
stand in the way, 
 
it is often difficult to see this principle. 
 
There is a struggle that goes deeper and penetrates further than realized. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2164 

All of this is sadly a reflection, 
 
a mirror of ourselves. 
 
All of this is only a part of what 
goes on every day 
every way. 
 
In 1963 an “Aged and Long-Term Illness Committees” reported. 
 
Little came of the report 
 
with the exception of dust. 
 
We hope there is more prior commitment by the government today 
 
to this report than the past years have seen. 
 
There must be a change 
if change is to come. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the next part of the report is called, “Through the looking glass”. It begins as follows: 
 

To understand an older person, 
 
it is essential to speak of change, 
 
and it’s relationship to growing older with time; 
 
time that is changing. 
 
Since 1900, 1800, 1700 . .  
 
change has been under opposition and struggle 
 
change has come, 
 
through the idealism of each age. 
 
Through ages we have seen simplicity and complexity, 
 
more information and education, 
 
the development of techniques in order to produce better or more. 
 
Competition as a base for advancement and equality 
 
has been built into our lives. 
 
The old have seen a goal-orientated world forming, 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2165 

again and again, 
 
We are told we can rise above it all. 
 
The design of our society is to pursue an ideal, 
 
many live within the myth of progress 
 
production has changed 
 
creating the technology of this age present before us all, 
 
working for us? 
 
A necessary part of production is said to be efficiency, 
 
translated to mean savings of money, material and man 
 
in that order, 
 
Why is it not working? 
 
We produce more than we are capable of knowing 
 
Know more than we can sometimes understand. 
 
Distribute with more inequality and waste. 
 
Struggling through the advertising and display 
 
our age 
 
one of plastic and glass and steel invention 
 
encasing our bodies, framing the mind. 
 
Witnessing breakdown of family society and man. 
 
It is difficult to understand, why we have not begun much sooner to correct these wrongs 
 
The old are somewhat slowed by it all, 
 
many not having the skills required, are forced to stop, compelled to retire, obligated to move to one 
side. 
 
People no longer able to produce 
 
Only consume every year 
 
More . .  inadequate housing 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2166 

limited services 
unnutritious food 
drugs 
hearing aids 
medical care 
hospital beds 
nursing home beds . .  
 
Every day they experience the produce of changes 
 
the decades have given changes that have pushed man to one side. 
 
Man alone in alienation. 
 
Older men and women facing life alone 
without assurance. 
 
Women particularly oppressed, 
not having been free to discover an identity, and acquire skills to use in living removed from 
homemaking and motherhood, regular income and pension. 
 
An older person in Saskatchewan, has roots built primarily, on working the land. 
 
They know the meaning of co-operation through: 
 
family farms 
barn raising 
quilting bees 
church circles 
one-room school houses 
sleigh rides 
barn dances 
home made ice cream 
apple pie 
 
Past remembrances. Memories of a heritage. 
 
Times were 
 
work and play were in closer harmony, family life was important, 
 
reverent. 
 
Social and community life was for all the family. 
 
Times saw a change, 
 
a dramatic, rapid change. 
 
Self-sufficiency to reliance and dependence, within a few decades. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2167 

Movement from rural to urban, 
 

partly because of money 
partly for security 
partly because the land no longer offered the promises the young had heard of in the big cities 

 
the promises of technology blinded, 
 
unable to see what might happen 
 
as values for self increased 
 
value for others diminished 
 
Co-operation replaced by self-interest. 
 
Without the family unit of grandparents, parents and children as closely tied as before, 
 
older persons tended to live alone more, move to more nursing homes, special care homes and 
boarding houses, or share homes with other older persons. 
 
As family responsibilities narrowed, with larger and larger numbers of older persons, community 
integration became less spontaneous, 
 
with family ties further apart 
 
the old family responsibilities 
 
gradually shifted to community concern and obligation and government commitment. 
 
Old age has become the object of a policy. 

 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I have read half of the report and I’ve given them a chance to think this over and 
I am going to again ask for leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You can’t, Dave. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Is that a fact, Mr. Speaker, if I make the same motion I have to sit down? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think that is true. The Member asked leave to adjourn and the House has refused so 
he must continue his speech at this time. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Well, then make yourselves comfortable because I’ll be here for awhile. There wasn’t 
an NDP born that could put down a Liberal today, tomorrow or any day in this House. You can use your 
big majority all you want, Mr. House Leader, you can use it all you want, it won’t avail you anything. If 
you think that by using that, we were aware what your little trick was. You didn’t want to speak to this, 
your Members didn’t even want to second it. But once it was on the books we knew 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2168 

exactly what you wanted to do, you wanted to rise, probably take a few cuts at the Federal Government 
and then adjourn it and let it stand on the Order Paper as you are doing. This is something that this 
Government has done, what that side of the House has done whenever there is a resolution they don’t 
like, or a motion they don’t like . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! There is a Member on his feet. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Page 61: 
 

The Senior Citizens’ Commission had a task that involved getting out into Saskatchewan and 
personally talking with people about their needs, wants and desires. 
 
Because of our involvement, it became increasingly clear to this Commission that two basic problems 
were repeated over and over again. People, older persons particularly, do not have adequate access to 
any information that is necessary for making decisions. This problem was evident as we discussed 
areas of housing, community services and health care, with older people. 
 
The older person in this province simply does not have any information about services and programs 
that do exist or about alternatives that could be available in housing, community services or health 
care. Rural Saskatchewan had considerably less information about these areas than did large urban 
centres, although the confusion and problem of “where to go for this or that” was common to both 
rural and urban older people. 
 
If the myriad of government agencies and departments are confusing even to the long time public 
servant, can you imagine the difficulty of the old in this province. It is clearly beyond words. 
 
Secondly, having a voice, “believing you have a say”, knowing your ideas and concerns are 
considered, is a necessary and important part of anyone’s life. We discovered that older people feel 
they have little or no voice in the areas of housing, community services and health care; basic areas 
that directly affect their lives. 
 
To not have information about these basic areas, to have no voice in these areas, is tragic indeed. 
Without the necessary information, it is difficult to obtain opinions about the housing older persons 
preferred, what community and health services they would like to see available. Without a way of 
making your voice known, the problems of planning community and health services or housing to 
meet individual needs become compounded. 
 
The elderly, for the most part, are segregated from the mainstream of society. As we have indicated, 
with the advent of retirement, thus the loss of productive worth, the elderly are pushed to one side. The 
mind of government is serving the interests of big business, labour and the professions, only gives 
token recognition to those who are not tied to these interests; namely the very poor and the aged. We 
believe the element of productive worth has been a great factor in the exclusion of the elderly from 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2169 

their right to programs and services and their lack of involvement in the planning process. 
 
Independence should be an integral part of life. Older persons prefer to live in their own homes and 
remain there as long as possible. This point was made over and over during the course of our study. It 
is suggested that ground-level, single and double self-contained housing units were the alternatives of 
choice by the elderly. Special care and nursing homes were seen as only useful if one was no longer 
able to remain independent. 
 
Older persons saw great value in having access to services through community based programs that 
would allow them to continue to remain at home. These service programs can broadly be defined as 
preventive, insofar as they ensure the older individual the independence and dignity of remaining 
healthy and at home. 
 
Services that presently exist in our province are fragmented and without co-ordination. Basic services 
primarily of this preventive nature for the elderly, are under two departments; the Department of 
Public Health and the Department of Social Services. These two basic services are Home Nursing 
Care (i.e. orderly services, physiotherapy, occupational therapy) and Community Services (i.e. meal 
service, homemaker, phone-call-a-day, visiting services and recreational). We commend the 
government for the work in these two service areas. However, we believe that these services mark 
only the beginning of a necessary ongoing commitment. 
 
The Senior Citizens’ Commission has recognized the difficulty experienced by the elderly in not 
having access to a single, identifiable group to provide services. We believe these two service areas of 
Home Nursing Care and Community Services presently provided by the two departments of Public 
Health and Social Services should receive a large increase in financial support and be integrated 
formally into an agency. 
 
In summary, in order to ensure the elderly access and availability to these services, a provincial system 
based on information, co-ordination and referral should be the building block of this agency. 
 
In order to ensure the elderly a voice in determining needs and planning services to meet these needs, 
a provincial system of councils should be tied to the agency to allow for citizen participation through 
planning and decision making. 
 
RECOMMENDATION: 

 
And I wish the Hon. Members would pay serious attention to this first recommendation. 
 

The Senior Citizens’ Commission urges the provincial government to establish an Agency as part of a 
new deal for the elderly in Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2170 

Mr. Messer: — Wake them up, Dave. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — It’s you I’m trying to wake up, the Government I’m trying to wake up. I’m trying to 
wake you up to your own responsibility, but you sit there arrogantly using your power to try and stifle 
free speech in this House and I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, as long as the Liberal Party is alive, as it is and 
active, this will never happen. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, there is a little chart here and I’d like to explain it to the Members. Jack, Roy 
will get you if you speak up. Remember the new look for the NDP. Land is beautiful, it’s also black, but 
it’s beautiful. On the top of the chart we have the Government, then there’s the Minister responsible to 
the Government, Social Service, Health, and then they want provincial councils for planning, decision 
making and assessment. They want regional councils and local councils, they want provincial 
consultants, technical assistance, information, regional co-ordinators, community services, home nursing 
care. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to make a few comments on 
this Resolution and I would like to leave page 65 that the Leader of the Opposition has been so 
brilliantly reading and continue with page 66. This page is headed “The Agency”. 
 

Purpose: 
 
1. To provide for the delivery of community services and home nursing care services to the elderly in 
their own home, in order to ensure independence and well being. 
 
2. To ensure communication to the highest levels of government through the provision of a provincial 
system of information, co-ordination and referral. 
 
Objectives: 
 
1. To develop a community base for research at the local level in order to document the needs of the 
elderly. 

 
2. To involve the elderly in the development of programs and services sensitive to their needs. 

 
3. To stimulate community involvement in meeting the needs of the elderly: 

 
(a) Encouraging citizen participation and public awareness of needs and resources. 
 
(b) Development of planning groups in order to assess the needs at a local level. 
 

4. To provide resources required to develop programs and services for/by the elderly. 
 
5. To provide the elderly with programs and services of a preventive nature, in their place of residence, 
in order to ensure personal dignity and independence, through a method that will stimulate the 
involvement of the elderly into a mainstream of life. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2171 

6. To develop public awareness in respect to the special aspects of aging: 
 

(a) Continuing Education, Pre-retirement Counselling 
(b) Employment and retirement, pensions. 

 
Local Council 
 
Purpose: 
 
To represent local interests in providing services to the elderly. 
 
Objectives: 
 
1. To represent the views of the elderly. 
 
2. To set guidelines for the growth of community programs for the aged. 
 
3. To serve as a bureau where Senior Citizens can voice their concerns or criticisms of community 
service and to seek solutions for these matters locally or through regional representation. 

 
4. To co-ordinate existing services for the aged within that locale. 

 
5. To prompt community action in meeting the needs of their elderly. 

 
6. To provide a representative from the local Council to sit on the Regional Council. These delegates 
would represent the views of their area in: 

 
(a) Establishing regional guidelines for community development. 
 
(b) Providing information concerning local activity. 
 
(c) Advising in the allotment of monies for program budgets. 
 

7. To act as a central organizing body for all other groups and individuals active within that locale. 
 

8. To establish an information, co-ordination and referral centre to carry out the objectives of the 
Local Council. 

 
Local Council Guidelines: 
 

1. Council membership must include Senior Citizens and those people in the community who are 
involved in services to the aged. 

 
2. The Council must ensure the representation of its Senior Citizens through 60% of its number being 
pensionable age or over. 

 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2172 

3. The initial council representing up to five communities must number no more than five allowing 
each additional participating community to provide one council member until the council reaches its 
maximum number of twelve members. 

 
4. Council may meet as often as it wishes but no less than twice a month. 

 
5. Council must be a legally recognized society meeting the requirements of The Societies Act. 

 
Page 69: 
 
LOCAL INFORMATION, CO-ORDINATION, REFERRAL CENTRE 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other comments that I would like to make about this problem before the 
House on another date and I would beg leave to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The adjournment was negatived on the following Recorded Division. 
 

YEAS — 14 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart 
Coupland 
Loken 
Buy 
Boldt 

Grant 
MacDonald (Milestone) 
McIsaac 
Gardner 
Weatherald 

Lane 
MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 
Wiebe 
Malone 

 
NAYS — 33 

Messieurs 
 
Dyck 
Meakes 
Romanow 
Messer 
Snyder 
Thibault 
Larson 
Baker 
Brockelbank 
MacMurchy 
Pepper 

Michayluk 
Whelan 
Kwasnica 
Carlson 
Engel 
Cody 
Tchorzewski 
Taylor 
Matsalla 
Faris 
Owens 

Mostoway 
Gross 
Feduniak 
Comer 
Rolfes 
Lange 
Hanson 
Oliver 
Feschuk 
Kaeding 
Flasch 

 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, before continuing with the reading of the Senior Citizens’ Report, I 
should like to say to you and to the Members opposite that I seconded this Motion today, for the reason 
that I agree with it completely. I must say that I did not know that it was on the Order Paper until about 
1:00 o’clock this afternoon. As a result, I did not have time to prepare any remarks to give to this 
Assembly. I would have hoped that the Government might have shown the same courtesy that the 
Opposition shows to them and would have allowed this debate to be adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2173 

Mr. Malone: — They apparently are not prepared to do that and I might say as well that I’ve been in 
this House not very long, but I’ve noticed on several occasions that the Attorney General has given very 
vigorous speeches and has conducted great criticisms of the Opposition and gone on and on at great 
length and always ends up by saying that he wants to adjourn the debate and I don’t think on one single 
occasion since I’ve been in this House, have we refused to allow him to do that. So I think that should be 
pointed out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, if I could continue then, on page 69 of the report which is headed: 
 

LOCAL INFORMATION, CO-ORDINATION, REFERRAL CENTRE 
 
Purpose: 
 
To carry out the instructions of the Local Council in meeting their objectives. 
 
Duties: 
 
1. General: 
 

(a) To work with the Regional Co-ordinator at the local level in the presentation and explanation of 
community program packages established by the provincial agency. 
 
(b) To advise local groups and individuals in matters of regional concern such as: 
 

(i) regional guidelines regulating local program activity. 
(ii) Funds available for developing program ideas. 
(iii) Information about activities and ideas employed in other communities. 
 

(c) To catalogue detailed information concerning the needs and services of the elderly. This data 
would include: 
 

(i) Records of service activity enabling the Local Council to maintain reliable information about 
their community. 
(ii) Records of ideas and issues brought to the attention of the centre by Senior Citizens. 

 
Such information would provide assistance to: 
 
(i) The local Council in their decision-making. 
(ii) The Regional Co-ordinator in planning the direction and nature of regional programming. 
(iii) The Provincial Council and Agency consultants in making realistic decisions within 
government. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2174 

(d) To provide the Region with locally gathered information relating to any specific research 
project conducted by the Provincial Council. 

 
2. Specific: 

 
(a) To co-ordinate Home nursing care and community services for Senior Citizens: 
 

(i) As viewed by the government these services have equal authority to the information, 
Co-ordination, Referral Centre. Therefore, the role of the Centre is to assist these community 
groups through: 
 

- Assuring the use of their programs by informing inquirers of services available to them 
and referring the person to the organization which best meets his or her needs. 
- Assisting services with resources, i.e. volunteer support, telephone answering service, 
advertising, etc. 
- Involving people in discussion of services at community meetings to develop ideas 
and interest in these local activities. 

 
(ii) Where these services do not exist the information, Co-ordination, Referral Centre will 
assume the responsibility of establishing programs to respond to the needs defined by it’s Local 
and Regional Council. 
 

(b) To establish study/action group meetings to discuss issues of mutual concern to the Senior 
Citizen, i.e. housing, tax exemptions, transportation, etc. This encourages local groups to take action 
in meeting these needs within their community. 
 
(c) To provide a central registry of information to match the needs of the elderly with the services 
available for them. Additional information the Centre will have to assist its work are community 
service programming packages developed by the provincial agency. These packages will be made 
available to interested groups and individuals and the Centre will assist them with this information in 
establishing community services for the aged. 
 

Local Information, Co-ordination, Referral Centre Guidelines: 
 

1. Established by the Local Council through a Community Development Grant provided by the 
Provincial Agency. The Province will finance 80% of the salary costs; the Local Council will assume 
the balance of the financial responsibility. 
 
2. Staffing and work schedule are determined by the Local Council. 
 
3. Local Council provides the guidelines for staff activities. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2175 

4. Staff may advise the Local Council in their decision-making. 
 
Page 72. 
 

REGIONAL COUNCIL 
 
Purpose: 
 
To provide the Local Councils with Regional Authority in matters concerning the assessment of the 
needs of the elderly; and decision regarding the development of community programs and services. 
 
Objectives: 
 

1. To agree on a regional course which reflects the interests as decided by local communities. 
 
2. To describe local needs through regional pursuits of provincial policy: 
 

(a) based on facts obtained through the local system of data collection drawing comparisons and 
showing trends which point out inadequate service and needed development. 

 
3. To co-ordinate local activities when it would prove more economical or beneficial to work 
together as a region; i.e. in programs that require pre-determined attendance. 
 
4. Seek to provide solutions to local problems that are referred to the regional council. Eg. 
Complaints or suggestions regarding administration of special care homes. Eg. Program financing. 
 
5. To make decisions regarding allocation of finances and budget appraisals: 
 

(a) approve final submissions from individual community service programs (i.e. Home Nursing 
Care and Meals on Wheels). 

 
6. To co-operate with regional representatives on inter-government problems. 
 
7. To develop associate membership to act as a resource pool for the appointed council: 
 

(a) Pursued affiliation — Regional Staff of: 
(i) Public Health — eg. Institution boards. 
(ii) Social Services — eg. Existing Councils. 
(iii) Education — eg. Community Colleges. 
(iv) Municipal Government. 
(v) Library. 
(vi) Community Workers — eg. H.R.D.A. 
 

8. To send delegates from the regional council to represent the concerns of their region when 
developing policies at the provincial council. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2176 

THE REGIONAL CO-ORDINATOR 
 

Purpose: 
 

As a permanent employee of the provincial government the person hired shall: 
 

1. Fulfill the duties as defined by the establishment of the provincial agency. 
 
2. Be accountable to the agency director and regional council. 
 
3. Work in close consultation with other regional co-ordinators and the provincial resource persons. 
 
4. Would be knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to community work and programs. 
 

Interim Duties: 
 

The regional co-ordinator will: 
 
1. Begin working in an area of the province where some program development exists. 
 
2. Be responsible for co-ordinating activities with communities that work well together and are 
capable of defining as a region. 
 
3. Assess which communities would co-operate effectively in forming Local Area Councils to 
represent their needs. 

 
Local Interim Activity: 
 

The first concern of the regional co-ordinator will be to become acquainted with the members of 
local communities and aware of their contributions to the social activity in progress. 
 
1. Support must be gained by communication with local councils on aging, community service 
oriented organizations; 
 

Eg. Church Councils, 
Special Care Home Boards 
Line Departments 

and individuals (eg. Librarian, V.O.N.) involved in service capacities. 
 
2. A planning group is formed to: 
 

(a) Encourage an atmosphere of co-operation between volunteer groups and the proposed 
agency. 
(b) Involve and inform the community. 
(c) Encourage community participation & involvement in planning and program development. 
(d) Publicize and stimulate interest and participation in the public meeting. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2177 

Ongoing Duties of the Regional Co-ordinator: 
 

A. To arrange a public meeting in the local community: 
 

1. To explain the establishment of a provincial agency to co-ordinate services and develop programs 
for/by the elderly. 
 

(a) To more actively involve Senior Citizens in the community. 
(b) To develop support services that will afford independence to elderly persons in their homes 
or within institutions. 
(c) To create public awareness in regard to the changes that occur upon growing older. 

 
2. To outline the structure and function of the projected Agency: 
 
(a) Purpose (Provide for Community Service): 

(i) To compile information on available services to match needs of the elderly to resources and 
keep account of unmet needs. 
 

(b) Priorities: 
(i) Emphasis will be placed on the immediate needs distinguished for Community Services and 
home nursing care based on the findings of the Senior Citizens’ Commission inquiry. 
 
(ii) An immediate goal of the agency will be to build a communication network between the 
local community and the provincial government; i.e. through a centre for information 
co-ordination and referral service. 
 
(iii) To introduce a preventive component to ensure the elderly improved physical health and 
independence and enriched quality of life by providing adequate home nursing care and 
community services. 

 
(c) Finances: 

(i) Grants for both existing and developing community service programs shall be obtained 
through the Local Council. 
- avoiding overlapping and duplication of services. 
 
(ii) Established programs shall receive direct funding from the province on approval of the 
Regional Council. 
 
(iii) Newly developed programs that have received provincial approval on recommendation from 
the regional shall be funded through the Regional Council. 
 

(d) Membership on Local Council: 
(i) Each participating community must be guaranteed at least one voting representative on the 
Local Council. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2178 

3. To receive nominations for positions on the Local Council for election at the public meetings in 
the local community, clearly indicating the level of necessary involvement for those appointed: 
 

(a) Frequency of Meetings – The Council shall meet as often as desired but is required to meet 
no less than twice a month. 
 
(b) Senior Citizen Majority – In order to truly represent the needs and desired (concerns) 
(wishes) of our senior population, the Council must be composed of no less than 60% of persons 
of pensionable age or over. 
 
(c) Location – As more than one community will be represented, meetings may rotate. 
 

B. To act as a direct tie in communication between the Local Community worker and the Agency staff 
at the provincial level. 
 

1. To report on local evaluation of services (data suggesting direction for program development) and 
required research. 
 
2. To inform the person responsible locally of provincial policy: 
 

(a) Distribute provincially prepared information on all government policy and directions in 
programs. 
- organizing the information so it is easily obtainable and supervise its distribution at the local 
level. 
 

3. To assist and give guidance with matters involving community service development: 
 

(a) To train the local community worker to increase efficiency and ensure a level of competency. 
 
(b) To explain program package material as a means of ensuring the proper data is recorded and 
categorized. 
 
(c) To make clear and understandable, aspects of the service programs: 
 

(i) Advise on: 
- Operation of home nursing care and community service programs. 
- Conditions of eligibility for community program subscription; i.e. budget and 
finances. 
 

4. To provide knowledge regarding budget allocation and financing. 
 
5. To define steps to assist in operation of programs. I.E. evaluation of community acceptance or 
need. 
 

C. To co-ordinate local activity by establishing a Regional Council composed of local representatives: 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2179 

1. Assure equal representation from Local Councils: 
 

(a) Suggest payment of small sum of money to alleviate travel expenses. 
 

2. Act as an advisor to the Regional Council, acquainting it with provincial policy, program 
information and reports on local activity: 

(a) Prepares information outlining trends in local activity. 
(b) Does comparative evaluation studies of program effectiveness throughout the region. 
(c) To ensure that unorganised territories that lack service be given a voice at the regional level 
and priority be placed on initiating program development in these areas. 
 

3. Assuming responsibility for arranging for meeting times, reserving space and informing local 
representatives to the Regional Council. 
 

D. Interaction with Provincial Consultants: 
 

1. Regional co-ordinators and provincial consultants share responsibility to develop a total picture of 
provincial concern and co-operate to co-ordinate provincial activity. 
 
This naturally will necessitate regular meetings or frequent workshop sessions. 
 
2. Regional Co-ordinators will maintain close contact: 
 

(a) Through planning sessions evolved around implementing programs. 
 
(b) Co-operate for conducting in-service training. 
 
(c) Formulate regional boundaries and mutual areas of future co-operation. 
 

PROVINCIAL COUNCIL 
 
The purpose and objectives of the Provincial Council are the same as those outlined for the entire 
Agency. 
 
PROVINCIAL CONSULTANT TEAM 
 
Purpose: To provide technical assistance to the Agency in meeting the objectives outlined by the 
Minister and the Provincial Council. 
 
Objectives are outlined for each consultant in the following section. 
 
PROVINCIAL CONSULTANTS 
 
Program Consultant — Social Services: 
 

1. To be responsible for the preparation of material concerning community services (i.e. homemaker, 
meals on wheels, phone-call-a-day, recreation services, transportation, activity centres, aides 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2180 

to independent living, personal services): 
 

(a) Ways and means of service delivery. 
(b) Evaluation of service program at a local level (in consultation with the research consultant) 
- this will be a package of material included for local level action and use. 
 

2. Assume responsibilities for aggregation of budgets locally assessed and regionally approved for 
presentation to the provincial government for funding. 
 
3. To work in co-operation with the government department of Social Services in terms of proposed 
universal programs, their consideration and implementation with respect to the elderly. 
 
4. To act as an advisor to the regional co-ordinator in these matters. 
 

Program Consultant — Home Nursing Care 
 

1. To be responsible for the preparation of material concerning home nursing care 
 

(a) Ways and means of service delivery 
 
(b) Evaluation of service program at a local level (in consultation with the research consultant) 
- this will be package material included for local level action and use. 
 

2. Assume responsibilities for aggregation of budgets locally assessed and regionally approved for 
presentation to the provincial government for funding. 
 
3. To work in co-operation with the government department of Public Health in terms of proposed 
universal programs, their consideration and implementation with respect to the elderly. 
 
4. To act as an advisor to the regional co-ordinator in these matters. 
 

Research Consultant 
 

1. To work in an advisory capacity with the regional co-ordinator determining the programs and 
services best developed to meet the requirements at a local, regional and provincial level. 
 
2. To assume broad responsibilities for on-going research projects either through the agency or in 
co-operation with other various government departments and agencies. 
 
These research projects include: 
 

(a) Since there is evidence that the number of level 1 and 2 beds in this province should be 
reduced, a study shall be undertaken with a view to recommending the ways and means of 
implementation. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2181 

(b) Since there is evidence that level 3 care costs are a serious financial problem to our elderly 
people, an insured service for level 3 should be implemented immediately, and a study shall be 
undertaken with a view to recommending the amount of room and board to be charged. 
 
(c) To undertake a feasibility study to determine if level 4 should be assessed a room and board 
charge. 
 
(d) Since there is strong evidence that ground level, subsidized self-contained housing units 
(single and double) are required in Saskatchewan communities, a study shall be undertaken in 
order to determine the numbers, location and type (design) of these units, in order to ensure 
integration of the elderly to the mainstream of life. 
 
(e) Since there are specific transportation requirements of the elderly not presently met on a 
provincial basis, a study shall be undertaken in order to determine the ways and means of 
facilitating and developing a voluntary transportation service, subsidized taxi service, to include 
school buses. 
 
(f) Since the high cost of prescription drugs is a heavy burden to the elderly, a study shall be 
undertaken with a view to outlining the specific requirements of an insured drug program. 
 
(g) Since adequate eye care for elderly persons is not readily available, a study shall be 
undertaken with a view to outlining a comprehensive sight-screening program, with a 
supplementary study undertaken to determine the feasibility of an insured total eye care program 
for the elderly. 
 
(h) Since chiropody services are almost non-existent in this province, a study shall be undertaken 
with a view to outlining the program to assure comprehensive chiropody services. 
 
(i) To determine the feasibility of greater involvement of the elderly in day care activities for 
people of all ages. 
 
(j) To work out a method of bringing library resources to the home, to assure greater availability 
and access to ethnic and handicapped individual requests. 
 
(k) To study and recommend ways of involving those persons in special care facilities in 
community activities for the elderly. 
 
(l) To study the feasibility of a mobile hearing aid unit to ensure greater accessibility of this 
service to the elderly. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2182 

(m) To study the feasibility of a provincial pension program which will ensure full portability 
and vesting rights. 
 

Information Consultant: 
 

1. To prepare a monthly agency bulletin that will include (aside from general policy) 
 

(a) Reports of the various services being delivered by the agency. 
 
(b) Information about services the agency can refer to other provincial departments and 
private agencies. 
 
(c) Interest items from the local area councils with a view to bringing the region(s) 
together more closely around specific issues and programs. 
 

2. To assist the provincial consultants in the most effective ways of providing material to be used 
in the local area, i.e. material to be used for the collection of data regarding the needs of the 
elderly. 
 
3. To provide general information to the various government departments in order to keep them 
informed about the agency. 
 
4. To prepare news releases and pamphlets, meeting announcements, in line with the over-all 
direction and policy of the agency. 
 
- The Information Consultant will be instrumental in using the ways and means of bringing 
elderly people together through information gathering and sharing by way of the news bulletins. 
This bulletin would outline the agency to various people and indicate those in the agency 
responsible at the local area, regional area and provincial area for the overall direction of the 
agency. 
 

Educational Consultant: 
 

1. Responsibilities include the preparation of material for use at a local level in order to develop 
public awareness in respect to the special aspects of aging 
 

(a) Involvement at a medical education level . .  sponsorship of an on-going continuing 
medical education program on aging for the health professionals. 
 
(b) Involvement in staff training programs for those involved in any way with the care of 
the elderly: 

(i) Institutional care 
(ii) Community Services i.e. homemakers and nursing home care. 
 

2. To work in the broader educational areas with institutions in developing curricula within 
courses with respect to the special aspects of aging: 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2183 

(a) University, Schools of Social Work, Theological Colleges. 
(b) Public Schools, Separate Schools, High Schools, Community Colleges, Institutes of 
Applied Arts and Sciences. 
 

3. To be responsible for the preparation of material for use in 
 

(a) preventive Health Education for the elderly. 
 
(b) Seminars on legal rights, pensions, etc. 

 
The Educational Consultant and the Information Consultant shall work towards the preparation of 
material to be presented through the media with a view to informing people with regard to the 
special aspects of aging. This may take the form of contracting film or video presentation for 
television, preparation of radio program material, articles for newspaper and magazine. 
 
MAKING IT WORK 
 
In order to lay the groundwork and develop the background for the Agency, it is the suggestion of 
the Senior Citizens’ Commission that an interim Provincial Council be established in order to assist 
the Minister(s) in matters regarding 
 

(a) Staff selection at a provincial level. 
 
(b) Recruitment of Regional Co-ordinators. 
 
(c) Training and education of the Provincial and Regional Staff towards the establishment of the 
Agency at the Local level, Regional and Provincial level. 
 

It is suggested that the Agency begin with a director, an administrator, six provincial consultants, six 
regional co-ordinators and up to six local Information, Co-ordination and Referral personnel per 
region for a total of 36 local people. 
 
In order to establish the Regional boundaries of the Agency, the six co-ordinators will work in broad 
areas of the province. Boundaries will not be imposed, as the regional co-ordinators are to attempt to 
inject sensitivity into defining the regions, perhaps culturally; also being aware of possible 
developments in the area of coterminous boundaries for Departments of Health and Social Services. 
 
THE APPENDIX 
 
CONSTITUTION 
 
Local Council 
 
Incorporation under The Societies Act: 
 

1. The council must ensure the representation of its Senior Citizens through 60% of its number 
being the pensionable age or over. 
 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2184 

2. The initial council including up to five communities must number no more than five allowing 
each new participating community to provide one council member until the council reaches its 
maximum of twelve members. 
 
3. A term of office for the council member shall be two years with no member holding a position 
for more than two consecutive terms. Following the initiating two year term, half of the council 
must seek re-election and half of the council must be carried over the next year. 
 
This will ensure a rotating membership every year of one-half the members. 
 

Responsibilities 
 

PROVINCIAL 
 

1. To consider remuneration for those caring for relatives. 
2. Unannounced inspection and evaluation of nursing homes. 
3. Consideration of tax reduction on property for those over 65 years of age. 
4. To consider an insured dental care program for those over 65 years of age. 
5. Special Care and Nursing Homes should only have a 95% occupancy rate to allow for emergency 
and short stays. 
6. Consideration of regulations for the admittance of mentally ill patients in chronic care facilities 
and special care facilities. 
7. Special care homes should have a minimum number of double rooms. 
8. Doors in special care facilities should be equipped with locks to ensure privacy. 
9. Since special care homes are for the comfort of the elderly and not the convenience of the staff, 
there should be more flexibility in services and meals at hours determined by individual choice. 
10. Mandatory medical checkups on a regular basis by physicians for those in Nursing and Special 
Care Homes. 
11. No highrise developments should be built until alternatives are adequately presented to the 
elderly and every effort made to give the elderly an opportunity to integrate with other persons of 
various ages, (i.e. floor separation of young and old with common recreation facilities). 
12. Encouragement of co-operative housing developments for those elderly people able to invest. 
13. In any housing development, ground level suites should be for the elderly. 
14. When one person of a couple enters a special care home, the assets should be divided equally, 
regardless of income or finances. 
15. That the recommendation 89 of the Status of Women in Canada report be implemented: 

“89. Therefore, we recommend that those provinces and territories, which have not already done 
so, amend their law in order to recognize the concept of equal partnership in marriage so that the 
contribution of each spouse to the marriage partnership may be acknowledged and that, upon the 
dissolution of the marriage, each will have a right to an equal share in the assets accumulated 
during marriage otherwise than by gift or inheritance received by either spouse from 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2185 

outside sources.” 
 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be hearing at great length from the Attorney General on 
this particular Resolution later this evening. 
 
FEDERAL 
 

1. Pensions to be available at 60 years of age. 
 
2. There should be no compulsory retirement allowed. 
 
3. That the recommendation 103 of the Status of Women in Canada report be implemented: 
 

“103. Therefore, we recommend that (a) both the Canada and the Quebec Pension Plans be 
amended so that the spouse who remains at home can participate in the Plan, and (b) the 
feasibility be explored of 

(i) crediting to the spouse remaining at home a portion of the contributions of the 
employed spouse and those contributions made by the employer on the employed 
spouse’s behalf and 
(ii) on an optional basis, permitting the spouse at home to contribute as a self-employed 
worker.” 
 

The Study 
 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
 
It is recorded in “Votes and Proceedings” of the Saskatchewan Legislature of April 21, 1972, that: 
 
“Resolution (No. 18) was moved by Mr. Steuart, seconded by Mr. Grant: That this Assembly 
recommends to the Government of Saskatchewan that it set up a special senior citizens’ provincial 
commission upon which senior citizens’ organizations will have representation to study and report 
on the following: 
 
(a) The need for a special provincial government department for senior citizens headed by a 
competent person of mature age. 
(b) Nursing or supervisory care centres. 
(c) Senior citizens’ apartment or grouped units. 
(d) The practicality of a school tax exemption for senior citizens. 
(e) The effectiveness and practicality of an expanded “meals on wheels” program for senior citizens. 
(f) The major new program announced in Great Britain to give a “new lease on life” to senior 
citizens. 
(g) The need for a substantial increase in the basic rate of pension, and the need of incorporating a 
“cost of living” clause in the formula which would automatically adjust income periodically in order 
to keep pace with general living costs. 
 
A debate arising and the question being put, it was agreed to.” 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2186 

PRIORITIES 
 
1. Development of mechanisms for the more efficient planning, co-ordinating and delivery of 
services, and the methods whereby community organizations and individuals can participate in 
assessing needs and planning services to meet those needs on an on-going basis. 
 
2. Housing – alternatives available. 
 
3. The criteria for the establishment of all types of community services for the elderly that would 
ensure an independent and fuller life. 
 
4. Health – Level IV 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
Priorities were established by the Senior Citizens’ Commission in order to focus attention on the 
Terms of Reference as outlined by the legislature. The first priority, simply stated as the ways and 
means of making information and help available was central to our course of study. 
 
A random selection of study locations was determined for the population sizes of: 
 
0 – 500 Plenty, Coronach, Govan, Stenen, Leask. 
500 – 1,000 St. Walburg, Central Butte, Carrot River, Arcola, Watson. 
1,000 – 5,000 Hudson Bay, Unity, Shaunavon, Melville, Indian Head. 
5,000 – 30,000 Swift Current, Weyburn, Prince Albert, Melfort, Moose Jaw. 
30,000 and over Saskatoon, Regina. 
 
The Commission prepared a community check list for use in the 22 study locations throughout the 
province. This community check list included all of the possible housing alternatives and community 
support services, along with a section for comment or criticism of Health Care. Availability of 
information and voice in decision making regarding Housing, Community Support Services and 
Health Care; adequacy of finances in these three areas was covered by the study. 
 
In each study location, with the exception of Regina, a telephone system was utilized. A 
hospitality-tea and coffee social event was sponsored in all study locations with the exception of 
Regina and Saskatoon. Local community people were instructed on the use of the check list. 
 
Advertising was prepared for use on television, radio and local newspapers, in addition to material 
circulated by contacts in many service orientated groups and organizations. The advertisement 
material outlining the priorities served to encourage local people to participate in the inquiry either 
by telephoning or attending the hospitality event. 
 
In smaller communities the telephone system and the hospitality event were held simultaneously. In 
larger communities the hospitality event was held on the day 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2187 

Preceding the telephone system. The Commission held only a telephone system in Saskatoon. In 
Regina, a joint study was arranged with the Family Service Bureau and the Senior Citizens’ Day 
Centre. These two groups had received a New Horizon’s Grant from the Federal government, which 
was directly in line with the study the Commission was to undertake. Elderly people, using our 
check list and a form prepared by the Family Service Bureau and the Senior Citizens’ Day Centre, 
visited the homes of other elderly people to make a person-to-person contact and complete the 
forms. 
 
Using the community check list requires that those administering it must become good listeners. 
People were free to comment on the priorities and the check list was filled out as the conversation 
progressed. This method allowed for a warmer atmosphere with less rigidness. 
 
The community check lists were compiled by a computer in Regina. 
 
Follow-up meetings were arranged by the Commission for all study locations (exception of Regina 
and Saskatoon) to discuss the results of the local inquiry. 
 
The following graphs are based on a sample of 3309. A copy of our community check list follows 
the graphs. 
 

And I commend the graphs to the Members opposite because they obviously haven’t read the report and 
it is hard to read graphs but I am sure they will take it under consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also like to tell the House about the number of people who gave briefs and 
submitted information to the Commission. 
 

1. Alliance of Youth and the Elderly Society, 134 Avenue F. South, Saskatoon. 
2. Catholic Women’s League, c/o Mrs. G. T. Molloy, Provincial Social Action Convenor, 615 
Idylwyld Crescent, Saskatoon. 
3. Central Haven Steering Committee, c/o Walter Siemens, Chairman, Box 1311, Saskatoon. 
4. Church in Society Committee, Saskatoon Presbytery, Saskatoon. 
5. College of Dental Surgeons, c/o Dr. Ron Hill, 811 – 21st Street East, Saskatoon. 
 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 to 7:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, before we crashed to a halt at 5:30 I was reading a list of the briefs in the 
Senior Citizens’ Report and I propose to finish reading those names. I believed that I stopped at item 5. 
 

6. Committee on Unmet Social Needs in Unity and District, Unity. 
7. Community Clinic, 455 Second Avenue North, Saskatoon. 
8. Community Grants and Standards Division, Department of Social Services, 2240 Albert Street, 
Regina. 
9. Community Planning Association, Saskatchewan Division, 202 – 1808 Smith Street, Regina. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2188 

10. Community Switchboard, 2641 Garnet Street, Regina. 
11. Council on Aging, c/o Lutheran Theological Seminary, 224 Seminary Crescent, Saskatoon. 
12. El Amarillo Stables, Regina. 
13. Family Service Bureau, No. 20 309 – 22nd Street East, Saskatoon. 
14. F.I.S.H., Swift Current. 
15. Gray; James, 43 McAskill Crescent, Saskatoon. 
16. Griffiths; Peter, 622 – 15th Street West, Prince Albert. 
17. Holy Family Hospital, 675 – 15th Street West, Prince Albert. 
18. Hughes – Caley; M. 424 – 25th Street East, Prince Albert. 
19. Human Resources Development Agency, 1820 Albert Street, 3rd Floor, Regina. 
20. Humboldt Senior Citizens, Box 415, Humboldt. 
21. Inner City Council of Churches, c/o Reverend R. Davidson, St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church, 
Spadina Crescent, Saskatoon. 
22. Interdenominational Group, c/o Mrs. Marion Read, Govan. 
23. Jubilee Residences Limited, Mount Royal Lodge, Avenue P at 30th Street, Saskatoon. 
24. Lashburn Senior Citizens Association, c/o Allan Craig, Lashburn. 
25. Leask & District Senior Citizens Branch 69, Leask. 
26. Ministry of Outreach and Social Action, Knox-Metropolitan United Church, Regina. 
27. New Horizons, c/o J. L. Phelps, 207 – 29th Street West, Saskatoon. 
28. Pensioners and Senior Citizens Organization of Saskatchewan, 257 Hanley Crescent, Regina. 
29. Pensioners and Senior Citizens Organization, c/o Earl Kyle, Secretary, Swift Current. 
30. Pensioners and Pioneers Organization, c/o Joseph A. Thain, 701 – 11th Street East, Saskatoon. 
31. Pine Tree Heritage Advancement Club, Christopher Lake, Saskatchewan. 
32. Prince Albert Home Care Program, c/o Victoria Union Hospital, Prince Albert. 
33. Prince Albert Regional Office, Department of Social Services, 196 – 9th Street East, Prince Albert. 
34. Public Health; Department of – Psychiatric Centre, Victoria Union Hospital, 1200 – 24th Street 
West, Prince Albert. 
35. Public Health; Department of – c/o Ms. Ruth Dafoe, Medical Social Worker, Provincial Health 
Building, Regina. 
36. St. James United Church, 4506 Sherwood Drive, Regina. 
37. Regina Council of Women, c/o Mrs. Mary Entwistle, Chairman, No. 5, 2250 – 7th Avenue North, 
Regina. 
38. Regina Local Housing Authority, 2153 Lorne Street, Regina. 
39. Regina Pioneer Village Ltd., 430 Pioneer Drive, Regina. 
40. Regina Rural Health Region, Department of Public Health, Golden Mile Plaza, Regina. 
41. Royal Canadian Legion, 1836 Cornwall Street, Regina. 
42. St. Stephen’s (Anglican) Church, 10 Grosvenor Crescent, Saskatoon. 
43. Salvation Army Eventide Home, 2221 Adelaide St., E., Saskatoon. 
44. Saskatchewan Action Committee for the Status of Women, c/o Linda Tate, 2900 Argyle Street, 
Regina. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2189 

45. Saskatchewan Association of Housing and Nursing Homes No. 200, 2505 – 11th Avenue, Regina. 
46. Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Canadian Labour Congress, Room 105, 2709 – 12th Avenue, 
Regina. 
47. Saskatchewan Safety Council, 2149 Albert Street, Regina. 
48. Saskatoon Board of Trade, Bessborough Hotel, Saskatoon. 
49. Saskatoon; City of – c/o City Hall, Saskatoon. 
50. Saskatoon Convalescent Home, 101 – 31st Street West, Saskatoon. 
51. Saskatoon Young Women’s Association Program Committee, 3rd Avenue and 24th Street, 
Saskatoon. 
52. Senior Citizens Assistance Plan (S.C.A.P.) 705 Caribou West, Moose Jaw. 
53. Senior Citizen’s Day Centre, 2412 – 11th Avenue, Regina. 
54. Senior Citizen’s Day Centre, 2412 – 11th Avenue, Regina. C/o Russell McKenzie Leader, Senior 
Citizens Discussion Group. 
55. Senior Citizens Service, 1075 Albert Street, Regina. 
56. Shaw; Mervyn, 629 – 7th Street East, Saskatoon. 
57. Sherbrooke Staff Nursing Association, c/o Mrs. Fluter, 48 Walker Crescent, Saskatoon. 
58. Soroptomist Club of Regina, c/o Ms. J. M. Blake, President, 60 Turgeon Crescent, Regina. 
59. South Saskatchewan Optometric Group of the Saskatchewan Optometric Association, c/o Dr. L. J. 
Kolton, 440 Midtown Centre, Regina. 
60. Superannuated Teachers of Saskatchewan, 2330 Albert Avenue, Saskatoon. 
61. United Church of Canada, Saskatchewan Conference, No. 2, 1805 Rae Street, Regina. 
62. United Church Women, Regina Presbyterial of the United Church of Canada, c/o Miss C. G. 
Aitchison, Secretary, 2720 Victoria Avenue, Regina. 
63. United Church Women, Saskatoon Presbyterial, c/o Ms. Grace Milne, No. 20, 2112 St. Cecilia 
Avenue, Saskatoon. 
64. Victoria Union Hospital, 1200 – 24th Street West, Prince Albert. 
65. Watson Union Hospital Board of Trustees, Watson, Saskatchewan. 
66. Weaver; N. E., Box 563, Carlyle, Saskatchewan. 

 
At this time I will not bother reading the Bibliography to the Members opposite because I am sure that, I 
might read it later this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of my supporting this Resolution is that it will give elderly people a decent 
basic standard of living, if a couple is allowed the sum of $500 and a single person $350 per month. I 
feel that elderly people need at least this amount to take their proper place in the community because 
most of them have problems that are unique to their status as elderly people. These problems are not 
known by people who are not in their privileged status and I intend on advising the Legislature of some 
of the problems facing elderly people in our society today, so that they will have a proper appreciation 
of what they face and hopefully at the appropriate time will be in a position then to vote in favor of the 
Resolution. 
 
I would like first of all, Mr. Speaker, to refer to the publication called “New Goals for Old Age”. This 
publication 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2190 

is found in the library here. 
 

New Goals for Old Age, Columbia University Press, New York: Morningside Heights. Edited by Mr. 
George Lawton. 

 
The first article I’d like to refer the Members to is called “How it Feels to be Seventy-five and a 
Woman”. There’s an editor’s note that says, before I start reading the article is: 
 

The writer is nearer eighty than seventy and is spending what she calls, “Some of the very happiest 
years of my life” in a home for the aged – therefore the anonymity. She was present in the audience at 
the Welfare Council lectures and greatly enjoyed having the experts diagnose and treat her case. No 
other auditor was by profession “an old person.” 

 
And this lady’s article is very brief, it is only about 12 pages. It starts as follows: 
 

We old people have been given a present; it comes wrapped in a rather wrinkled cover. Quite a heavy 
package it is and not too easy to carry. 
 
The donors are our physicians, dieticians, boards of health – and what have you. The gift is a score or 
more of years than we were wont to expect. 
 
Having made their presentation, they watch us grow older and are alarmed at the Frankenstein act they 
have put on. They cry, “What in Heaven’s name are we going to do with all these old people? They 
have to be fed and housed and cared for and the bulk of them are so difficult to get along with!” 
 
So they call in the psychologists to help. The psychologists are supposed to assist us toward a 
wholesome social metabolism, thus preventing the menace to civilization we already threaten to 
become. 
 
We used to take it for granted that at sixty we were a finished product, unalterably and beautifully 
“jelled,” but we learn that we are far from finished; so we buckle down to the job of trying to make 
ourselves as healthy, happy and useful as possible – with the psychologists to inspire and direct. 
 
I have been by way of knowing intimately a number of old people and find that the sense of fellowship 
tends to become closer with our years. So I find myself slipping into the editorial “we,” for the decade 
from seventy to eighty seems to me to include a greater number of like characteristics than any other. 
 
We are inclined to be garrulous, and as impatient, combative, sensitive, and irritable as spoiled 
children. If our inhibitions have not been built up by wise parents and painful experiences, we are not 
pleasant to live with. We look backward too much, forward to the immediate future too little, talk too 
much; listen, read, and think too little, and most of us pray only during an emergency. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2191 

Writing of old age is much like describing an illness; a chronic illness never to be cured but which 
must be endured stoically and cheerfully, with courage and fortitude, and more important still – with 
humor and curiosity. For to be curious is to be interested, with keen desire to learn the how, why, 
when, and where of every daily happening in national and international events and in characters and 
personalities. A humorous and alertly interested mind keeps its youth and strength and is stimulating 
to itself and to others. 
 
Mental and physical inertness we must fight with our whole being. Otherwise, we develop 
hypochondriasis, the most dreaded of all old age diseases. Alexis Carrel warns us against it time and 
again. Personally, I confess that it is one of my special devils. It is an insidious foe lying in wait to lull 
one into an alluring coma of body and spirit. 
 
Young people help us to throw off this kind of indolence, especially our children. They rescue us from 
so unfortunate a malady, for they are part of our cherished and dearly loved, tenderly protected Old 
Selves! They are the greatest incentives and pleasures of our lives because we live again in their trials 
or triumphs. If the second and third generation are not wiser and finer than we, we know we have 
failed in the most important work of our lives. 
 
If we actually have succeeded in raising other than a “generation of vipers,” and have created 
something along the line of modern human beings to whom we may lift our eyes in a noble kind of 
envy or admiration, we are in danger of becoming the victims of a slightly cringing pride. Perhaps 
then they will tell us that we are suffering from an inferiority complex. This may be true. When we are 
tired of our uninteresting lives and our painful bodies and forgetful brains, our children and children’s 
children awaken in us a new zest for living and prove that fresh and piquant surprises are waiting just 
around every corner. 
 
I think a cultivated person is likely to be more interested in international and civic affairs when old 
than when middle-aged because we have more time to think. Middle-aged persons are apt to be 
confused by the many needs of house, children, and budget. In our enforced idleness, we have more 
time. And because of past experience, we possess a greater realization of the influence of every 
individual, whether it be in the mere casting of intelligent votes or in other innumerable activities in 
which we now at last have leisure to take out part. 
 
A beloved old lady of eighty said to me that old age is like pioneering in a new country because every 
day something new is learnt about our change in bodies and minds. She said that even if these changes 
are not pleasant, she found them interesting! This is one way of dealing with the loss of hair and 
complexion, the larger shoes, shoulder humps, caved-in mouths, and general slowing up of mind and 
body. There certainly is no closing our eyes to these inevitable facts. 
 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2192 

But to balance such humiliating discomforts, it is pleasant to know that we care very much less about 
such things (or do we?). Then, too, there is the balm of realizing we are no longer able to suffer the 
mental agonies often endured in youth and middle age. Almost nothing can happen after seventy plus 
to give us the unbearable distresses of mind and spirit that we somehow managed to live through in the 
past. Perhaps we have developed a harder shell covering our emotions. Perhaps our glands are less 
active. I know we have a better sense of proportion. We know that cruelties and injustices in time lose 
their strength or, should we be the aggressors, that they may be expatiated by each of us through 
patient and humble kindnesses to those whom we have offended. 
 
The French have a beautifully true saying, “To understand all, is to forgive all.” Understanding begets 
sympathy, sympathy begets tolerance, kindness, and even love. 
 
The loss of friends and family is found to deprive us of dearly prized happiness; but there is a 
palliative in knowing that the earthly span of their troubles is over and that our own growing 
infirmities have been separating us more and more from enjoying their beloved companionship as had 
been our wont. 
 
I think in old age we are more easily amused and have a greater gratitude for daily comforts and 
blessings than younger persons, who are apt to take things for granted. Biologically, we are at ease in 
our last third of life. Men are our pleasant companions and warm friends, and the tingle of mental 
stimulation is not lacking. But they are no longer essential nor are they tiresome problems as they 
often were in youth. Instead we gather closer to our hearts our best loved women friends and find that: 
 

From quiet homes and first beginning, 
Out to the undiscovered ends 

There’s nothing worth the wear of winning 
But laughter and the love of friends. 

(Hilaire Belloc) 
 

The spirit of service for others is perhaps the greatest of the happinesses of elderly persons and one of 
which may never tire. We find a deep satisfaction, or what Dr. Sadler calls a “sense of elation,” in 
doing for our congeners or for our children the most disagreeable duties. When melancholy threatens 
to mark us for her own, we shake off the cloud and regain poise and cheerfulness the moment we 
render a service. It matters not in the least whether the service rendered be great or small. 
 
I spoke of the necessity of shaking off inertia. Quite as important is the need to keep our thoughts in 
constructive channels, to plan for the happier next thing to do. I have learnt that the habit of going over 
and over the various occasions upon which I have played the fool in the past is a mental regurgitation 
prone to afflict sleepless nights and is wholly futile and weakening. I turn on my light, spread a quilt 
on the floor, and, flat on my back with arms straight at the sides, lift them 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2193 

slowly with a deep slow intake of breath until they rest on the floor above my head. The lungs are 
filled to capacity, then I lower the arms as slowly with a thorough expulsion of breath. When this has 
been done twenty or thirty times, the circulation is fully restored. Concentrating on counting, drawing 
in and expelling of air, and the whole rhythmic action of this exercise clears the brain and tends 
toward sleep. 
 
We so often do look back over the past even when we are busiest, and face the fact that we have not 
often made the very best of what we have had. I quote Margaret Wilkinson’s poem as expressing best 
this trend of thought: 
 

I never cut my neighbor’s throat, 
My neighbor’s gold I never stole; 

I never spoiled his house and land, 
But God have mercy on my soul! 

 
For I am haunted night and day, 

By all the deeds I have not done. 
O unattempted loveliness! 

O costly valor never won! 
 
and I wonder what loveliness I am letting slip away in these last “here and now” years. It is a thought 
that brings me up standing. The psychologists tell us that every situation however seemingly narrow 
holds out to us every possible opportunity for growth, for heroism, for spiritual development. 
 
Imbedded in the inner consciousness of all persons during their last decades, I am sure, is a seeking 
attitude with respect to higher power. How do we regard what we call God? It is a delicate subject to 
approach, a difficult confession to put into words. 
 
I believe intensely in a Great Plan toward the development of the spirituality of the human race, 
recognizing the infinitely slow progress toward this desired and essential accomplishment. My most 
intelligent prayer I believe to be that I may avoid any thought, word, or deed that may cause the 
slightest delay toward its fulfillment, that I may be quietly able to advance it in however small a 
fashion. I believe prayer to be a necessity and recognize the beneficial effects of prayer upon every 
part of the human body, mind, and spirit. It is an appeal to that great natural law of aspiration, toward a 
higher, finer development, which we must acknowledge is demonstrated in every form of life from the 
amoeba up to the complexity of the finest human being. 
 
I do believe that prayer (aspiration) is futile without constant practical effort to think and act toward 
the ends so desired. I believe in keeping our minds wide open and friendly toward every creed and that 
what the Friends (Quakers) call the “Inner Light” illuminating each soul is that which each must 
follow. 
 
After seventy or eighty I think few of us greatly dread death. There is a natural shrinking from an 
unknown future; but here again curiosity plays a part; we want very much to know what is going to 
occur after the 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2194 

familiar now. 
 
In Through the Looking Glass, the White Queen says, “I will give you something to believe. I am just 
101, five months, and a day.” “I can’t believe that!” said Alice. “Can’t you?” the White Queen said in 
a pitying tone. “Try again. Draw a long breath and shut your eyes.” Alice laughed. “There is no use 
trying,” she said. “One can’t believe in impossible things.” “I dare say you haven’t had much 
practice,” said the Queen. “When I was your age I always did it for a half-hour a day. Why, sometimes 
I believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.” 
 
In this modern, up-to-date world where miracles that had always been impossible happen so often, I 
rather envy the White Queen. For I too must learn each day to put newly discovered natural laws in the 
place of old myths. So, whether we think there is a future life or not, I insist upon contemplating its 
possibilities, and wish to keep an open mind because a mental status quo is to be dreaded more than 
any death of the physical body. 
 
That frail, old philosopher-poet Alexander Pope tells us: 
 

Hope humbly then; on trembling pinions soar. 
Await the great teacher Death, and God adore. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to another subject of interest to elderly people and this is entitled: 
 

APPLYING MENTAL HEALTH PRINCIPLES TO PROBLEMS OF THE AGING 
By Nolan D. C. Lewis, Director, New York State Psychiatric Institute and Hospital, New York City. 
 
The term “senile” seems descriptive of a rather simple situation: we have an old person, and that is the 
senile state! Really the matter is extremely complex. 
 
The period of life known as the “senium,” or “old age”, is associated with many problems which are 
peculiar, distinct, and often quite remote in character from those encountered in infancy and the earlier 
adult years. Much of the knowledge gained from the study of the physical and mental behavior of 
young and middle-aged adults can no more be applied to the period of senility than to the immediate 
life of the child. Moreover, “age” is an extremely elastic term which, in physiological concepts, can 
rarely be used in its chronological sense, as what is understood by “age” in terms of structure-function 
may overtake a man in his earlier years or may manifest itself in irregular retardations and 
dysfunctions of special sets of organs, according to the results of predisposition, previous diseases, and 
the stress and wear and tear to which the body has been subjected in its journey through life. 
 
In a manner of speaking, some individuals are old and worn-out in childhood. There are many old 
people who are old in years and yet are quite useful. As we grow older we are inclined to use the term 
senility to describe people who are a little ahead of us in years. When we were children, we thought 
those a few years ahead of us in 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2195 

age were “old.” We must take into consideration many different kinds of ages: mental, moral, 
physiological, and chronological. The following story is a good illustration of the possible variety of 
ages. 
 
“An old Boston gentleman, wishing to be friendly toward a little boy, asked him, ‘And how old are 
you, son?’ The boy answered at length, ‘If you are asking how old I am mentally, according to 
intelligence tests, I am 12 years old. Morally I am 5 years of age, and physically I am ten years of age, 
but I assume you are referring to that old term, chronological age. If you are, I am eight years old.’” 
 
In senility, we deal with biological as well as chronological age, since age is a matter of biology as 
well as chronology. In the individual, from the time he is conceived and on through maturity, there are 
going on at the same time degenerative or involutionary processes of the tissues as well as growth. 
Senility, therefore, starts with conception. 
 
Each individual is born with certain endowments or capacities and with the ability to mature. These 
capacities are unequal in strength and function, there being many degrees of power, and it should be 
recognized that a number of them grow progressively weaker after the individual has passed the prime 
of life. These irregularities in capacity account for many, if not most, of the individual differences in 
attitude and behavior. 
 
Development of the organs goes on at irregular speeds throughout life. Post-mortems on all sorts of 
people show that even in the very aged there are always a few organs that are relatively young. Some 
organs do not show the advance of age; some grow old faster than others. Biological time rather than 
chronological time is important. For some reason, human beings do not live more than 100 years, and 
this is probably a good thing. If we lived to be 1,000 years old we would have ten times as many 
accidents and diseases, and our bodies would have to function at a very low level. 
 
In old age, whether chronological or physiological, some important endowments and functions have 
attenuated, have become distorted through conversion, or have disappeared entirely. Thus we are 
dealing with a different individual after age has required the readjustment . .  
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to draw the Hon. Member’s attention to 25 (2) where he says that the 
debate must be relevant. I can’t see just how that ties in with this Motion for $350 a month. I hope the 
Member will tie it in so that it comes back to the Motion. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier I think that the problem we are dealing with in 
this debate is the problems of people that are old. The reason that the Member has presented the 
Resolution is to assist them economically with these problems and I thought it would be of some 
assistance to the Members on the other side if they could appreciate what these problems are and that is 
why I am reading some of 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2196 

these articles about problems facing elderly people. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I hope the debate will be relevant to the Resolution. 
 
Mr. Malone: — 
 

For some reason, scientific study of the old person has been neglected; there have been frequent 
studies of childhood but hardly any of old age. As compared with the interest taken in children’s 
problems by general physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, and public-welfare 
organizations, the interest and care accorded the aged is insignificant, amounting to nothing less than 
neglect. Here and there one finds a small organization interested in old people . .  

 
And the Liberal Party is interested in old people and the Member for Saskatoon who sits to my left is 
interested in old people and this is why this Resolution is before the House. 
 
Mr. Malone: — 
 

. .  but chiefly from the standpoint of housing and feeding – in other words, with an eye to economic 
welfare. There is an enormous field here for research. But where do we find journals devoted to the 
welfare of the aged? One may admit some excuse for this attitude on the basis that the aged are 
generally, although by no means always, economically worthless, and become more so with added 
years, while the child has . .  
 

And that’s what I think is the substance of this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, is the economic well-being of 
the aged, they don’t become worthless with the years. 
 

WELCOME TO SCOUTS 
 
Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina North West): — May I beg the indulgence of the House to introduce some 
guests in the Speaker’s Gallery. On behalf of all Members I should like to welcome 13 scouts of St. 
Timothy’s Troop No. 49. Their leader, Bill McDougall and a friend of his, Tom Overend, are seated 
with them. I hope they enjoy their visit to this Assembly and I congratulate their leaders for taking the 
time to arrange this trip to the Legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Hon. 
Member in welcoming the Scouts here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Certainly, I know they will find their visit here to the Legislative Assembly 
informative. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And relevant. 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2197 

Mr. Steuart: — We are talking about senior citizens and we are doing our best to help them. So we 
welcome to the Legislature and thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving us this opportunity. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — I should like to join with the other two Members of this 
House and welcome the Boy Scouts to this Legislature. The Boy Scouts motto is, “Be Prepared”, 
obviously Members on this side of the House are quite prepared to carry on this illuminating debate on 
senior citizens’ problems well into the night. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Resolution No. 26. 
 
Mr. Malone: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 

One may admit some excuse for this attitude on the basis that the aged are generally, although by no 
means always, economically worthless, and become more so with added years, while the child has an 
increasing economic value and, in addition, a prospective maturity which may be favorably influenced 
by helpful interference at the proper maturation phases. Perhaps, too, doctors have not made a 
specialty of geriatrics, and investigators have side-stepped the field because of a subtle unconscious 
fear of getting old themselves. 
 
Inasmuch as one person’s tissues may become senile long before another’s and reveal what is known 
as senility in degrees which vary from those manifested by other individuals, we must expect to find 
and we do find varying degrees of functional loss and distortion. Categorically, we refer to the span of 
life after the sixtieth year as the senile period, and our remarks in general refer to this period, although 
they apply as well to exceptional cases in the younger age periods. 

 
And I think this is the period that we are concerned with in this debate, over 60. 
 

(Some elements in the senile deterioration begin at birth or even before, and usually at forty-eight or 
fifty years the changes characteristic of senility become evident in the human organism.) 
 
Senility is simply one aspect of the developmental process. The gradual change from the adult state to 
old age is essentially a normal biologic reaction characterized by certain physiologic alterations which 
in themselves complicate and disturb the life adjustments. Moreover, like all other processes in the 
living organism, these changes are often accentuated or distorted by pathologic variations. In every 
instance, there is some degree of senile atrophy of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems, and in a 
complex organism like man, different cells and tissues grow old at different rates of speed. That both 
men and animals gradually age – that is, 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2198 

become senile in the course of progressive development – is indicated by the decrease in the metabolic 
rate. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that Members now probably have an appreciation of mental hygiene and old age, 
so perhaps I could move on to another topic which is probably of interest to all of us because I am sure 
all of us find ourselves in this position. This is the topic of the older person in the world of today in the 
family. This, I think, is implicit in the Resolution of the Member from Saskatoon who sits to my left and 
I think with the added income that would be given to the elderly person if this Resolution is adopted 
they could find their proper place in the family and not be a burden on the younger people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — Referring again to another chapter in the above cited book, I quote: 
 

Basic to this entire discussion is the question whether we believe the family will continue to be the 
unit of our society and our democracy or whether we think it one of the institutions doomed to 
obsolescence as Spengler has called it in his Decline of the West. I prefer to regard the family as a 
structural unit of society which will survive this period of social revolution or evolution we are living 
through. But I also believe that the family in surviving will undergo very radical changes. 
 
As we look back upon the development of our country, we must be struck by the fact that the tie of 
kinship has operated to help form the family into a kind of economic unit, made up of individuals who 
otherwise might have found it impossible to remain in the same functioning group. The past several 
generations have seen rapid and startling changes in this respect, since the industrial revolution had 
done away with the necessity or even possibility of any one family’s being its own self-contained unit. 
Though one can still cite instances outside the urban areas of families in which several generations 
continue to live together because they are carrying on this old tradition of “family.” The large family 
mansions in which it was expected that the older people would continue to live, with the younger 
generations joining them in different degrees of independence, or dependence, is familiar to us in real 
life as well as in fiction. But it is a phenomenon rapidly disappearing today because of industrial and 
social factors. Those working with older people in the crowded city find the situation in which it is 
physically possible for this plan of living to obtain to be practically non-existent. 
 
It seems that while we can intellectually accept the fact that as a practical or physical measure several 
generations cannot easily arrange to live together, there is a distinct lag between this acceptance and 
any change in attitude toward what we can or do accept in the matter of family relationships. 
Obviously, this is because the family is a group of persons whose relationship is recognized by 
themselves as being based not upon economic reasons but upon the ties whose strength is far greater 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2199 

than any other. 
 
We find ourselves, then, struggling with living arrangements entered into because actually “blood is 
thicker than water.” Kinship still carries with it responsibilities which often, when assumed by our 
present-day generations result only in an unworkable plan and in unhappiness for everyone concerned. 
We may not be able to alter our definition of what a family is, but we can change our ideas of what is a 
natural living arrangement for members of a family if the individuals who compose it are to be happy 
and self-sufficient persons in the community. 
 
This is by no means so simple as it sounds. For we have had as an integral part of our cultural 
background a philosophy of living which imposes on the family the task of caring for the aged and 
infirm. Too abrupt a change of anything which is woven so closely into the fabric of our habit of 
thought and of living is a painful process – and, perhaps, an undesirable one. 
 
As a result of depressions and a consequent shift of social responsibility for the support of an 
increasing population of elderly people, events are moving much more rapidly than is our thinking 
about these events, at least in individual situations. For instance, the gap between the governmental 
program of support with the attendant individualization of the family, and any real reflection of it in 
the legislation providing for old age assistance is evidenced by the present provisions for the support 
by legally responsible relatives. This in many instances of practice is not consonant with the intent of 
the law but stems directly from our age-old attitude toward family relationships. In a strict 
interpretation of the law, its original purpose is often defeated, and the effect upon family life may be 
most unfortunate. 
 
I am not advocating at this time any liberalization of the law either for children or for parents and 
grandparents in the matter of the responsibility for support, for we must still count upon the social 
force of family ties to balance the real limitations of tax resources for meeting the actual economic job 
of taking care of our old people. But in the demand that this be done – particularly when the demand is 
a legal one – I find the basis for much of the unhappiness for both the old and the young who are 
living together in family settings. 
 
I recall hearing Dr. Hartwell say in a lecture that “the goal of mental hygiene is to help the individual 
to live his life in all age periods – from beginning to end – in a way that will be most acceptable and 
pleasant to himself and most acceptable and useful to others.” This is also the goal of those who are 
working with elderly people in family groups, and the latter have a challenge in their efforts to achieve 
their objective far greater than that faced by those working at other age levels. 
 
Now I believe that if this goal is reached for the elderly person or persons, it is very often reached as a 
by-product or by a very natural process for the other members of the family. The challenge lies in the 
fact 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2200 

that we don’t always realize that we need to be more careful, more understanding, and to work harder 
with old people because they are the individuals whose “psychological welfare,” as Dr. Lawton has 
put it, “is more neglected than that of any other group of persons.” 
 
Recently I heard a well-trained social worker say that those in family work had forgotten that essential 
to a family are the children in it, and perhaps we should “rediscover” the child if we are to preserve the 
family as a democratic unit. I wanted to remind her and others that we should also in our social work 
consciousness “discover” the older person or persons in the family, who are for purposes of family 
work merely counted “among those present,” but whose interests are almost always discounted in 
favor of those of others – persons presumably more important in the scheme of living. 
 
Is there anything really new in the relation of an older generation to a younger one? It seems to me that 
it is as old as our knowledge of man. But perhaps we can also agree that the difficulties surrounding 
that relationship have been definitely aggravated by the social and economic changes of recent years, 
especially in urban centres. 
 
While living in the country is today both physically easier and more comfortable and economically 
more complex than it was fifty years ago – owing to marketing and transportation facilities which 
bring the outside world to the door – it is still far from being as complex and complicated as life in the 
city. What we can do about reducing or removing the difficulties is one problem when the old person 
and his family live in the country and an entirely different one when they live in the city. 
 
Family relationships may be divided into three classifications. In all the years I have worked with 
elderly people each situation appears to be a variation of one of these basic three. 
 
First, there are the countless families in which the old and the young work out their living plans 
happily, or at least to their mutual satisfaction, though we are apt to think otherwise because the 
majority of the situations which come to our attention do not fall in this group. If this isn’t so, then our 
population figures and estimates are decidedly askew. 
 
The second group are those families in which the difficulties of getting along are greater for the older 
people, whether for economic, social, or emotional reasons. Many times, if the economic strain could 
be removed, members of this group would be included in the first group, as the work of the old age 
assistance program so conclusively demonstrates. 
 
In the third group are the families in which the difficulties of working out acceptable relationships are 
greater for the younger generations. Those who have made the care of the aged their major interest, 
might well be reminded occasionally, that we must not lose sight of the fact that we may satisfy the 
needs and desires of the 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2201 

older person at too great a cost to the younger people in the situation. 
 
In New York City we cannot, in considering the mental health or well being of elderly people, quite so 
cavalierly dismiss the economic factor as does Mr. Frank in his discussion. Quite understandably, in 
order to make his points of individual adjustment, he had to disregard extraneous considerations such 
as environmental and economic factors. But for a total picture of what enters into either making or 
breaking down mental health we must remember that many family difficulties arise from financial 
stringency. With that, too, we must remember the growing individualization of the family, to which 
continued city life under marginal or moderate income may possibly contribute by making affectional 
ties less binding than they would be in rural life under similar limitations. 
 
There is little to discuss in the first group I have mentioned, although it is essential if we are to have a 
sense of balance to know that satisfactory relationships exist. We should also study these carefully 
when we have the opportunity, in order to discover, if we can, what are the factors which bring about 
success in family living. This is as necessary as continually focusing our attention upon those 
situations in which apparent failure exists. 
 
Even in the “satisfactory” situations, it is rather common to have elderly people come for advice when 
they are convinced that some shift on their part will be helpful either to them or to their children or 
relatives, though there may be no difficulty apparent on the surface of things. 
 
There is the older person who has had a full life with much responsibility, who has the ability to be 
very rational about the changes which come with the years. Yet such a person may find the life of 
security with children or younger relatives, whether it be dependent or independent, far from being 
wholly satisfying. I am thinking particularly of individuals whom I nominate to myself as persons of 
lost identity – or, rather, of a changed identity. They are not quite in the position of Philip Nolan in 
“The Man without a Country,” but they are often persons without a past which has anything to do with 
the present in which they are living. 
 
Such a woman came to see me the other day. On the face of it, Mrs. Stone would be the last person in 
the world one would expect to look for suggestions regarding an old age home to which she might go. 
But as I talked with her, I realized that her visit was the result of a very logical conclusion. Mrs. Stone 
was a woman in her late sixties, well set-up, beautifully groomed and fashionably dressed in excellent 
taste, intelligent, and possessing a most unusual sense of humor and a fund of common sense beyond 
that which most of us have. She was a widow, whose resources, like those of so many others in these 
years, disappeared through the poor judgment of the executors of her husband’s estate. She could find 
no real fault with them, she admitted, for after all, in the late twenties and the early thirties they were 
in a numerous and high company, and there was, she said, no 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2202 

reason for her to expect them to be endowed with a superhuman business acumen with regard to her 
securities. 
 
Mrs. Stone had no children, but she had two nephews and a niece, living in different cities and in 
different parts of the country. Each was married and comfortably enough situated to be able to provide 
her with a home. But what was more important, each was very fond of her and eager to have her. Mrs. 
Stone in her own affluent days had an excellent flair and skill in interior decoration, although she had 
never been commercially engaged in that occupation. She therefore found herself extremely useful and 
busy in their homes – devising color and decorative schemes, making curtains, slip covers and so on, 
so that she had a satisfaction in realizing that her care was in no sense a total loss to them. She was 
welcome socially in their homes, and was invited to share in the social activities of the family. Each 
had, however, established his home in a city in which she had never lived or known anyone in her 
younger days, or when she might have been received as Judge Stone’s wife of Columbus, Ohio. 
 
As she put it, “In each home I am ‘John’s Aunt Louise,’ or ‘May’s Aunt Louise’ – never Mrs. Stone of 
Columbus with a background and life of my own. I meet no one who knows me for myself, and I 
honestly believe I’d be happier in a home with other people of my own age, who accept me for myself 
as myself, even though they didn’t know me earlier, than to go on living as I do now. My nephew 
won’t be able to understand why I want to make this application, for he has a place for me and will 
give me a small allowance, but I hoped you might understand. 
 
Mrs. Stone will, I am sure, be able to work out a philosophy which will help her, but in it she needs the 
help of other members of the family. Her consideration for them makes it impossible for her at this 
time to let them know that she had any cause for dissatisfaction or discontent, for she appreciates fully 
their fondness for her and their acceptance of responsibility for her, which she knows stems from both 
genuine affection and their attitude toward family ties. I believe she will work through the situation 
herself and find a new “identity.” 
 
In the meantime, Mrs. Stone’s application for residence in Ward Manor has been accepted. The final 
decision, however, when we get it, will be determined by a careful balance of what is socially 
desirable for Mrs. Stone at the time, against what may be economically and socially necessary for 
others who are also awaiting admission. If our resources were ideally adequate, individuals like Mrs. 
Stone who want to be part of a group, ought to be able to choose the kind of arrangement they wish, 
but with the pressure of demands from those who are actually in financial or physical need of the 
protection which group living in a home provides, it may not be possible to meet this kind of a 
situation in the near future. She is not in any sense eligible for support from public funds, because of 
the ability and willingness of her family to support her, nor is her family financially able to set her up 
in independent living, even though Mrs. Stone and her relatives were 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2203 

ready to accept such a plan. The hope for her lies in her own good sense and the help which some 
person or agency can give her in developing a plan in which she achieves an individuality apart from 
that of being “Charley’s Aunt.” 
 
If I may indulge in a bit of personal experience I should like to comment on a situation I have watched 
in my own family. For it is only by understanding all that goes into this change that we can arrive at 
more satisfying solutions than might otherwise be possible. 
 
For ten years I have watched my own mother making the very carefully concealed change in status 
and identity from being Mrs. Randall, a person of substance in her community, to that of being a 
daughter’s mother in four or five strange communities, a very especially loved grandmother, or a 
more-than-welcome mother-in-law. She is a person whom we want very much to have in our homes, 
so that there results among us a good-natured rivalry in our bidding for her visits to us. The best 
solution which we have been able to reach since the death of my father and the selling of the large 
family place has been for her to have a place of her own with each of us. 
 
All her life, from the early days in the Middle West as the eldest in a large pioneer family, through the 
days of our youth, when she was the responsible head of our family – in which there lived not only our 
immediate family but, in true New England fashion, my great-grandmother, my grandparents, and two 
great-aunts, – she has been a member of a large family group, so that living alone is today a disastrous 
experience for her each time she tries it when the urge for a place of her own comes upon her. 
Throughout these years the adaptation to the demands of several generations – in her words the lesson 
of “the two bears, bear and forbear” – have today made it possible for her to fit quietly into the family 
life of each home and keep herself busily occupied and so useful that she is a real loss when she moves 
on. 
 
Of course my mother’s financial independence contributes greatly to her ability to adjust. Yet through 
it all runs the fact that to our friends her identity is one that relates only to us and that her personality – 
the sum total of experiences of her life which have gone into making that personality – is meaningful 
only to us and is given very little thought by anyone other than ourselves. Yet, what interests me is 
that being deprived of the status to which she has been accustomed and an identify of her own, apart 
from that of being our mother, her habits of life are making it possible for her to accept the role which 
circumstances have brought her in old age. What is especially valuable to her now is the early pioneer 
training of taking things as they come and making the best of them without too much grumbling. Were 
it not for that, there are in such a situation the very elements which bring us to the next classification – 
families in which relationships are difficult for the older person or persons for any number of reasons. 
 
As I look back over the twenty-five years in which I have talked with older people about their 
difficulties I 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2204 

am inclined to conclude that those in which adjustments were needed for the older and those needed 
for the sake of the younger members of the family are about even in number, and, as I have said 
before, the benefits of such change are apt to fall “like the gentle rain from heaven” about evenly upon 
the two groups, though I can only claim to have been guided by the facts as we have them rather than 
by the facts as they are. 
 
We are familiar with the old lady or old gentleman who comes to us with the story that the 
daughter-in-law (of often the son-in-law) doesn’t wish to continue to provide a home and something 
must be done. Nearly always, in New York City at any rate, because of limited space and limited 
income, a change is the best method and often the simplest method of achieving harmony, although 
this is a generalization which is not always true, for there are as many kinds of causes as there are 
cases. The conflict between generations is historic, and while education over the years may help us to 
understand and modify the conflict, it never will be simple to resolve the conflict by a purely 
intellectual approach because emotional reactions are unpredictable. 
 
I recall very clearly the old gentleman, about eighty years of age, physically well, mentally alert, 
gentle, quiet, unobtrusive, but still possessing a certain amount of initiative so far as his own interests 
were concerned, who came to us seeking a place in a home for the aged for himself. Mr. Bennett told 
us he was living in the home of a son, who had several children of the “teen” age of whom he was 
apparently very fond. And one of them, a boy, evidently found in his grandfather a very 
companionable person. Yet the old man knew he wasn’t wanted, because, as he put it, he occupied a 
room on the third floor which his daughter-in-law wanted for her son. The family wasn’t rich but they 
could provide for him, and Mr. Bennett’s son was willing to do so with the help of a brother and sister. 
There was no prospect of an immediate vacancy in the home, and with this explained an application 
was accepted. 
 
However, when the application was returned, it was discovered that the old gentleman had a wife who 
was residing with a third son in another town. Investigation later brought out some very illuminating 
facts. 
 
Mr. Bennett, when his four children were young, had left his family for parts unknown. This he had 
done because he couldn’t seem to meet his obligations, either to his own satisfaction or that of his 
wife. Mrs. Bennett, a more energetic person, took over the support of the children, which she 
accomplished by dint of hard work of all kinds. She was successful, for she bought a house and paid 
for it, gave her sons and daughters fairly good educations, with of course, self-help on their part as 
they grew up. Years later, when each had married and set up his or her own home, and the mother 
could no longer be active, the father returned to the family rooftree, penniless, and unable to find or to 
keep work. The children, true to the British tradition of their family background, accepted the financial 
responsibility for him as a filial duty, but there was no affection in the 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2205 

gesture. There was, very understandably, a certain amount of resentment of his expectation of support 
from them after the years of his desertion, not only of them, but most especially of their mother. 
 
She was willing to greet and meet her husband in a friendly fashion, but she refused to live in the same 
house with him. Therefore, the family had compromised on a joint financial support which meant 
making available room and board and clothing with a minimum of sacrifice on their part and a place 
for him in the home of one of them in which he knew he was none too welcome. There was enough 
income in the family to provide with little difficulty for the financial requirements of admission to a 
private home for the aged, but not one of the children would make it available even though they, as 
well as he, might have been much happier and more comfortable and the arrangement might ultimately 
have proved to be less expensive than the one they were carrying out. 
 

Now, if this Resolution as presented by the Member is adopted the situation like this one I have 
described here would not arise. 
 

No private home would accept Mr. Bennett unless these requirements were met (and some would not 
even then), since it was plainly possible to meet them. Nor could the old gentleman be received in a 
public almshouse which would provide the impersonal congregate living he was seeking, because of 
this same ability on the part of the family to provide material support. 
 
Mr. Bennett was then condemned to an unhappy existence in which he was bearing the brunt of his 
daughter-in-law’s resentment of what he was taking from her son, but in which he was reaping the 
harvest from his early shirking of family responsibility. The younger generation were equally 
applying, with a certain amount of satisfaction, punitive measures in their unwillingness to make it 
possible for him to take up residence in the kind of living in which he would have been more at home 
because of long years of knocking around from pillar to post. With no justification of the old man’s 
actions, but accepting his earlier life as fact, with some effort to understand the reasons underlying the 
fact, I believe it would have been better planning for the individual old person, the family, and the 
community to have succeeded in persuading the children to arrange for his placement in an institution 
in which he could have been one of a large group and could have made his contribution of “odd jobs,” 
on which he had supported himself through the years. 
 
Mr. Bennett’s pattern of daily life and relationships with others throughout a great many years had 
been impersonal and simple, and a continuation of it would appear to be conducive to less emotional 
strain and family friction. His major mistake in working out his own problem when the joblessness of 
age came upon him had probably been his yielding to some deep-seated urge to see his family. One 
might guess that he had always been very fond of them, but that his own general ineffectiveness pitted 
against his wife’s very strenuous capability had been too much for him and he had not been able “to 
take it” as his son said. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2206 

But once Mr. Bennett was reunited with the family, he destroyed the possibility of receiving any 
community support. I am not arguing that he should have had it. Our regret was that there were not 
time and resources for attempting to help the family work out a plan which might have meant more 
happiness or contentment for the old person. Whenever any situation comes to our attention, it is 
important (or rather it strikes me anew how essential it is) in order to be helpful to elderly people to 
have more information about them, both from themselves and from others, than for any other age 
group. What they have been like in their earlier years, or as children, how they have conducted 
themselves in their families and in their communities adds immeasurably to our effectiveness in 
working out any plan with them or for them. 
 
For example, there is the case of elderly Mrs. Snow, who had been born and brought up in the country 
in very humble circumstances. Always there had been enough, in a way, so that she and her family had 
preserved their dignity by self-support, but with little or no margin. The mother always was the 
accepted head of the family, for the father and husband was not much of a manager, although he 
worked hard as a gardener on a large estate. After the death of her husband, Mrs. Snow had very little 
cash, just as all through her life. With no near relatives in the country who would or could have her 
with them, she came to the city to live with a married daughter. The latter did not quarrel with this 
plan because she accepted it as her duty, even though at the time her home was crowded, for not only 
did her own children live there but one son had married and brought his young wife into the home. 
The old lady, moreover, was handicapped by very poor eyesight as well as by unfamiliarity with the 
neighborhood and had to stay indoors most of the time. 
 
Friction was inevitable, and yet Mrs. Snow’s record in the country as a neighbor, a worker, and a 
mother was a creditable one. She was crude and simple, but sternly Puritanical in her attitude toward 
family life and the duty of one’s children toward their own. After a fairly exhaustive study of the 
family needs, it was decided that the mother – or grandmother – faced what for her was a pretty hard 
situation, and that the family friction between generations was the direct result of very crowded living 
conditions and limited income. A final source of conflict was the widely divergent attitudes of the two 
and three generations, one from the country and one from the present-day city, toward family, moral, 
and economic standards. 
 
The daughter was genuinely anxious to do what could be done, but was torn between the so-called 
respectability of the old age assistance grant for her mother, whose physical limitations made it hard 
for her to get along in the city, and residence in a home for the aged in the country where all their 
former friends and neighbors would know that she had “put her mother away.” The mother finally 
decided the matter for herself by choosing the home in the country. There Mrs. Snow has found a 
certain measure of contentment because she is in familiar surroundings; and there is a certain freedom 
of activity because of the fact that she is out of the city; but she 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2207 

has also proved herself to be a very stubborn old lady. Her daughter now admits reluctantly that her 
mother was always the one at home who “told everyone else what to do and when to do it: and the 
yielding habit is so strong with this daughter, herself now a grandmother, that she will make any 
sacrifice rather than raise an issue with her mother over anything at all. 
 
Though it took a great deal of time, patience, effort, and devious manoeuvring to consummate the 
arrangement finally planned for Mrs. Snow, it is the best for all concerned. The action taken to make 
the old lady more comfortable has proved to be even more in the interest of the rest of the family. For 
it has lessened their responsibility and has taken out of the family a rather dominating old lady, who 
couldn’t give up her lifelong habit of telling the members of the family what they should do. 
 

Again the problem is economic. 
 
Loss of status of this kind in family groups is one of the greatest deprivations which old people face. 
So few seem to learn the lesson that to be a consultative and directional force rather than a dictatorial 
one carries with it often a greater dignity and a really greater power or importance. People like 
Grandmother Whiteoak in Jalna are pleasanter folks to meet in fiction than in one’s daily life. 
Matriarchs are dramatic when one is reading about them, but they are extremely hard to live with. 
 
Family loss of status is generally associated with either a lessening or a total cessation of earning 
capacity or of economic power. However, it may also be the result of the necessity of living in 
unfamiliar or a very much changed environment. If I may be permitted another personal illustration, I 
can cite an incident that pointed this up for me very clearly. 
 
Several years ago we suffered here in the East a major cataclysm in the form of a severe hurricane 
which caused a great deal of damage to our home place, a remote and simple farm in a rural section of 
Rhode Island. As a result, for days and weeks we had to carry on under very primitive conditions 
without any of the so-called improvements which we had recently put into the house and to which we 
have all become so thoroughly accustomed. There was no running water or electricity; there was 
difficulty in getting food and in keeping it once you got it; and there were all sorts of make-shifts 
necessary to live, to say nothing of making the repairs to damaged buildings and land around the 
house. 
 
In our family group at the time was an elderly woman, an old family retainer who had been a kind of 
legacy with the farm and who had never in all her seventy-six years moved farther than twenty-five 
miles away from the valley. With us also at the time was my mother, who had all her early life lived in 
a pioneer family in the West. These women met the emergency with great ease and took the lead in 
planning just how we would get along without gas, running water, light, telephone, refrigeration. The 
rest of us, all adults, were less than children in this simple 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2208 

life. The way these women assumed leadership and the way we let them do so was an illuminating 
experience to me. They had the feeling they were being exceptionally useful, and that they could carry 
a job to a conclusion. Once more they were persons to whom others turned for advice and help. This 
worked wonders for those two women, not only in their attitude toward the situation and to us, but in 
their physical ability to work without fatigue, or at least fatigue of which they complained or were 
even conscious. What would once have exhausted them was now amusing. Here was an absolute 
demonstration of the way older people need a continuation of a former status which is recognized by 
others if there is to be a wholesome normal amount of contentment on their part as well as greater 
degree of physical well-being. 
 
But to return to the economic situation and its effect on status and relationships, I should like to 
mention the unfailing gullibility of human nature as evidenced by the number of older people who still 
have faith that by turning over all their real and other property in a lump sum to some member of the 
family they can be in return guaranteed support for life. Many old people have taken this means for 
providing for their future without anticipating the resultant difficulties through changed conditions and 
attitudes. Through the fact that they are deprived of the only thing which may have made their 
presence in a family tolerable on any basis, they suffer agonies of disillusionment and deflated ego, 
painful at any time for anyone, but unusually so for old people with no opportunity for retrenchment or 
reinstatement. As one old lady said to me the other day, “What a fool I’ve been! And even the 
government doesn’t want to support fools!” 
 
Such misunderstanding need not always nor does it usually arise out of bad intent or dishonesty on the 
part of the younger generation. It often is due to the fact that the younger people are ignorant of the 
exaggerated idea that the old people may have of the value of their property, either real or cash, and 
the older person’s lack of understanding of what it may accomplish in a new and very complex world. 
When money or property is turned over to someone else to manage with the definite promise of 
continued support as a factor in the transaction, the seed has been planted of an ultimate 
misunderstanding which can disrupt a family completely, especially as few legal documents are drawn 
up in such contracts because they are family matters. We know too that even when such agreements 
are made in genuinely legal fashion between institutions and individuals there is the same attitude. The 
old person frequently is heard to express the feeling that he has paid far too dearly for the care he is 
receiving, ignoring the fact that for an equivalent sum of money paid to any insurance company he 
would receive a much lesser degree of security than he expects either from his family or from a home 
for the aged. Of course, we must realize all that has gone into the accumulation of the possessions, 
what they must have meant in the lives of the old people, and what relinquishing possessions does in 
reducing the individual’s sense of importance. 
 
The factor which makes for the greatest misunderstandings or strain between the generations is illness, 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2209 

either physical or mental. The acuteness of the difficulty is in no way related to the acuteness of the 
illness – if anything, it is apt to be in inverse ratio to it. In emergencies, even the least capable of us 
find some way of measuring up to the demands of the occasion, and all of us are continually being 
surprised by the resourcefulness exhibited in families when a supreme need arises. 
 
But when the illness is of the chronic type – long drawn out, demanding steady, unremitting service, 
both in terms of medical and personal care, few families of limited means or limited quarters can 
continue indefinitely on the high level of emergent demands. Nothing taxes one’s patience more than 
caring day in, day out, for the needs of the old person whose chances of being restored to health are 
slight or non-existent but whose daily needs continue on the same, if not on an increasingly 
demanding, level. This is also true in those cases of mild mental affliction – which include loss of 
memory, lack of orientation, forms of suspiciousness which may develop into what we speak of as a 
persecution complex, and confusion – which often create intolerable disorder in the household and for 
which institutional care is not available or may not even be desirable. No matter how well one knows 
that this is no fault of the individual, there are bound to be moments when one’s nerves are frayed, and 
irritability and exasperation result in unhappiness for all concerned. This is particularly true in families 
containing three generations, where the younger members are denied what we call a normal social life 
in the home because of the disturbed old person. 
 
It is in situations of this kind that we must make an attempt at what workers call “manipulation of 
environment” and what in simpler terminology I call finding a new living arrangement for the old 
person. And as usual, when this kind of change seems most eminently suitable it is often the hardest 
thing to do, either because the facilities are not easily available or because the family cannot accept the 
idea or because the old person cannot be persuaded that a change is desirable. I might point out that at 
times when such a change seems indicated, the results of moving an old person without his consent 
have often justified such a procedure, for he is often much happier and more comfortable than before. 
 
Often it is for the sake of the family unit itself – or the younger members of it – that the older people 
ought to be placed in another setting. I recall very vividly the case of one man and woman with three 
very promising young children from five to eleven years of age. The man was a high school principal 
in a small town, so that the salary was not large, but the cultural advantages were excellent and the 
family enjoyed a happy place in the community. A short time ago, the woman’s mother, a person of 
Swedish birth, who had not been in the home before and who found it hard to be happy in the cultural 
pattern of the family, was taken very ill and came to stay with them. The daughter, loyal to a very 
great degree, with a very high sense of responsibility to her mother which her husband approved, had 
all the best medical advice she could obtain. The local physicians advised consultation with several 
very expensive surgeons 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2210 

from a city some distance away, and the daughter authorized this, although it meant mortgaging to the 
hilt every bit of property the family had. After the consultation, an operation was advised and this 
further strained the resources of the family, for it necessitated more borrowing. 
 
Now the mother is a chronic invalid in the home; the family is not going to get out of debt contracted 
for at least fifteen years; and those are critical years for the young people. Most persons would rightly 
conclude that this was all unwise, and the judgment of the family very poor. But how does one answer 
a daughter who says with a harried and worried look, “But I simply had to have the best for my 
mother, and that was the only way I could be sure I’d be giving her a chance to live.” 
 
Were this daughter’s values mixed when she sacrificed the possibility of good education and 
equipment of the young for the present comfort and support of her elderly mother, whose presence in 
the home not only disrupted household routine and produced actual discomfort but caused all their 
other difficulties? Isn’t this the question which we encounter so often in trying to work out methods of 
establishing eligibility for old age assistance and in trying to determine the desirability of separate 
maintenance in a home for the aged, or in some other plan for the old people? 
 

Once again, I submit, Mr. Speaker, if this Resolution is adopted this type of thing would not arise. 
 

I confess to being quite baffled, for in it is bound up the whole question of responsibility of tax payers 
who themselves cannot in many instances arrange for themselves the changes in their own families 
which we believe to be desirable for applicants for the grant, or for admission to our homes for the 
aged. But I believe that for the sake of the old people and the other members of the family we ought to 
weigh the social considerations more heavily than we now do when arriving at our decisions. 
 
Recently, I was presented with this family situation. There was an elderly man of eighty-four and his 
wife of seventy-six, neither one well and yet neither one very ill. They had brought up five children, 
who were all married with their own children and grandchildren. Not any one of the families was 
really “well off,” but one or two were more comfortable than the others. However, in each of these 
homes were “in-laws” who refused to take any responsibility for the old people, financial or otherwise. 
Each one of the children on being interviewed expressed a genuine interest in the old folks, and a 
willingness to help, but not one would assume entire responsibility for them, because each was 
convinced it was something they should all share. 
 
Evidently those less well off were jealous of those better off. There was constant bickering among 
them because of this as well as because of the misunderstanding which arose out of the disposition of a 
small piece of property which the old people once had had. A number of conferences with the family, 
in which their native good 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2211 

sense was invariably evident, except when it came to the subject of money, confirmed the truth of the 
old saying, “A mother can support five sons, but five sons cannot support a mother.” 
 
The Division of Old Age Assistance finally decided that the old people were eligible for help and that 
for their sake some permanent plan for their care should be made which would be acceptable to 
everyone. The Old Age Assistance grant was paid to them in the home of a married daughter. But the 
family quarrel still continued, for the children with small cash incomes all exaggerated the possibilities 
of regular income going to the daughter. It was therefore deemed best that the old couple enter a 
private home for the aged, and that there should be a sharing of the responsibility for meeting the 
small personal expenses of the old folks. The old people love the present arrangement, for they have 
their own room. Now when they and their children see each other, money is not the only subject of 
discussion. For the present, at least, they are all friends. 
 
We must remember that in this family money never was plentiful or easy to get, although no one ever 
actually lacked physical or material comfort. Therefore, the intense feeling over what seems a 
relatively small amount was understandable, and had to be regarded as carefully as though it were 
larger. In this instance, it seemed equally desirable for the children, the grandchildren (who were 
genuinely fond of their grandparents), and the older people themselves, to see that the latter got 
separate living arrangements. The old people have found themselves and are living a happy, quiet 
existence so far as their personal satisfaction is concerned. 
 
One could say a good deal about what happens in homes where there are very young children, and 
where there is a conflict in methods of child care and training, and of running a household. The matter 
of training of children is apt to be dynamite in most homes unless there is both firmness on the one 
hand and restraint on the other. 
 
I remember one little girl about seven who came one day with her mother to see me about a great-aunt 
who was being considered for Ward Manor. Said aunt must have been a disturbing personality in the 
home, because of a different racial background and a long life of living alone before trying to carry on 
in the home of a nephew who had married an American woman. The little girl at first refused to come 
into my room, but finally she peeked around the corner of the office and her consternation was most 
amusing. Looking at me with wide-open eyes, she said to her mother in most surprised tones, “But 
mummy, how could Miss Randall look like that? I don’t see how anybody would want Auntie to come 
to live with her unless she was old and gray haired, and horrid and cross!” Yet Auntie proved to be a 
satisfactory member of a family group at Ward Manor, because the group was all adult and there were 
no elements of personal responsibility for her. 
 
We want the relationships between the generations in a family such that one’s idea of each is pleasant. 
If family life fostered an early belief that old age is not 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2212 

only welcome to the old person but to other members of the family, growing old might be an easier 
process for all of us. I think of the old folks of our family not so much as being merely old, but just as 
being always there, of having a kind of permanent quality which gave all of us a sense of stability 
some of which seemed to leave with them when they went from us. The present world situation robs 
us of that because the old people as individuals have themselves been deprived of any such sense of 
stability. 
 
In a family, the mental health or the happiness of the old person is one part of the sum total of 
happiness for all the members of the family. With the growing individualization of the family, whether 
it consists of adults and children or all adults, a better adjustment for all may often be achieved by 
separating the generations rather than by clinging to our old ideas of family living. We may be forced 
to discard our ideas of a dynasty as a family, and think of it for purposes of living as only the 
immediate family of parents and children while the children are growing into adulthood. 
 
“Life with Father” is admittedly a very different thing today for so many reasons that they cannot be 
enumerated. Yet, I am sure we want to retain for family living those characteristics which as human 
beings we need at any age and which we still find in a family more easily than elsewhere – love, 
companionship, understanding, tolerance, and sympathy, which we can still expect more directly and 
with more assurance from members of our own family or of our “own blood” than elsewhere. 
 
But I am equally sure that we must face a modification of our ideas of family living as we have known 
it, and as we very often think it should be today. We are moving into an era when going to live with 
old folks, or having the old folks come to live with us will be difficult to achieve with equal 
satisfaction to all the persons involved. I say this, aware that some years ago those working with old 
people were accused of being kind but not intelligent and that today we are told we are overprotecting 
the old people – another way of saying the same thing. 
 
What I hope we can do in the future is to be kind and intelligent, protective and helpful, and at the 
same time stimulating to a fuller personal life for elderly people, which should include family life in 
its fullest meaning – real satisfaction derived from it no matter what its plan for each participant. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have covered several matters about old age mental hygiene and an elderly woman’s life, 
the old person in the family and I should now like to turn to another subject which I am sure the 
Members opposite would be interested in and which is directly relevant to this debate. This is the 
“Physical Changes in Old Age and their Effects upon Mental Attitudes”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — The author of this article is Dr. L. F. Barker, the Johns Hopkins Medical School, 
Baltimore. The first part of the article 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2213 

is titled: 
 

WHY DOES MAN GROW OLD AND DIE? 
 
During the millions of years since living creatures began to exist on the earth, animals of many 
varieties have slowly developed from the earlier simpler forms to the mammalian types culminating in 
man. Compared with the limitations of lower animals, the widely extended activities of thought, 
feeling, and action of human beings have made possible what we know as modern civilization with its 
physical and material comforts, its intellectual and emotional interests, its opportunities for personal 
freedom, its economic organization, its social institutions, its expansion of knowledge and power, its 
political relationship (local, national, and international), its achievements in the realms of art, 
literature, and science, and its creation of ethical values – a development that is truly astounding. 
 
But the specialization of function that has permitted a greater richness of life carries with it its own 
penalty, for the reciprocal interdependence of the cells, tissues, and organs is accompanied inevitably 
by an aging process, and ultimately each human organism must die, no matter how good its heredity 
has been nor how favorable the environment in which it has lived. Though it is true that life 
expectancy for man has been greatly increased, especially in our own time, this increase has been due 
mainly to the prevention of mortality in infants, children, and younger people through the prevention 
and cure of infectious diseases, advances in surgery, better general hygiene, and growth in our 
knowledge of nutrition. The increased life expectancy has been chiefly for the young; the gain for 
persons over fifty has been only slight in the past century, and life expectancy after the age of sixty has 
recently been diminishing. Many doubt if average longevity can be made to exceed sixty, unless 
eugenic practices should come to be more generally adopted. 
 
The maximal span of life for higher organisms is roughly five times the number of years required for 
development to maturity – for man say five times twenty-one, or 105. Extremely few persons, even 
among those of good inheritance living in the most favorable environment, exceed or even reach this 
age. There have, it is true, been a few notable exceptions. The case of the Dane C. J. Drakenberg is 
most often referred to; it was claimed that he had reached his 146th year when he died in 1772. 
Another instance is the one Kucynski described who was at least 109 years old when he died. That a 
few people have lived to be over a hundred years old is undoubtedly true, but there have not been 
many nor do I believe that there ever will be many, despite the more sanguine prophecies of certain 
Moscow investigators. 
 
It should not be forgotten that until the age of seventy people like to be considered younger than they 
really are, but that very old people may have an opposite tendency and may lay claim to a greater 
longevity than they have in reality enjoyed. We should be sceptical, therefore, of reports of extreme 
longevity until they have been carefully tested as to their reliability. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2214 

Nascher once paid a visit to a man in Kentucky who was said to be “the oldest living human being”; 
though he was reputed to be 118 years or older, Nascher found on careful study that he could not have 
been more than 98! 
 
Man is subject to the biological laws that govern other higher animals; he is born, undergoes 
development to maturity, normally reproduces his kind, may pass through middle life to senescence, 
but, in time, after he has fulfilled his fundamental biological functions, must inexorably die. During 
his lifetime many “minor involutions” occur in his body – the branchial clefts during foetal life, the 
thymus at puberty, the tonsils during middle age; but, when he lives long, he must finally undergo the 
“major involution” that ends in his death. The “minor involutions” are desirable for the good of the 
individual, the “Major involution” is necessary for the good of the human race. As Goethe said, 
“Death is Nature’s device for securing abundant life.” 
 
The slow transformation of a human being, but with continuance of personality from his birth to his 
death, through the weakness of infancy, the impetuosity of youth, the seriousness of middle age, and 
the ripeness of old age can be represented in the form of a graph. Metabolism begins to diminish soon 
after birth, the musculature reaches its maximum of functional capacity at about the age of thirty, the 
genital functions begin to decline in middle life and the intellectual functions at sixty or later. The 
slowness of the change is apt to give the false impression of permanent duration. 
 
But as a matter of fact, the curve of the graph is predetermined by the constitution of the germ plasm 
at the moment the human ovum is fertilized by the sperm cell; as James S. McLester figuratively puts 
it, “the arc of the bullet is determined by the charge it receives before it leaves the muzzle.” Life can 
be ended prematurely, of course, by disease or violence, but aside from these it pursues the path that is 
determined for it by the inherent qualities of the genes from which it starts. Longevity is exquisitely 
hereditary: the best insurance of long personal existence is derivation from long-lived ancestors. 
 

Mr. Speaker, right now I would like to turn to a newspaper clipping which was reported in the Prince 
Albert Herald in December of this year and it contains a charge by Senator Argue against the unfairness 
of the Provincial Government to senior citizens. This should be of great interest to all Members 
opposite. This is headed “A Statement by Senator Hazen Argue contained in the Senate Communique.” 
Now this was in the Prince Albert Herald, December 29th, 1973: 
 

The Saskatchewan Government’s treatment of old people in its homes for the aged is almost 
unbelievably bad. Tom Farrel aged 77 and almost blind, has to play as Santa Claus, to earn a few 
dollars at Christmastime because the Government of Saskatchewan allows him to keep only $26 a 
month out of his pension cheque. Mr. Farrel says 87 cents a day is shameful. This is all the money that 
I have for cigarettes, a meal at a restaurant, entertainment and clothes. It is all that I have to buy 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2215 

presents for my grandchildren for Christmas. 
 
Tom Farrel and other pensioners with no additional income have been allowed a comfort allowance of 
only $26 a month for the past two years. They have been denied the past and present increases in the 
old age pensions, while others, those of wealth, have received the full benefit. These Saskatchewan 
pensioners sign their cheques to the licensed authorities and receive back the pittance of 87 cents a 
day, the maximum allowed by the Government of Saskatchewan. As Santa Claus in Woolco, Tom 
makes $3 per hour. Sometimes he works two hours a day – 2:00 to 4:00 p.m. and the other days he 
works four hours – 2:00 to 4:00 and 7 to 9. On the days he works four hours he spends $1.50 for 
supper and that leaves him about $10.50. The Saskatchewan Department of Welfare has informed him 
that they must have part of his earnings, so it looks like he has only about $6 left out of $12. 
 
The plight of Tom Farrel and others like him has been raised in the Senate, brought to the attention of 
the Members of the Saskatchewan Legislature. That’s the inference that 3,000 people in Saskatchewan 
homes for the aged in similar circumstances continue to receive only $26 a month, 87 cents a day. 
 

Now I am not sure whether that situation has been changed, but one would hope so, Mr. Speaker, but 
surely that is reason enough for the Members opposite to support this Resolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another article to which I want to refer. I should like also to quote another article in 
this very well written and excellent book and this deals with the creative urge in older people and I think 
this is something which I think most people seem to forget that elderly people are as creative as young 
people, but because of their conditions, because of their poor economic conditions they are just not 
allowed the necessary time in order to do this. I want to read to you, the comments of Mr. Edward T. 
Hall, beginning at page 128, in this regard. 
 

Charles Dickens in The Tale of Two Cities uttered a bit of philosophy that might well be used as a text 
for this article: “You see,” said Doctor Manette, “it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost 
workings of this poor man’s mind. He once yearned so frightfully for that occupation, and it was so 
welcome when it came; no doubt it relieved his pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the 
fingers for the perplexity of the fingers for the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he 
became more practiced, the ingenuity of the mental torture; that he has never been able to bear the 
thought of putting it quite out of his reach.” 
 
Man is naturally creative. He finds peace and satisfaction when he expresses this urge by making 
things with his hands. Unfortunately, our educational system and manner of living in America have 
not emphasized the vital importance of such expression in a well-ordered life. Back in 1905, when Das 
Gupta founded a weaving school in the home of the late Rabindranath Tagore in India, Mahatma 
Gandhi stated that everyone, irrespective of his station in life, should devote at least one hour of every 
day to 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2216 

doing something creative with his hands. 
 
The urge for individual expression may be submerged or lie dormant during a long life. Apparently, 
however, this creative spark remains alive and under proper handling may be fanned into a flame. Our 
studies with thousands of people of all ages suggest that each person has preferences as to mediums of 
expression. 
 
A man who was well on in years came into the school one evening to look around. He explained he 
had too much time on his hands, was bored with movies, cards, and life in general. He had been an 
executive and had never used his hands. He didn’t know what to do. I told him to wander through the 
different studios to see what others were doing. As the bee is drawn to the lotus, we found him intently 
watching a younger executive in the clay room. We brought him a smock so he could play there. As 
the weeks passed he and his friends were surprised by the high quality of his work, which later we, in 
fact, put on exhibition. 
 
Another retired business man browsed around the school for an hour or so and then said, “I want to 
learn how to weave.” It was new to him, and he had never realized that it would appeal to him. Today, 
he is a fine weaver and enjoys the satisfaction of creating for his family and friends fabrics they deeply 
appreciate. 
 
A seventy-three-year-old lady knew definitely what she wanted to do when she inquired whether there 
was an age limit for students. Pounding in copper had appealed to her since early married life. Now as 
a grandmother, she had her first opportunity to follow that urge. She was with us every day for several 
months, doing excellent work. She is now head of a creative department in a private girls’ school. 
Welcome Lawson was seventy-six and nearly blind when he enrolled to learn how to make copper ash 
trays to sell to Vassar College students. He had been a lawyer. 
 
Two executives, who will shortly e forced to retire, have mastered weaving of yardage fabrics for 
suits. Many of my own tweeds were woven by a white-haired old gentleman; part of the yarns were 
spun and dyed by an eighty-one-year-old lady. This past week an aged man enrolled in bookbinding 
and asked for special training in gold decorations. 
 
Helping elderly people discover their chosen creative field is very important. In the Universal School 
it is simplified because so many distinctly different activities are carried on where they may be 
observed. No one can predict what a visitor will favor. 
 
One grandmother, who is determined never to grow old, worked in both the leather and pewter 
studios. She now has her own shop in her home, where she is profitably busy making articles on 
special order only, mostly for gifts. Another woman, in her late sixties, studied jewelry and developed 
a series of twelve birthday bracelets for graduation presents. Another little widow, who was old in 
spirit and well on in years came to the school to get 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2217 

her mind off the crushing sadness of losing her only son. Weaving appealed to her and provided the 
needed occupational therapy. She soon began to sell her work. The transformation surprised everyone. 
She now looks fifteen years younger. 
 
Adding creative expression to one’s daily routine has a deep and far-reaching effect on the individual. 
The medical profession uses occupational therapy in both mental and general hospitals to give the 
human mechanism an opportunity to regain health. Preventive therapy is even more effective. It is 
especially needed with older people who may lack the will to live possessed by those still in harness. 
As suggested above, the effectiveness of the activity is greatly increased when we discover what the 
person would love most to do. 
 
Mr. R. W., a man in his late sixties, had suffered a stroke and was forced to give up his congenial 
business activities. Realizing that he was merely awaiting death, he became extremely neurotic and 
started drinking heavily. The psychiatrist whom he consulted, instead of sending him to an institution, 
decided to place a ready warped loom with yarns and shuttles in the living room one night after his 
patient had retired. 
 
The next day R. W. began to play with his new toy. He stopped drinking and became his fine, normal 
self. For several months he wove fabrics for various members of the family and steadily improved 
physically. Contrary to medical predictions, his heart stopped troubling him, and he has now returned 
to his business. 
 
To R. W.’s life was added what might be called “Vitamin V in human behavior,” bringing results that 
even science is hard put to explain. R. W. discovered his creative self through happy activity that 
occupied both the mind and the hands. When the results of these satisfying moments evoked praise 
from others, R. W. received the ego recognition we all crave. It introduced into the day a reason for 
living and into the anticipated tomorrow the joy which comes from having completed one’s daily task. 
 
Another student at the school was ninety when he and his wife enrolled. They lived in New Hampshire 
and planned to have a gift shop in their home, which later materialized, most of the articles for sale 
being fashioned by the elderly couple. 
 
The following winter he returned to the school with blueprints of a new home. He wanted to make a 
miniature model so they could see just how it would look when completed. He was one of the most 
ambitious students in the school, and just refused to grow old. 
 
Articles fashioned with our hands are our personally created children. In many lives they fill the gap 
left by actual children or friends who have drifted away or have disappointed one. An elderly person 
who has lost initiative and broods over imaginary or real wrongs must be given a happy, effective 
antidote that gets him out of the grooves of his own thinking, pulls him off the 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2218 

shelf, and provides congenial work. The rediscovery of one’s creative self does that – Vitamin V in 
human behavior. 

 
And again, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this is not helpful without proper economic assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most difficult things that elderly people face and I know this through personal 
experience from my own family, is the changing social scene and the difficulty they have adjusting to it. 
I am not thinking of my immediate family but of a grandfather. And I think the Members opposite may 
not appreciate this problem that elderly people have and I intend on enlightening them in the next few 
moments. This particular problem, which again can be cured by economic well-being is described by 
Mr. Lawrence K. Frank, also from “New Goals for Old Age”. 
 

The words “a changing society” are being constantly used but we are not always clear just what they 
mean. Usually we refer to the more or less outward, visible signs of new developments in our 
economic and industrial life and to some of the modifications in living which we have been forced to 
make to meet such developments. Urbanization, with the consequent crowding of more and more 
people into large cities, is perhaps one of the most striking of these changes and one that is responsible 
for much maladjustment and disturbance, since the older patterns of rural living which are carried into 
the city are either inefficient or in conflict with the other demands of city life. Within the city we have 
witnessed in recent years the rise of congregate dwellings or apartment houses in which a thousand or 
more persons may live, and very recently we have seen the construction of large-scale housing 
developments which provide housing for twenty to thirty thousand persons in which would be a large 
town or small city. 
 
Another prominent, inescapable feature of social change is seen in the organization of rapid 
transportation and communication with automobiles and buses, streamlined trains and airplanes, which 
now enable us to move about from place to place and to communicate with almost unbelievable speed. 
Similarly we have seen the rise of large-scale commercial amusements in the form of moving pictures 
and radio, and the big sport events such as baseball and football, attended by many thousands of 
spectators. These amusements are notable because they are largely enjoyed by the individual who 
passively attends with little or not effort; indeed, they are sometimes likened to anodynes and drugs to 
which individuals turn for escape or forgetfulness. 
 
These developments that have so immediately affected family and individual living are, however, but 
products of an even more amazing development of industries and public utilities that now furnish an 
unbelievable variety of goods and services as modern technology is increasingly focused upon 
production. From the factories have come forth a wide variety of equipment and gadgets and so-called 
labor-saving devices, together with machines and tools that have now supplanted most earlier 
handicrafts and operations. These developments have also had an 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2219 

immediate influence upon daily living to the extent that they have led to the establishment of central 
heating and hot-water supplies, canning factories, commercial bakeries, laundries, restaurants, and 
modern hospitals and schools that have progressively taken over the former functions and duties of the 
home. 
 
These large-scale social, economic, and industrial changes have transformed our social life and have 
had an impact upon daily living that we are only just beginning to realize. To the older men and 
women, especially those who grew up in the simpler rural life of a generation or two ago, they present 
a bewildering array of new situations to which adjustments may be difficult. Even the acceptance and 
use of modern conveniences may, because of their complexity and speed, present very difficult 
situations, as we may see in the hesitation of older people to enter moving stairways and elevators and 
their avoidance of the labor-saving gadgets with which modern life is now equipped. It is to be noted 
that it is not only the complexity of these newer devices and equipment, but the speed with which they 
operate that often creates anxiety for the older person whose reactions are slower than those of the 
average person to whom, after all, the contrivance is geared. 
 
In considering the impact of the changing social scene upon the older person today, we should 
recognize these difficulties and try to realize how trying, if not exhausting, the effort to keep on being 
alert must be to those who no longer can have the quickness of perception and response of the younger 
person. 
 
It is customary, in discussing our changing socio-economic life to think of these developments as 
essentially novel and modern, but a little reflection will remind us that the process of socio-economic 
change has been under way for almost two hundred years in England and later in this country. Let us 
recall how England was disrupted about 1750 with the coming of machinery and urbanization; of how 
the older handicrafts were ruined as factories arose; and how the simpler agricultural life was 
supplanted as England became increasingly industrialized. These changes brought large-scale political 
upheavals and social strife which were more or less duplicated in this country following the Civil War. 
The novel Inheritance by Phyllis Bentley gives a poignant picture of how the decline and closing of 
handicrafts and the development of industrialization led to social changes which affected people of 
different social classes, economic classes, and age groups. 
 
Within the past thirty or forty years, however, there has been an intensification of all these trends and 
it may be truly said that the social, economic, and technological changes have been coming more 
rapidly and on a larger scale than ever before. Indeed, it may be said that much of the present-day 
confusion and conflict arises from the long delayed and strongly resisted readjustments in our social 
and political life to meet these other developments, and that now we are faced with widespread 
disturbances and violence because we have not modified our laws and customs to bring them into 
greater conformity with our economic 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2220 

and industrial development. 
 
Discussions of these larger impersonal developments in industry and technology often fail to give us a 
clear picture of what they mean to the individual man and woman. Let us try to see a little more 
clearly how these changes do affect our ways of life. Perhaps the most notable and often the most 
neglected aspect of recent social change is seen in the way in which we have given up making a living 
in order to earn a living; that is to say, more and more we are engaged in wage-earning, even in 
agriculture, where farming has been shifted to cash crops. This means that our economic security is no 
longer a question of how much effort we can put into work, but rather depends upon the shifting 
fortunes of business enterprise. 
 
Along with this change from making to earning a living we should note the pasting of the family 
homestead, so that now few of us have any permanent home or abode, but rather move about from 
dwelling to dwelling in accordance with the changing requirements of jobs and business conditions. 
As we have been engaged in trying to earn a more or less precarious living and have shifted out 
dwellings from place to place, we have had to face the further difficulty that, until the 1940 national 
defense program began, industry has insisted upon earlier retirement. Before the war it was not 
infrequent for wage earners to be retired at forty-five as no longer capable of meeting the demands of 
the rapid pace of industrial processes. This latter situation was indeed ironical, since during the last 
generation men and women have been living longer but found that they were no longer needed in 
business and economy. The war, of course, has changed this situation, though whether such change is 
temporary it is hard to say at present. 
 
I was recently impressed with comments in Washington concerning what is happening in industries 
today. The larger, more far-sighted, better financed industries are beginning to make a conscious effort 
to provide opportunities for older and for handicapped workers. Six or seven years ago anyone with 
any kind of heart affliction would have been ruled out for employment. Industry now provides him 
with a job that he can safely do and gives him the medical supervision and direction that he needs to 
maintain himself under working conditions. This may mark a new trend in work for older individuals. 
In a Midwest factory there is one man, approximately eighty years of age, whom the company brings 
in a car every morning and returns home in similar fashion every evening. This old man does nothing 
except keep up the morale of the fifty, sixty, or seventy year old people who have the skill which that 
factory requires. 
 
If we will reflect on what it means to have no permanent place of abode or roots in the community, to 
be largely at the mercy of fluctuating business conditions, to face early retirement – we will begin to 
get a clearer view of what changing socio-economic conditions are meaning to the individual man and 
woman as he or she grows older. 
 
Here it is appropriate to point out that along with 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2221 

the developments in our social, economic, and industrial activities there has been a progressive shift in 
our population which has been scarcely realized except by special students of the subject. During the 
nineteenth century the population of the United States increased at a prodigious pace both through the 
high birth rate and through the entrance of numerous immigrants from abroad. Within the last thirty to 
forty years the birth rate has been almost steadily declining, and the duration of life has been extended. 
Whereas in 1900 our population could be represented by a pyramid with a broad base of children 
under five, tapering to an apex of a few older persons, today our population may be represented by a 
figure resembling a barrel, with a rapidly decreasing number of children at the bottom, and a growing 
number of individuals over seventy at the top, with a large bulge in the middle years of twenty to 
forty-five. According to the best estimates of our future population, in another forty years, if present 
trends continue, our population picture may be likened to that of a candle with an equal number of 
males and females in each age from one year up to approximately seventy, when there will be a slight 
taper where the wick would appear. The present and prospective population situation is indeed unique, 
since so far as we know it has never existed before, at least in western European culture. This very 
change in the age distribution of our population, with the declining number of babies and children and 
the increasing number of older men and women, presents a situation that calls for large-scale social, 
economic, and political readjustments for which we have scarcely begun to prepare. 
 
It should be recalled that in earlier times only a few older persons survived the hazards and strains of 
life, and accordingly they enjoyed prestige and widespread respect and exercised the authority which 
their age and supposed wisdom deserved. Today and in the immediate future we face a situation in 
which there will be an increasing number of older men and women who, largely because of rapid 
social changes, are confused and bewildered and only too often resistant to the enforced readjustments, 
so that they enjoy little prestige and can exercise little or no authority, except in so far as they may, 
through the organization or political pressure groups, force from society various concessions like these 
being urged today by the organizations of older persons through the country. 
 

And I would submit, for example, by the Senior Citizens’ Commission of Saskatchewan. 
 

The difficult readjustments we face in meeting the changing economic and industrial situations are no 
greater than those which confront us in the rapid increase in the number of older men and women in 
our population, for which we have at present made little or no systematic preparation. We should 
recognize that there is a certain irony in this situation, inasmuch as we face more rapid and more 
extensive changes calling for even greater social reorganization at a time when apparently our 
population will have an increasing number of older individuals who, in general, will be less capable of 
meeting such situations and of accepting the necessary social changes involved. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2222 

The enactment of old age security provisions within the last few years may be regarded as the first step 
toward meeting the requirements of our aging population. It is worth pointing out that for years 
business and industry have recognized the necessity of replacing machinery and equipment and have, 
in accordance with good accounting practice, set up reserves to meet the cost of such retirements. Only 
recently, however, have we recognized the necessity for meeting human obsolescence and 
depreciation by providing old age retirements as a justifiable charge upon industry. Perhaps we can 
interpret this as a sign of the progress of the democratic aspiration toward recognizing the integrity of 
the individual personality and attempting to protect and conserve individuals. 
 
Both in childhood and in old age the necessity for large-scale social provisions is gradually being 
recognized though a variety of provisions designed to conserve our human resources in all possible 
ways. Such provisions as have now been made, however, are the first faltering steps toward a more 
systematic social program that will arise as we begin to assay all our social life and institutions, 
business, industry, professions, government, education, and so forth, in terms of what they are doing to 
and for the individual. 
 
While we have been often told that social change is caused by inventions and discoveries which are 
bringing about alterations in our economic life, it is also worth noting that many social changes are the 
result of a change in sensibilities, that is, through new awareness of human needs and values which 
were formerly ignored or sacrificed, sudden realization of injustices we can no longer tolerate as 
humanly desirable. Thus, as we could complacently accept the exploitation of individuals, we could 
tolerate the almost unbelievable cruelty and destruction of men and women and children that was so 
frequent during the nineteenth century both here and abroad. Today, as we become increasingly 
sensitive to human needs and begin to place a value upon the individual, we are more and more ready 
to realize how ruthlessly destructive our social life has been. Emphasizing the importance of 
sensibilities and values, therefore, is justified here because it is just this sensitive awareness which our 
teachers and educators must create and communicate to others if we are to hope for any approach to a 
more humanly decent society. The fundamental conflict is between technology and human 
sensibilities, between forms of production and our consciousness. The rise of new sensibilities, 
becoming aware of human values and needs, may represent a change which in the long run will be 
more important than technology because these sensibilities will dictate to what use to put our science 
and technology. 
 
Let us remind ourselves that the basic social question with which economics, political science, and 
sociology are concerned may be formulated in terms of “who shall be sacrificed for whom?” How 
sensitive are we to the rights of people who are being sacrificed? In the past the ruthless using or 
exploitation of individuals has been justified by all manner of social theories and by our basic cultural 
traditions. Here we should pause to discuss 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2223 

what our culture is and does, since these cultural changes have large significance for the life of the 
older individual. The better understanding we can gain of what our culture means, both to the group 
and to the individual, the better position we shall be in to understand some of the most acute 
difficulties that are faced by older individuals in their personal lives today. 
 
Perhaps we can gain a better understanding of what we mean by culture by realizing that as organisms 
we exist in the geographical environment or space that we call nature, but that as members of society 
we carry on our life activities in what might be called social space, utilizing the institutions of 
contract, barter, sale, courtship, marriage, divorce, property owning, and litigation to regulate our 
activities and our conduct toward others. 
 
Until recently we have been inclined to think of our social life and of our culture as some sort of 
large-scale organization or mechanisms existing somewhere between the earth and sky and operating 
by some cosmic forces, for example, economic forces, social forces, and so forth. Today we are 
beginning to realize that what we call organized society is not a cosmic organization, but rather is to 
be looked upon as the patterned conduct of individuals who have been taught in childhood what to do 
and not to do, what to say, what to believe, and what to think, so that in a very real sense society and 
culture are really built into us in the basic ideas and beliefs and assumptions, the selective awareness, 
patterns of conduct, cherished goals and aspirations to which we devote our lives, and in the criteria of 
credibility, that is, the way we judge what we will believe or disbelieve. 
 
Each individual child must be inducted into a particular social life and a particular culture and be made 
to see, believe, and feel in accordance with our social and cultural traditions. Likewise each individual 
child undergoes the process of molding his naïve impulsive behavior into the patterned conduct, 
especially as seen in his habits of eating and elimination, his emotional reactions, and all the other 
patterns of socialized behaviour which enable him to participate in the group life.] 
 
Now the most interesting and significant aspect of this whole process is that each individual child, 
while learning to confirm more or less to the standardized requirements of our society, nevertheless 
builds up a highly individualized version of the required conduct and, above all, his own peculiar way 
of feeling toward situations and people. It is not unwarranted, therefore, to say that while we exist in 
the geographical environment of nature and carry on our life activities in the social world, business, 
industry, government, the family, we really life in the private world of our own personality. 
 
Let me illustrate this by pointing out that when we listen to someone speaking, each of us sees a 
different person, hears different remarks, and reacts to what we hear with approval or dislike, so that 
when we come from 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2224 

any meeting with others we remember and quote not what was said, but rather what we heard. We 
should realize, therefore, that each one of us is living in this highly idiomatic private world that we 
have developed from our life experience and that to a larger extent than we may care to recognize, our 
whole adult life is governed by our forgotten childhood, when we were being socialized and made a 
participating member of our social and cultural life. During those early but forgotten years we 
developed our basic patterns of conduct, our characteristic ways of accepting and organizing 
experience and our persistent ways of feeling toward the world, especially the feelings of anxiety, 
guilt, and resentment or hostility. These feelings color the world in every situation in which we find 
ourselves, and because they derive from those early years for which we have no conscious memory, 
we rarely, if ever, have any insight into our own conduct or that of others. Social change is not 
something that is going on outside, however much it may appear in changed equipment. Social 
change, if there is any, is the change taking place in human behavior, and society and culture is an 
aggregate consisting of the ways you and I believe, feel, and act about our lives and the lives of other 
individuals. It is the common elements of speech and patterns of conduct that make up the thing called 
society, and that is changing because you and I have ceased to obey implicitly the ideas and patterns of 
conduct taught to us by our teachers, parents, and others in our youth. Irrespective of whether social 
conditions change as we grow older – the exceptions of which are the accustomed patterns of action – 
people are changing. 
 
If we will now apply this discussion to the situation of the older person we may gain some light on 
which the changing social scene means to an aging individual. The private world which he built many 
years ago may become increasingly incompatible with the changing social situation. The basic 
assumptions and beliefs with which the individual in early life attempted to make life meaningful and 
to organize his experience become increasingly obsolete and incredible in the life of today. The 
patterns of conduct which the individual learned in early life with the sanction of law, the church, and 
the community mores, become increasingly inadequate as the various social changes we have 
discussed before crowd in upon him and demand readjustments that are more and more difficult to 
make. Thus, for the older person we may say that it becomes increasingly difficult to bring life 
experience within the range of the patterns of personal thinking, acting, and feeling that constitute his 
only repertory for living. As old friends and family disappear his feeling of isolation grows, and he 
finds situations more and more perplexing and refractory. The older patterns with which he met life in 
his childhood and youth, however inadequate and difficult then, are now becoming almost impossible 
for utilization in the new situations and with the younger people who have grown up with other ideas 
and beliefs and ways of living. 
 
We should pause here to point out that the whole emphasis of education in the home and family, in the 
church and school, has been to establish more or less rigid patterns of thinking and acting, and to 
demand a 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2225 

high degree of conformity which may operate to unfit the individual to meet changes in his later life. It 
is not unwarranted to say that, perhaps unconsciously but more or less effectively, the educational 
process through which the individual passes seems almost deliberately designed to create frustration 
and defeat; to prepare people for a life they can never find and to handicap them in every possible way 
in attempting to meet new situations in which their adult lives must be led. To a very large extent this 
is due to the old tradition that only the wisdom of the past was of any value, and therefore education 
has drawn upon the past for its content and taught the past as the sole dependable guide to the future. 
Moreover, as we are beginning to realize, the anxieties and guilt feelings of parents, teachers, 
ministers, and others concerned with the education of the young force them to impose all their fears 
and needs upon children, adolescents, and young adults, thus burdening them with all the frustrations 
and defeats of their elders. As the individual grows up these educational experiences become more 
controlling and coercive, and he meets life with increasing anxiety as his own personal patterns of 
conduct and all the fears and worries that have been given him by others operate to handicap his 
efforts to meet the persistent tasks of life which all individuals must face. 
 
These personal difficulties become ever more acute as the individual grows older, especially when he 
retires or withdraws from active working life. While engaged in the daily round of working he could 
find some defense or escape from his personal problems, but upon retirement he must face his basic 
personality difficulties in all their acute form. We hear a great deal about the importance of helping 
people to solve their personality problems; this is undoubtedly an erroneous view since a little 
reflection will show us that we cannot solve our personality problems since they are the persistent 
ways in which we organize our experience, interpret life, and feel toward people. In other words, our 
personality problems are the inevitable aspects of the private world in which we live and from which 
we can never escape. For example, Wilder remarks in The Woman of Andros, “Most people go 
through life trying to hide as best they can their consternation that life after all contains no wonderful 
surprise and the most difficult burden of all is the incommunicability of love.” We can, with 
intelligence and courage, and with some help from others restate our personality problems on different 
levels of understanding and insight or on what we might say are successive levels of maturity – if we 
can and do mature. 
 
Thus we see that the persistent perplexities and anxieties with which we have more or less learned to 
live in our period of life, become the major focus of living in our later years. All the old anxieties, 
hates, and resentments, all the old compulsions begin to occupy us when we are no longer busy, when 
we are no longer needed, when we are alone. Moreover, many of the impulses and functional needs 
which we learned to repress in our early childhood begin to emerge in later life and clamor for 
expression or release. And so again we may find ourselves confronted with the same difficulties and 
perplexities as in our adolescence and early childhood. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2226 

Perhaps we can understand the situation more clearly if we will realize that the past is not out in some 
mysterious space, but the past is in us; past experience is a part of us and continues to operate in us in 
the present just as our mammalian ancestry continues to operate in our organic systems and 
physiological functions. As we grow older our forgotten childhood revives our memory of childhood 
experiences, and increases as our memory for recent events fades. Thus we may say that the older 
individual becomes increasingly preoccupied with his past, especially his early childhood, and 
increasingly subject to those persistent feelings of anxiety and resentment which he developed in his 
early life. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — 
 

When we speak of the older person in the changing social scene we should think, not merely of our 
changing technology and the various social, economic, and political developments, since these are 
chiefly the background from which the older person projects his private world like a lantern slide upon 
a screen. To the extent that this projected private world is increasingly out of focus with the 
contemporary social life, the older individual will be perplexed and confused. But the major difficulty 
which each individual faces, especially as he grows older, is within that private world as the persistent 
conflicts and the emotional distortions and reactions become ever more acute with the passage of years 
and the almost inevitable frustrations they bring. 
 
We cannot possibly slow down the social changes, indeed certain changes are so long overdue that for 
the next generation or two we must look forward to even larger reorganizations and changes with 
possibly considerable violence and disturbance, expressive of the prolonged resistance to these needed 
readjustments. We may, if we are intelligent, achieve some kind of social order, and strive to 
synchronize the social changes which at present are so uneven and unbalanced. For the older 
individual our efforts should be primarily to help him to make the revisions which are necessary 
because of advancing age and social changes. But what is even more important, we must discover 
what is taking place inside of him and help him to accept him or herself and come to terms with other 
individuals and their personalities. In other words, we may say that good social adjustment for the 
young and for the older individual is primarily a question of how they have been able to assimilate 
their own past experience and to come to terms with themselves, rather than how they have adjusted to 
the external, social, economic, and political situation. 
 
Nothing is more pathetic than the poignant spectacle of men and women, sixty, seventy, and over, still 
driven by the anxieties and ambitions of youth, still torn by the insecurity and guilt of their adolescent 
years. How many individuals of older years live a life of continual unhappiness and misery because 
they are dominated by persistent feelings of resentment and hostility, still engaged in fighting the 
battles of their childhood, against 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2227 

their parents, teachers, against all adults who frustrated them, deprived them, coerced them, and even 
brutalized and terrorized them. How miserable is that old age in which the individual can find no 
release from those driving ambitions to get even, to show other people that he is not as bad as he had 
been told he was in childhood. 
 
With aging, there is the possibility that the pattern of inhibition and repression built up in childhood 
may be broken through by the impulsive life that has been long buried underneath. Every psychiatrist 
has had the experience of knowing some man of social, economic, or business standing who has been 
caught in an action, say a sex offense, which seems perfectly incredible in connection with that 
individual and incredible to the man himself. These inhibitions that we build up in childhood may 
begin to slip and lose their cogency of control. Impulse and curiosity break through, to the 
consternation of the older person, his friends, relatives – and victims. If we think of the private world 
of the individual as having a greater or less degree of structuralization or form and a greater or less 
degree of rigidity, these two dimensions might be useful concepts to employ in discussing the private 
world of the aging individual. 
 
The mental health needs of older persons are more like those of the young child, not because of the 
popular and false notion that they are childish, but because the same problems become more acute 
with the years and the need for reassurance, for “whoness” rather than “whatness” returns in full force. 
As long as we are vigorous and active and can demonstrate our “whatness” and put it over on people, 
the question of “whoness” is not so important, but as contemporaries fall by the wayside, the question 
of “whoness” becomes more insistent. 
 
The very young child or baby, coming into a strange and terrifying world, needs support. The older 
person’s sense of confidence in the world is beginning to diminish and he needs reassurance because 
of the growing discrepancy between his little universe and what is going on outside. 
 
Thus we see that the basic dimensions of the private world of the older person will be the focus of any 
endeavor to foster better mental health and to provide a design for living that is compatible with their 
needs and capabilities. The continued sweep of our social and technological processes makes it 
impossible for the older individual to bring his social situation into conformity with his private world 
and feelings as frequently occurred in older, simpler communities. Instead, therefore, of the usual 
pattern of fighting the world, or withdrawing into a sulky retreat from life, our effort should be to help 
individuals to reorganize their private worlds so that they can live more at peace with themselves and 
less in conflict with society. To a very large extent this means deliberately planning for our old age, 
something which individuals rarely do, because they have such strong resistance to even thinking of 
their later years of life. Until recently only a few individuals did survive, but with the increasing 
number of older individuals we must try to develop some more systematic program to foster this 
preparation for later life. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2228 

Can we work out a scheme that will make life more happy and less disturbing without seeing clearly 
that this involves doing something to society as well as to the individual? I am inclined to say that the 
psychiatric formula that people must “face reality” is susceptible of a gross misuse. It may be a 
defeatist program and so I should like to base by protect on the use of the term “facing reality”. Our 
task is not to face reality but to try to create a reality that would fit human needs and values. New hope 
comes with the new culture which is part of the ever-changing historical process. With this viewpoint 
of correcting reality as much as accepting it, we can agree to the more specific facts about the mental 
health of old age without being misled into accepting a defeatist attitude. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — 
 

It is sometimes thought that an older population is necessarily a more conservative one. If old people 
are unable to achieve a degree of security and peace, they may be rigid as voters, and have a 
conservative or even reactionary influence on our social life. But the older person is not by nature 
inclined to be more rigid than the younger. If we allow him to be more active in the community and 
participate more in the world about him, he may not have to be so conservative. We have not 
developed the roles for older people to a point that would clarify their many human relationships with 
family, friends, and others. We need a great many new roles for old people. The book All Passion 
Spent by Victoria Sackville-West tells the story of a woman who has served her husband’s political 
career, but who upon his death prefers to set up life for herself. For the first time in her life she has 
time to reflect and work out her own plans. 
 
We are not making sufficient demands upon older people. What they want is not idleness and freedom, 
but an opportunity to do something with their lives that will make them significant. Thornton Wilder 
says, in The Woman of Andros, “We can only be said to be alive in those moments when our hearts 
are conscious of our treasures.” We have to increase the number of such moments for old people. 
 
Until recently we have been inclined to think of health and sanity as something that was mysteriously 
lost, but today we are beginning to realize that health and sanity must be achieved by meeting the tasks 
of life more adequately, courageously, and effectively. To the extent that the education of children and 
adolescents and the growing programs of adult education can and will attempt to help individuals to 
meet life situations more affectively and realistically, in terms of the new understandings and insights 
and awareness that are now becoming available, we may be able, with mental hygiene and preventive 
medicine in childhood and adolescence, to build a wiser and happier pattern of life for the older person 
in the midst of our changing social scene. 
 
We cannot do a great deal for the older person 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2229 

without at the same time doing a great deal for society. One is a reflex of the other. If we have a society 
that will tolerate the humiliation and degradation of human beings, we will have the personality 
distortions, intolerances, and cruelties which is the other side of that kind of society. All over the 
world different societies have given rise to their predominant character structures. If we favor a certain 
kind of social structure we pay the price in people who cannot make the grade and people who have to 
be sacrificed. Cultures have been set up that have met more successfully than we have the problem of 
recognizing the integrity of individuals. 
 
We must find some way of taking into account the increasing number of old people, some way of 
making the transition from maturity to old age with a minimum of the destruction, wastage, 
unhappiness, and misery that now obtains so widely. Only when we stress the value of the individual 
personality will old people come into their own. 

 
Once again I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this Resolution will accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a couple of remarks further to the Resolution. I take considerable pride 
in supporting this Resolution, although I must say that I rarely, if ever, agree with the Member who 
proposed it. But nevertheless the Resolution to me is a good Resolution and even though I disagree with 
Mr. Richards’ politics, as he disagrees with mine, in this case we find common ground. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, for reasons known only to themselves, Members opposite felt that they 
could not support him in this endeavor. I think probably the reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is because of 
their pious smug attitude, that they are the only people who are entitled to bring about social legislation, 
that they refuse to listen to anybody else. They refuse to listen to Members on this side when they 
suggest that there should be legislation dealing with women’s rights, with old age pensions and with a 
multitude of other things. They feel that they are the only ones that have a social conscience and that 
they are the only ones who know what is best for the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — This is the wisdom that brings about an allowance of 87 cents a day for a man in an old 
folks’ home in Prince Albert. This is the wisdom that provides for no increases whatsoever at least at 
this time, for old age pensioners, notwithstanding the fact that this Government has received record 
income in the past year and will continue to receive record income and also receive record money for oil 
sales. Money, I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier advised us some time ago was to be 
used for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t see it being used for the benefit of the people 
of Saskatchewan to date except perhaps they have reduced the cost of gasoline. There are still several 
hundreds of millions of dollars sitting in the Government Treasury which could be used to help elderly 
people in many ways. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2230 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons that the Attorney General and his colleagues became so annoyed 
today when the Leader of the Opposition spoke, is that they were very sensitive to his remarks. The truth 
hurts and they realize it and it hurt them very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I have not been in this Legislature very long. I must 
say that on any occasion that I have been in this Legislature and when any Member has asked leave to 
adjourn a debate there has been no opposition whatsoever. I must say that this is the first time that this 
has happened in my short experience here, I am not sure if the Minister of Agriculture has had it happen 
to him. 
 
I must say as well, Mr. Speaker, that the person who uses this, and probably the most effectively is the 
Attorney General, that time after time I have sat here when he has got up and accused me of certain 
things and has taken a crack at me and other Members of the Opposition. And then, not only will he not 
allow us to answer at that time, he adjourns debate, sits down and we move on to something else. So I 
suggest to the Attorney General what is fair for him is fair for the Members on this side of the House as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, before sitting down I think I should give the Members opposite the 
benefit of some authorities on the problems of old age and related matters. They obviously don’t know 
very much about them so I intend on reading to them a few of the authorities that were considered by the 
Senior Citizens’ Commission in their report. 
 
The first of these is: 
 

The Real Poverty Report by Adams, Cameron, Hill, Penz, published by Mel Hurtig Limited, 
Edmonton, 1971. 
 
Report and Recommendations, on Aged and Long-term Illness Survey Committee. Province of 
Saskatchewan, July, 1963. 
 
Aged and Long-term Illness Survey Committee, Survey of Employers. Province of Saskatchewan, 
1962. 
 
Aged and Long-term Illness Survey Committee, Information and Opinion Survey, Province of 
Saskatchewan, 1962. 
 
Age and Opportunity Centre Inc. Annual Report – 1972, Province of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 1972. 
 
Report of Special Care Homes Program by G. H. Beatty, Province of Saskatchewan, Committee on 
Special-care Homes, 1971. 
 
Belleville and District Inc. United Community Services. Senior Citizens’ Study – Survey Report. 
Province of Ontario, June 1972. 
 
Annual Report of the Minister, Department of Social and 



 
April 9, 1974 

 

 
2231 

Family Services by Hon. Rene Brunelle, 1971-72, Province of Ontario. Year ending March 31, 1972. 
 
Norms for Day Centres, by Jacques Brunet. Province of Quebec, Ministry of Social Services, 1972. 
 
Canadian Conference on Social Welfare. Retirement Policies and Aging. Province of Ontario, 1968. 
Canadian Welfare Council, 55 Parkdale Ave., Ottawa, February, 1969. 
 
Canadian Council on Social Development, Beyond Shelter. A study of NHA – Financed Housing for 
the Elderly, July, 1973. 
 
Canadian Council on Social Development, Homemaker Services. Financing, Training, Future; 
proceedings of a workshop at the Canadian Conference on Social Welfare, 1972, Laval University, 
Quebec, June 18-22, 1972. Published January, 1973. 
 
Canadian Council on Social Development. The National Housing Act Amendments, 1972. A 
commentary by the Canadian Council on Social Development Housing Committee, 1972. 
 
Canadian Council on Social Development. Project Information Exchange; An inventory of studies, 
briefs and social action projects. 
 
Canadian Welfare Council. The Aging in Canada, 1966. Prepared by the Committee on Aging of the 
Canadian Welfare Council, August, 1966. 
 
Canadian Council on Social Development. Issues for Citizen Information Services. Report of a 
National Consultation on Community Information and Referral Services. Ottawa, Ontario. 
 
Canadian Welfare Council. Guidelines for the Purchase of Services. Ottawa, Ontario, August 1969. 
 
The Hon. Claude Castonguay Annual Report 1971-72. Department of Social Services, Quebec, 1972. 
 
Joy Cauffman, Inventory of Health Services. University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, 1971. 
 
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation. Housing the Elderly. Second edition, July, 1972. 
 
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation. A survey of Social Policies and Research Priorities for 
Senior Citizens in Canada, Ottawa, October, 1972. 
 
A New Direction – Now the Community Health Centre. A position paper presented to the Ministers 
Conference on the Needs of the Aging, March 13, 1973. Province of British Columbia. The Hon. 
Dennis Cocke. 
 
Dr. Alex Comfort. Conquest of Aging. Copyright 1968 by University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Consumers’ Association of Canada. A community Information Network, 1968, Ottawa, Ontario. 



 
April 9, 1974 
 

 
2232 

Consumers’ Association of Canada. Information Centres. A Handbook for Canadian Communities. 
May, 1973. 
 
Lawrence Crawford. Retirement. Preparation for Retirement. A selected bibliography and source 
book. Ontario Ministry of Community and Social Services, Toronto, Ontario, 1972. 
 
Lawrence Crawford and Jean Matlow. Some Attitudes Towards Retirement Among Middle-Aged 
Employees. 1968. Ministry of Community and Social Services, Toronto, Ontario. 
 

I would recommend that to Cabinet Ministers on the opposite side because they will be middle-aged 
employees who will be retiring in the next year or so. 
 

Department of Public Welfare. Nursing Homes Act. Chapter 216. Revised Statutes of Nova Scotia, 
1967. 
 
Department of Social Services and Rehabilitation. Annual Report. For the year ended March 31, 1972, 
St. John’s Newfoundland. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I see that we are running out of time, I intended on reading several more articles when this 
matter again comes before us, may I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I hope the Members opposite will 
consider supporting this Resolution. There is no conceivable reason why the Resolution should not be 
supported; there is no reason why there should not be legislation brought in at this Session to enable this 
Resolution to be put into effect. The Government has the money, the need is there. I urge them to act 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Members opposite will consider all the things I have said and what the 
Member from Saskatoon has said and what the Leader of the Opposition has said. I am sure if they 
consider them they will have only one decision they can make and that is to act in accordance with the 
Resolution and that hopefully the senior citizens of this province will get some very needed assistance 
from this Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Being now 9:30 this House will now stand adjourned until 2:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Members are supposed to keep quiet when the House is adjourning. 
Order! 
 
The House adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


	QUESTIONS
	Loss of Jobs in Oil Industry
	Increase in Pay Requested for Motor Licence Issuers
	Government Commitment to Senior Citizens re Report
	ANNOUNCEMENT
	Tabling of Agreement re Iron and Steel Complex
	RESOLUTIONS
	Resolution No. 24 — National Grasslands Park in Southwestern Saskatchewan
	Resolution No. 26 — Guaranteed Monthly Income for Senior Citizens

