



















































Hansard: February 26, 1974


773 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 26, 1974. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

INCREASE IN BREAD PRICES 
 

MR. J. G. LANE: (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Hon. Premier. 

 

The Premier set a precedent last fall when he was prepared and committed his Government to an 

absorption of the proposed increase in the price of beer. We have also noticed his rather weak attempts 

to blame the Government in Ottawa for his own dereliction in duty in fighting inflation. And in light of 

his precedent and his own efforts and in light of the proposed increase in the price of bread in the city of 

Regina, is the Premier of this province prepared to commit his Government to absorbing that proposed 

increase in the price of bread for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A. E. BLAKENEY: (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of how the Hon. Member 

proposes that the Government would absorb the price of bread. We do not buy bread or sell bread and 

therefore we cannot absorb the price by reducing our mark up in the manner presumably indicated by 

the Member for Lumsden. 

 

May I suggest that in reciting the steps taken by the Government to deal with the cost of living that he 

neglected to mention removal of the medical care and hospital tax last year which provided a very 

substantial benefit. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sure that if he bides his time there will be further proposals which will be in 

the Budget and which will similarly contribute to relieving the high cost of living caused by the 

inadequacy of Federal policies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Premier has attempted to avoid the question. We notice he wasn't in the practice of 

buying hogs or buying oil until very recently too. Certainly he can do something in that aspect. The 

Premier mentioned certain aspects... 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! When the Member rises to ask a question it should be a supplementary 

question pertaining to the original 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

774 

answer and not a new topic. It must be direct. 

 

MR. LANE: — The Premier said he didn't sell bread and I said he didn’t sell oil or hogs until very 

recently either. The Premier also made the statement that I am going to answer and ask a question, Mr. 

Speaker. The question, very simply is why did the Premier ignore the fact that he raised SGIO rates 

every year that he has been in office; raised income tax for all our citizens; raised succession duties; 

raised community pasture rates? The Premier has evaded this question and I still demand an answer as to 

what is the Premier going to do for the people of Saskatchewan on higher bread costs for the people of 

the Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Government policy will be announced in due course. 

 

FIRING OF SUPERVISOR FOR SOCIAL WORKERS IN NORTH 
 

MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). We all know that a social worker supervisor for 

northern Saskatchewan was fired by the Minister in the last few days. I should like to ask the Minister, is 

it the standard policy of that Department to have supervisors evaluated by other employees of the same 

branch with fewer qualifications and much less experience in that Department? 

 

HON. G. R. BOWERMAN: (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — No, it is not the policy of the 

Department to have of: supervisors evaluated by supervisors in a similar branch. The particular situation 

with respect to Mr. Baalim is that on the basis of the way that Mr. Baalim was acting and the way that 

was operating in his job it was necessary that he be supervised. 

 

MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. If that isn't the policy and it is one that has been 

made for a particular political reason, I wonder if the Minister could say, in view the criticism by the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, if you are reviewing the firing of Mr. Baalim? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen the criticism of the social workers, the Provincial 

Association of Social Workers. I have seen no specific criticism with respect to that incident. 

 

INSTALLATION OF SPRINKLING SYSTEMS FOR FIRE PREVENTION 
 

MR. G. B. GRANT: (Whitmore Park): — Before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). 

 

I know his department has taken a very genuine and sincere interest in trying to prevent fires as well as 

devise ways and means of warning potential victims. An article in last night’s paper indicated that the 

fire marshal has suggested some changes that are contemplated, one of which is compulsory sprinkling 

of apartments/housing people in excess of five stories. I believe the National Research Council do quite 

a bit of work 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

775 

on this and as I am informed they haven't as yet recognized sprinkling as essential in high rise buildings. 

I would appreciate him commenting on that. 

 

I would also appreciate a comment as to the senior citizens' home in the 22 block McIntyre Street on 

which construction has just commenced, I believe it just above ground level now. Is there provision in 

this building for sprinkling and what other safety and precautionary devices are being included in that 

building since the Provincial Government has a fairly large stake in it? 

 

HON. G. SNYDER: (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to respond to the Member's 

first question. I think it will be recognized that there has been a good deal of concern with respect to the 

whole aspect of fire prevention and fire protection particularly in light of a number of very tragic fires 

that have taken place in the city of Regina especially. Accordingly the people of my department have 

gone through the rigours of preparing a new set of regulations which have been offered to a number of 

interested organizations. In particular the Saskatchewan Construction Association had an opportunity to 

present their views with respect to the new regulations until such time as a meeting on March 7th and 

8th with respect to National Building Code regulations could be held. So accordingly the new 

regulations which were alluded to in the release yesterday are still on my desk waiting the results of a 

meeting which will involve the people who are responsible for the framing of the National Building 

Code. 

 

With respect to the other question I would have to remind the former Minister, the Member for Regina 

Whitmore Park, that in those particular circumstances those areas of concern that fall within the cities, 

the 11 cities where there is an established fire fighting unit, these have become the responsibility 

historically of the city in question where there is a fire fighting unit. 

 

We have made some overtures to the various municipalities indicating that perhaps there are some better 

methods of carrying on inspections. We haven’t concluded finally the route that we propose to travel 

except that we do hope in the not too distant future to have a coherent plan and a more effective 

inspection operation in order that some of the shortcomings that are evident, particularly in apartment 

blocks and other institutions where the public gather on a regular basis, may be rectified. We are hoping 

that we shall have something more coherent than is the case at .the present moment. We are on top of it 

and we hope that we will be able to report more fully in the not too distant future. 

 

MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I gather from what the Minister is saying that 

there is no special preventive features included in that building that I referred to. That it is up to the city 

to determine the safety features that are installed in that building and there is no provision for sprinkling. 

I think this is regrettable and I would hope that he would comment further at a later date. 

 

He speaks of a meeting to be held on March 7th and according to the article, Mr. Grebinsky, the Regina 

Fire Marshall 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

776 

seems to be somewhat in the dark as to what the Provincial Marshal is doing and I would ask the 

Minister, will Mr. Grebinsky and other local city fire marshals be included in these meetings so that they 

can be kept informed? 

 

MR. SNYDFR: — I would expect that that would be the case. I understand that our people have been 

invited to attend. It will be attended by the Saskatchewan Construction Association, at least two or three 

members from the Provincial Fire Commissioner's Office as well as a number of other interested people. 

 

SPEAKER’S RULING 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN DEBATABLE 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I want to say to the members that in order to facilitate the business of the House 

over the past number of years there has been a custom growing that these would be introduced without 

formally being moved. A couple of years ago we had motions for return non-debatable which becomes 

debatable. So in order to assist the Chair in keeping track of these motions when they are moved for 

debate, to keep track of them and to assist the staff we will have to get back to the proper formal rules of 

having these motions, if they are a motion which is debatable, duly moved and seconded. The Clerk has 

them all typed out so anyone wishing to move these motions, there will be forms for them. I would 

kindly ask you to have a seconder on them and sign them the same as any other motion so as we can 

keep track of them. Otherwise it becomes very difficult. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might just rise on a Point of 

Privilege. Is it your view that from here on, every motion for return has to be submitted in writing to you 

at this particular stage? I thought the practice certainly would be sufficient where the Member rises and 

simply says that he moves the order. It is all on the form. We see it. I am not sure I have Your Honour's 

ruling quite clear in my own mind. Would you clarify that for me? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What happens, what makes it difficult, if a motion isn't moved, if it is a debatable 

motion, then an amendment comes, the amendment is submitted in writing and we have no other copy to 

fit it with so we know what it is about without searching the blues back all the time. Once Members are 

aware, they move the motion without having to read it and send it up, it won't take very long. I realize it 

will be difficult at the start but it is going to facilitate the work of the office and myself considerably if 

we have these motions. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, does that mean in essence, if a Member moves a 

motion for return and he submits a copy to the Clerk and retains a copy and then when he gets up to 

move it hands in that copy. He has to do it again, that is right. But it is really not doing it again if he 

made a copy the first time. Is this correct? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Technically he should move 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

777 

it when he gets up but maybe with the agreement of the House we could work out and streamline it a 

little bit so that if a motion is submitted that the Clerk has signed in the first place, when the motion is 

called the Clerk could just date it and send it to the Chair, it would facilitate the work. Maybe we could 

work out some arrangements along that line so that we have some track of it. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 1 
 

MR. J. G. LANE (Lumsden) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 1 showing: 

 

A copy of all reports on investigations undertaken by any Department of the Government of 

Saskatchewan regarding unfair business practices and pricing practices, limitation of 

competition, advertising and any matter regarding consumer protection during the years 1971, 

1972, and 1975. 

 

HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI: (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I am going to have to 

ask at least this side of the House to oppose this particular motion. 

 

The Department of Consumer Affairs as well as other departments, but I am speaking in particular of the 

Department of Consumer Affairs, has and does many investigations of various kinds. It does those 

investigations as a result of complaints that it receives from consumers or problems that are brought to 

the attention by consumers as well as complaints and problems that are from time to time brought to it 

by people who are the sellers to the consumers. That is the function of the Department. 

 

The thing is, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes those complaints are legitimate and sometimes they are not 

legitimate. I don't think that it would be of benefit to those concerns to have these kinds of things made 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't feel that every merchant should be dragged out for public scrutiny simply because 

somebody has brought a complaint to our attention. As I have said not all complaints are always 

justified. Sometimes it is the consumer who is to blame and not the businessman. It is a strange kind of a 

question that Members opposite would ask, who seem to feel that they are the only spokesmen for the 

business community of this province, which is not the case. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I have to ask what kind of a warfare on business is being proposed by the 

Liberal Party opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, the motion asks for many things. It asks for any matter 

regarding consumer protection. The Department of Consumer Affairs is now receiving in the range from 

200 to 500 and sometimes over 500 complaints and concerns, expressed to it 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

778 

a month. It is our intention as a Government to respect the confidentiality of the consumer and it is our 

intention as a Government to respect the confidentiality of the merchant. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSK1: — Further it is prohibitive to search out every one of these files and provide 

this kind of information. 

 

Certainly we are most willing to provide statistics on work that is being done through the Department or 

through any other agency of government related to this and if the Member wishes to look up in the 

annual report he will find a great deal of information that is already provided there. 

 

The information, Mr. Speaker, asks for such information which I feel, and we feel as a government 

should be kept confidential and we believe that the consumer and the business community have a right 

to expect this confidentiality. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, I would recommend that this House defeat 

this motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I find the comments of the young Minister of Consumer 

Affairs rather amusing. If he had been in this Legislature when they were on the Opposition side of the 

House and seen some of the questions that they put on the Order Paper and expected answers to he 

would not speak the way he did. I remember the present Attorney General getting on his feet whenever 

we suggested that there was certain confidential information between the Government and the people 

that they did business with. The present Attorney General screamed to the high heavens that everything 

that goes on in government should be open to the public. 

 

I remember in 1971 the NDP campaigning on that very platform that we were now going to have an 

open government. Everything we do is going to be above board and on the table. There is never going to 

be a question in the Legislature that is going to be turned down because we believe in having the public 

aware of everything that is going on. Here today, after two months of sitting, of doing nothing, I think 

you would have to use that expression in view of the fact that there has been so little done. We have had 

two questions that have been on the Order Paper for two months, stood, and on the third one they are 

asking to have it turned down. 

 

This is the open Government that went to the people in ’71 and promised to provide the openness that 

today we see is nothing but a complete farce. I think there are some occasions when the correspondence 

between Government departments and certain groups perhaps should be on a confidential basis, but I 

hope that the Government opposite will keep this to a minimum and also that they will not adopt that 

holier-than-thou attitude the next time they sit over here on the Opposition benches. 

 

MR. J. G. LANE: (Lumsden): — Just a comment, Mr. Speaker. The remarks of the Hon. Minister are a 

farce to say the least. The hypocrisy of the Hon. Minister is also a farce to this Legislature. He talked 

about 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

779 

confidentiality and yet he goes on television and he talks about a report that he had prepared that he 

won't give to the Legislature, that he won't give to the Members of this House and talks about what bad 

guys Safeways are in their pricing. That is not confidentiality; This is biased, unfair reporting and his 

investigations will select certain individuals and certain groups and then go ahead and run to television 

and give that report because they are bad guys and we will get them and then he calls that respecting 

confidentiality. His answer is nonsense, the position of the Government opposite is nonsense. 

 

The Member for Athabasca made it quite clear what your position was before the last election and how 

you have dishonored it so far today. 

 

He talked about confidentiality of the consumer and of business. Let us make no mistake that 

government records are not confidential. The Minister himself is guilty of breach of confidence on his 

investigations. He selectively picks which ones he wants to take to the public. I say that is unfair. Sure, 

talk about war on business. Your unfair approach and unfair practices are a war on business and I say a 

discredit to the Department and a discredit to the Government opposite. 

 

We have asked for investigations and I don't know why you are afraid to table them in this House. You 

have biased investigations, you have already admitted that, you admitted that in the last session. You 

have admitted breach of confidentiality since the last session. There is no question that the information 

that we asked for is legitimate and it is certainly right to have it tabled before this House. 

 

It is very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that on the federal level the Government of Canada tables this 

information and it is reported and the Members opposite they may have something to do with it. They 

can check all the investigations and dispositions in the Canadian Association Consumer magazine. They 

will also find in that magazine who was prosecuted and who was found guilty. They are not afraid. They 

are afraid because they only intend to have biased investigations, unfair investigations and that is wrong 

and we, on this side of the House, cannot support that approach of the Government opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 2 
 

MR. H. E. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 

2 showing: 

 

All correspondence between officials of the Government of Saskatchewan and any interested 

parties, concerning the application of Meadow Lake Feeders Limited for financial assistance. 

 

HON. K. THORSON (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, this motion asks for 

information which frankly should not be made public. I want to hasten to add that I am not trying to 

determine now whether or not anybody connected with Meadow Lake Feeders Limited has applied to 

any 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

780 

Government agency for any financial assistance. That is really not the question that concerns me. I think 

it is a very bad precedent if it becomes known that when people write to the Government, correspond 

with Government agencies about the possibility of financial assistance from Government agencies, that 

that correspondence will be tabled in the Legislature and made public. Because when people write in 

about matters of that kind they are very often asked, and very often volunteer, to supply all kinds of 

information about their own financial circumstances. I don't think any of us in this Legislature would 

expect those people to be exposed to a public review because they corresponded with the Government 

about that possibility. 

 

May I say that if the question is rephrased in some other way or if the Member wants to get in touch 

with me directly, and there is some information that can be supplied that is useful and helpful, I would 

like to co-operate in that regard. But in its present form, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to defeat the 

motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 5 
 

MR. T. M. WEATHERALD (Cannington) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 5 showing: 

 

(1) A copy of all analyses, comparisons, projections, graphs, summaries, and reports prepared by 

the Minister of the Environment or his Department, and/or any other agency of the Government 

comparing the effectiveness of Saskatchewan's anti-pollution program to each and any of the 

programs in the other nine Canadian provinces. 

 

(2) A copy of all resumes, comparisons, reports, or summaries comparing Saskatchewan's 

anti-pollution legislative program to the programs in any or all of the other nine Canadian 

provinces. 

 

HON. N. E. BYERS: (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Cannington asks for 

a good deal of information: 

 

1. To compare the effectiveness of Saskatchewan's anti-pollution program with those in other provinces. 

 

2. For the effectiveness of our anti-pollution legislation with respect to other provinces. 

 

3. For figures on research spent in Saskatchewan as compared to Canada. 

 

I want to say to the Member that we will be able to provide him with some information in this respect. I 

do, however, want to point out to him that as Departments of the Environment are relatively new in most 

Canadian provinces and relatively new in the Federal Government, that we have not really been 

spending much time comparing our legislative progress on environmental matters with other 

jurisdictions. We have been moving ahead on a number of fronts, whether it is in the area of air 

pollution control measures or water pollution control measures or the implementation of the Litter Act, 

etc. However, not all 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

781 

provinces are moving at the same speed in this regard. 

 

I want to say to him that one of the things that we have endeavored to do is to work as closely as 

possible with our sister provinces in an attempt to develop regulations and legislation that are, insofar as 

possible, uniform across the country. We would think that it would be a disservice to Canada if we were 

to have provinces that could be earmarked as 'pollution havens.' Therefore, there has been a good deal of 

co-operation with the other provinces. Obviously, not all provinces are moving at the same pace with 

respect to legislation and they are not all moving as fast as we are. I want to point out to the Hon. 

Member from Cannington, for example, in an area such as our Litter Control Act, that we have been 

receiving enquiries from across the land as to its effectiveness, how are we getting along since we have 

not allowed the use of non-returnable bottles and banning of canned beverages and this sort of thing. 

Therefore, in many respects, we are out in front with respect to the other provinces. 

 

But insofar as it is possible to provide him with this information on a comparative basis we will certainly 

provide that information which is available. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 12 
 

MR. GUY (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 12 showing: 

 

Under the Public Service or Supernumerary Training Program:(1) the number of persons who 

were enrolled from July 1, 1971 to September 30, 1973; (2) the number of persons who were in 

training at September 30, 1973 

 

HON. A. TAYLOR: (Minister of Social Services) Mr. Speaker, I shall be moving an amendment to this 

particular Return. 

 

The Return caused us a few problems, particularly in its wording, as it asks for the number of persons 

enrolled from July 31, 1971 to September 30, 1973. It was a little difficult to define what the Member 

wanted. If he wanted the total enrolment in that period or the number of new enrollees. So my 

amendment will provide wording which will clear up that. We also felt, at least I felt, that since this 

program has been phased out, I think as most Members know, that it would be to the advantage of the 

House to have a review of the total program and therefore the amendment which I am going to move 

will provide for all years of operation of the program. 

 

The Members will be interested in knowing that at the close of the program about 500 people at that 

time were blanketed into the Public Service into newly created permanent positions. These employees 

had in fact been used as permanent employees but were not given the advantages of union memberships, 

superannuation and the like. The program had this difficulty although it did attempt to provide some 

training. This is one of the reasons for phasing out this particular program. 

 

The amendment which I propose, Mr. Speaker, seconded by 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

782 

the Hon. Mr. Cody: 

 

That all the words after the word 'Program' in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefore: 

 

(1)The number of persons participating in the program (a) January 1st, 1968 to July 1st, 1971; 

(b) July 1st, 1971 to September 30th, 1973. (2) The number of and percentage of persons who 

have successfully completed their training and who have obtained regular employment from (a) 

January 1st, 1968 to July 1st, 1971; (b) July 1st, 1971 to September 30th, 1973. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 19 
 

MR. GUY (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 19 showing: 

 

(1) Copies of any communications issued by the Executive Council or any individual Cabinet 

Member to civil servants prohibiting communication by them with the public, and prohibiting 

them from answering questions posed by citizens concerning the operations of any government 

departments or agencies. 

 

(2) A list of civil servants to whom such communications were made. 

 

He said: — Just before I move this, I should like to say, we have seen here today perhaps one of the best 

examples of an inefficient government that we have had in this Legislature. I remember yesterday when 

we wanted to adjourn one of the second readings we were severely reprimanded by the Attorney General 

for not having our material ready. I suggest there is a lot more work to be done in preparing for a second 

reading, particularly when you haven't had the Minister make his opening remarks regarding the purpose 

of second reading of a Bill. But here we have a question that has been on the Order Paper for more than 

three months. All the information that can possibly be provided is there right in front of the eyes of the 

Ministers who are going to answer the question. Here we have today the Attorney General standing up 

time and time again begging leave to adjourn the debate. Surely to goodness with the number of special 

assistants, executive assistants, assistants to the assistants along with the research and planning 

personnel and other people whom they have hired in each and every one of their departments, they could 

get the answers to these questions and at least have the amendments prepared in order to pass it and 

expedite it through this Legislature. 

 

I think this is a gross example of inefficiency that the people of Saskatchewan will not tolerate from a 

government that promised to be open and faithful and true to the people of Saskatchewan. I so move 

Return No. 19. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

783 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in moving this particular motion, the 

Member for Athabasca-Rosthern or is it Rosthern-Athabasca, I am not quite sure which, but the 

tweedle-dee or the tweedle-dum side of the team that sits over there either . . . 

 

MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, I have not spoken to the motion yet. Don't count your chickens before 

they are hatched. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I would then say that the future would-be Member for Rosthern, present 

Member for Athabasca — I want to stress to the Hon. Members opposite the would-be aspect of the 

statement — talks about inefficiency. I tried to tell the Member for Athabasca, and the Members 

opposite that with respect to many of these Orders for Return the respective Ministers are not in their 

chairs, out on government business and would have to have other comments to make with respect to 

some of the issues that are involved. Now that is a fact. It happens on our side. It happens on your side. I 

ask all Members to understand that. 

 

But really when we talk about inefficiency and waste, I think one of the things that the public in 

Saskatchewan should know is some of the inefficiency and waste that is generated by what are 

absolutely ludicrous statements, as examples, questions by the Opposition opposite. They clutter the 

Order Paper with questions which ask for information anyone with any degree of experience in 

parliamentary activity would know ought not to be asked. Questions which if they are to be answered 

would mean mountains of paper and hours of work in research. 

 

To give you an example, this particular question that they ask here for Order for Return No. 19, Mr. 

Speaker. This Return asks that copies of all communications issued by the Cabinet or any Members of 

Cabinet to civil servants prohibiting communications, be tabled. I ask, Mr. Speaker, what person who 

reasonably and objectively looks at the process of government would expect that question to be asked by 

an Opposition. 

 

MR. STEUART: — On a Point of Order, what motion is the Hon. Member talking about. Stick to the 

motion we are talking about. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The motion that we are discussing is Item 14 for Order for Return No. 19. I believe 

the Member is discussing this motion. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, as I tried to point out about the inefficiency of the Legislature due 

to the wasteful and obstructive questions very often advanced by a bankrupt opposition, that is basically 

the position that we are in. No one denies the right of the Opposition to ask a government questions, 

pertinent questions on facts relating to its operation. We will try to answer those questions as best we 

can, Mr. Speaker. But it is this ritual that we go through with the Liberal Opposition not having any 

policies, not having any ideas, trying to scheme up questions like we see here on Order for Return No. 

19. Talk about inefficiency, Mr. Speaker; 

 

I was about to say anyone who is fair-minded, who might 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

784 

approach this problem in any responsible way, would he honestly expect any government to answer a 

question that has been put forward here with respect to Item 14, Order for Return No. 19? What this 

Return is asking is that the Cabinet deliver to the Opposition copies of communications, privileged 

communications that it makes between itself and its employees. When was the last time the Members 

opposite when they were the government, that a question of this nature was answered by them? When 

can it be expected that in the day to day operations of government a member of the Executive Council or 

the Executive Council itself should be tabling communications between itself and civil servants? I don't 

think that the people of Saskatchewan would believe for a moment that this is a fair type of question, 

that this is a responsible type of question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a question which really is looking to uncover something. It is a question which is 

trying to uncover something but can't. It is a question which really serves no possible end result, but 

simply a question based on a blind guess. Mr. Speaker, this is an example of the inefficiency of the 

Opposition which is resulting in a day like this, when it could be a productive day for Private Members, 

being dragged down into the types of political comments made by the Member for Athabasca. I say to 

the Member for Athabasca and the Leader of the Opposition, the people of Saskatchewan are urging you 

to get out of this rut that you are in. To get out of this negative approach of trying to do witch-hunting in 

effect, to try and get you out of this rut and start asking responsible questions to make this Parliament 

and this Government work better. We will co-operate all the way that we can, but don't ask us for Orders 

for Return like No. 19, nobody could reasonably expect an answer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear: 

 

MR. GUY: — We listened to the Attorney General talking about confidentiality of material and so on. 

Most of the material that we are asking for in this Return of course has already been made public, at 

least parts of it. We have the comments made by Mr. Art Baalim who was fired unnecessarily by the 

Government, who went to the Press and gave a report on what he received from the Government in his 

notice of dismissal. We had some from Gerry Hammersmith when he was fired by the same Minister of 

Northern Saskatchewan, who went to the Press and a lot of it became public information. What we want 

now is to see the total amount of documentation that has been passed on between the Ministers and . . . 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. The Member for Athabasca said that he 

sought communications directed to Mr. Hammersmith, if I understand that right, that terminated his 

employment with the Government. I want the Member if he saw that communication to table it in this 

House. If he can't table that communication in this House, then he should retract his statement. May I, 

for the information of the House, Mr. Speaker, say that Mr. Hammersmith was not fired, he was on a 

contract and the contract expired. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Minister raised what may be a Point of Order, if the Member said the 

way — but we can't continue to elaborate 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

785 

on it. The Member for Athabasca. 

 

MR. GUY: — The Minister better open his ears. I didn't say anything about seeing it, I said that the 

parts of the transmittal from the Minister to Mr. Hammersmith when he was dismissed appeared in the 

newspaper. That's what I said. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 

 

MR. GUY: — That's not a Point of Order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Chair won't know until I hear it. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — The Member for Athabasca said there was a transmittal from me that appeared 

in the Press with respect to the release of Mr. Hammersmith. I respectfully request, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Member presents that news clipping to this House, because there was no release clipping that I am aware 

of. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister had a chance to speak on the motion. He may find 

another opportunity if he watches the Order Paper, instead of his nose in his desk, and pays attention to 

the House business he can get his speech in yet. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If any Member has a Point of Order it must be raised at the time, and the Hon. 

Member from Athabasca referred to newspaper clippings, and maybe he can answer those comments 

and see that those are supplied, what he is referring to. 

 

MR. GUY: — The question, Mr. Speaker, is that we want to know how many other employees of the 

present Government have been treated in the same sort of fashion, as the two or three examples that I 

mentioned were treated by the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Therefore, I think it is a perfectly 

relevant question and one that should be answered by the Government opposite. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 22 
 

MR. GUY (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 22 showing: 

 

(1) All printing contracts with their values, given to Service Printing Company, from January 1, 

1973 to all Departments, Boards, Agencies, Commissions or Crown Corporations of the 

Provincial Government. 

 

(2) (a) With respect to the above the contracts that were tendered and whether the low tender was 

accepted in each case. (b) Where the low tender was not accepted, if any, the name of the low 

tender and the reason that it was not accepted, (c) With respect to the above the contracts that 

were not tendered. 

 

He said: — Just before I move this 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

786 

motion, I am wondering if the Attorney General will make the same comments regarding this. I am sure 

that he would like to make the comment that this is irrelevant, that we are wasting the time of the House 

by asking for the value of all printing contracts given to Service Printing from January 1, 1973 to 

September 30, which will be amended by my colleague. I should like to hear the same comments made 

by the Attorney General in relation to this Order for Return that he made in relation to the last one. I am 

sure in this particular case he would like to have the courage to tell his colleagues to vote this motion 

down. But I don't think in view of the hue and cry across the Province of Saskatchewan in the 

mismanagement of funds going to Service Printing that he would dare have the gall to stand up in this 

House and I suspect that he won't even dare adjourn the debate, but will let this one go right through. 

 

MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I move an amendment, seconded by Mr. Grant 

(Whitmore Park) that Return No. 22 be amended as follows: 

 

That the words 'September 30, 1973' in. the second line be deleted and the words 'February 25, 1974' be 

substituted therefore. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Athabasca asked me whether I would make 

any comments with respect to this request for information. This Question in my judgement is frivolous 

and politically vexatious, not because it seeks out information about Service Printing. That I think is 

perfectly in order. But that it seeks not to ask about information about all the other people, printing 

companies, that have contracts with Government. The answer is really because the Liberal Opposition is 

back in that same old rut again, trying to single out what they think is something which they feel might 

be politically embarrassing to us. Now, if you ask me if that is a proper question, I say that if you people 

were going to be asking the types of questions within the proper frame of Government Opposition you 

wouldn't be singling out one company. But in any event I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned on the following recorded division: 

 

YEA- 35 

Messieurs 

Dyck Michayluk  Owens 

Meakes Byers Mostoway 

Smishek Thorson Gross 

Romanow Whelan Feduniak 

Snyder  Kwasnica Comer  

Bowerman Carlson  Rolfes  

Kramer Engel Hanson 

Thibault Cody  Oliver  

Larson Robbins Kaeding 

Kowalchuk Taylor Flasch 

MacMurchy Matsalla Richards 

Pepper Faris  



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

787 

NAYS — 11 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart Boldt Weatherald  

Coupland Grant  Lane 

Loken  McIssac  MacDonald (M. J. N.) 

Guy Gardner  

 

RETURN NO. 33 
 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 33 showing: 

 

A copy of all correspondence and agreements entered into up to November 30, 1973 between 

any officials representing the Government of Saskatchewan and any agencies of the Government 

of Roumania regarding a proposed tractor manufacturing, tractor assembling or tractor 

distributing facility or facilities in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. K. THORSON: (Minister of Industry & Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the House to 

defeat this Motion. As is well known in Saskatchewan the discussions and relationships between the 

Government of Roumania and the Government of Saskatchewan which was carried on in the year 1971 

up until the fall of 1973, with respect to the possibility of the establishment of a plant to assemble tractor 

parts in Saskatchewan, finally were terminated. Throughout that period of time the various letters and 

communications of one form and another that were carried on between the two governments dealt with a 

great many prospects and possibilities. At no time was it suggested to the Roumanians that any of this 

correspondence was to be made public other than joint releases from time to time or agreed upon news 

statements that were made from time to time. I frankly think it would be impossible for the Government 

ever to carry on such negotiations in any meaningful way if the parties to the negotiations outside the 

Government felt that everything they wrote down and every agreement they entered into of a tentative 

nature was going to be exposed to public view. Had we finally been able to reach an agreement and were 

proceeding with some kind of a project on a joint basis undoubtedly the Members would want to know 

the exact terms of the agreement and the relationship between the partners. But since the partnership is 

dissolved and since there was nothing more than discussions back and forth which finally led to a 

breaking off of discussions, I frankly think it would not be in the public interest to make all of that 

correspondence or all of those agreements, which were all of a tentative nature, public. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I find it very amusing that the 

Members opposite continually confuse or attempt to confuse the public in this regard. At least I will give 

the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson) if that is what he still is, the credit for having the courage to get 

up and say, "This is an embarrassment to us, we couldn't get along with our comrades from Roumania." 

First it was to be a tractor factory, then it was to be an assembly plant and now I see the latest soft 

peddling was that it was to 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

788 

be an assembly for tractor parts. Well, I don't blame the NDP government and the New Democratic 

Party for implying, let's try and ride this rather sad, sorry little episode that we waved so proudly and for 

so long in an attempt to confuse or kid the people that we had a real industrial development program, but 

to get up and say this information is not in the public interest is sheer hypocrisy. It is in the public 

interest to know what went wrong and how much money was spent and all the effort that was put into it. 

Of course, they are going to use their majority to deny this information. They have used their majority 

time and time again. I don't think anyone is deluded by this Motion to adjourn the last debate, they just 

haven't got the intestinal fortitude against the press. They don't play up the immoral act of the 

Government handing business to their own printing press but if this were done in Ottawa it would be the 

most disgraceful action that any government had ever pulled off. However, the little ploy of saying we 

will adjourn this doesn't really fool anybody. In this case they are going to defeat it as they have 

defeated most of the Motions we have asked for. 

 

This is legitimate information. Of course, there is nothing we can do about it if they defeat it but I want 

to call it to the attention of the public through the Press. One of the complaints the NDP had when they 

were in Opposition, and from time to time I am sure that complaint may have been justified, is that our 

Government refused to give them legitimate information. I want to point out that probably one of the 

reasons that we were defeated was that very thing. This Government, when they were the Opposition, 

took the very sanctimonious attitude that this was the denial of proper public information. They would 

run an open government that would lay the cards on the table for everyone to see. Yet, I am convinced 

that they have refused to give this Opposition, and it isn't important to give it to the Opposition because 

what they are refusing to do is give it to the public, more information they have refused to give us more 

information in the 21/2 years they have been the Government than we ever did in the total seven years 

that we were the Government. This is a fact. 

 

So refuse to give the information. Of course you will, because it embarrasses you and it should 

embarrass you. Your individual record as a Minister of Mineral Resources was a disgrace, you were 

removed from that. Your record as Minister of Industry, or Industrial Affairs or Industry and Commerce 

is equally a disgrace. Obviously they are not going to remove you because they don't know what else to 

do with you. But to refuse this honestly because it embarrasses you, I could understand that, but to 

refuse and to say it is not in the public interest, of course, is just sheer hypocrisy. 

 

I ask some of those Members who sit there giggling and laughing and enjoying themselves, to go back 

and remember the things they said when they got elected. Remember the pledge they gave to the people 

and then take a look at this Motion and ask if this, along with all the other Motions that we have asked 

for and been denied, are not really in the public interest and if you are not sitting back there playing a 

part, stooges to the front benches in their denial of proper information to the public. I am sure it wasn't 

even discussed with you, I am sure they didn't even bother to take it into caucus because they have as 

much contempt for you or more than they have for us or the public. They are making you party to a very 

deceitful operation, an operation that refuses to give legitimate 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

789 

information to the public. You sit back there and vote like sheep for whatever they tell you to. I 

guarantee that it hasn’t even been discussed with you. I guarantee that they haven t even done you the 

courtesy of bringing it up in caucus. They just walk in here, they defeat, they hide, they cover up 

whatever they feel like and you rubber stamp it in the vain hope for most of you that some day you 

might grace the front benches and get that big $29,500 salary, the big car and the ten executive assistants 

as well. Well, for most of you it will be a vain hope. I ask you to remember whatever happened to your 

principles, if you had any, and though you proclaimed them loud and long, they have long since 

disappeared in the 2 1/2 years you have been in power. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the Leader of 

the Opposition, trying to lecture us on the ethics and some of the errors that from time to time do happen 

and some of the failures. I should like to remind the Leader of the Opposition of some of his failures. I 

recall when he was in government the Premier of the day announced the heavy water plant. It made 

great big news headlines. A few days later he announced a Volkswagen Assembly Line Plant. The 

people of Regina are still waiting for that assembly line plant to come in. I remember just before the 

election him announcing a phoney deal of a Choiceland mine. The Liberals were very skilled and very 

able in running to the press announcing things that never did happen and never developed and never 

took place. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition talked about us refusing to table agreements. Mr. Speaker. I think if 

we look at the record, the records of Hansard are strewn with the failures and refusals of the Liberal 

administration to provide agreements and to provide information to the Opposition. I recall over and 

over again where we asked them to table agreements with respect to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. They 

never did table them. I recall asking for agreements to table with respect to the Athabasca Pulp Mill. 

They never tabled those agreements. Maybe the Leader of the Opposition may want to present an 

argument or have an argument but he must confess that this is something that isn't new to Governments 

not to table correspondence because it may be privileged, it might not be in the public interest but I 

should hope that he should not be that sanctimonious in trying to lecture us and say that when he was in 

office they did provide the information. 

 

ME. E.F. GARDNER: (Moosomin): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Roumanian Tractor Plant is one 

project that captured the imagination of a lot of people in this province. It was a departure from what 

was expected of the NDP Government. They had been telling us that they weren’t in favour of capital 

from outside of Canada or outside of the province. There was some taint apparently on capital from the 

United States, or Switzerland or elsewhere. But apparently capital from a communist country such as 

Roumania was not so tainted and they were going to get some of it. They were going to set up a tractor 

plant. This was a precedent, of course, and this interested many people in the province. I had requests 

from university students for information on this for writing papers. People were waiting day by day to 

see what was happening with the Roumanian Tractor Plant. This went on for months. As you will recall 

Saskatchewan cities were almost at each 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

790 

other's throats to see who -was going to get this plum from the NDP Government, this great Roumanian 

tractor factory that –was going to come. People were making trips to Roumania. The NDP Government 

sent people to Roumania, some of the cities sent people, and we were just waiting day by day for this 

great announcement. The press reported that property was bought in the city of Saskatoon, that property 

was actually purchased by the NDP Government in the city of Saskatoon. They get up now and say that 

people are not entitled to know what was the result of these negotiations, what has happened with this 

property that was bought by the NDP Government for the Roumanian tractor plant, or assembly plant, or 

some type of enterprise in Saskatoon I think it is a bit ridiculous to suggest that the people are not 

interested, that the people are not entitled to know. 

 

Apparently the voters are going to be denied the final information as to what has actually happened to 

the Roumanian tractor deal that they watched for so long in the press of this province. 

 

MR. J. G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I beg the attention of this House on 

this subject. I don't have anything startling to say that I don't think that Members have not thought about 

beforehand. 

 

We are getting on to the issue of confidentiality of government as opposed to the right of the public to 

know and it is very easy to come forward with sanctimonious statements on such a subject. I must admit 

that in the past I might have been one to make as many sanctimonious statements as anyone. I don't 

think that one can strictly argue on the basis of Woodrow Wilson that open agreements, openly arrived 

at, is the only way to run a government. I think it is too simplistic a case. 

 

I have, in my files, confidential information provided to me about people of a confidential nature and I 

would not want to make that public information because of the implications for particular people. And I 

am making that kind of judgemental decision and I am sure the same thing applies to other Members of 

the House. Obviously I am not in the position of the Government, nonetheless, where in politics 

government is constantly making judgemental decisions of weighing different factors in this issue. On 

the other hand one can't simply come forward, as the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) did and 

defend what the Government is doing on the basis that those people did it when they were the 

Government. We got into that kind of debate on the Pulp Mill many a time in which the defence of the 

Government, the present Government, was with respect to supplying of information that people then on 

this side of the House wouldn't provide when they were the Government. And so we are going to go 

back and forth and back and forth so I don't expect this will be a particularly illuminating afternoon, that 

we are going to make any great resolution of this kind of conflict. 

 

As I was sitting here listening to the not particularly enlightening debate as it went on, I wondered if the 

mover would be able to accept some kind of an amendment to his motion, such that we might try and get 

at, at least what I think is a minimal required release by the Government, of matters that pertain to the 

public debate about the possibilities of secondary industry and secondary manufacturing, and in 

particular, the manufacturing 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

791 

of farm implements. 

 

There must have been considerable economic debate going on about costs, about marketing, and this is 

something that certainly the public is entitled to know in order to make some intelligent decisions about 

resource development. I am afraid that I would have to beg the indulgence of the House for a couple of 

minutes to try to arrive at the precise wording of something, but if it be agreeable to the mover and it 

might make it simpler if we could move, even at the discretion of the Government, what they will be 

willing to release of this material. Not all of it, not all the private letters and private correspondence 

which would breach our diplomatic relationships with Eastern Europe. On the other hand there should 

be considerable sections that they might be willing to disclose. I think that it isn't good enough simply to 

go back and forth, back and forth, jibe and exchange on this kind of thing. If we are trying to make a 

serious job as the Attorney General begged us to do half an hour ago, not to just engage in trifling, not to 

just engage in cheap tricks. There is the serious aspect to this Order for Return and that is to provide 

public information on which to make rational decisions of the public about resource developments. 

 

I should like to move then an amendment to the effect that the Government release what information 

about this, in its discretion, it believes feasible. 

 

That all the words after the word 'showing' be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

A copy of all correspondence and agreements pertaining to the proposed Roumania tractor 

assembly plant that the Government feels it can release without damage to confidential 

relationships. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — There is one point about this amendment which is perturbing to me is that it is 

asking for information at the discretion of the Government. The Government can answer in any way, 

shape or form necessary that they please. No one can say that the information wasn't supplied because it 

is at their discretion. That is the wording of it. I believe that in the Assembly that a motion should be to 

the point, shouldn't include debate, it should ask for more information or definite instructions. So I 

believe on those grounds I shall have no alternative but to rule the proposed amendment out of order. 

 

MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, I sometimes wonder why the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) tries to 

come to the rescue of another Minister when it pertains to something other than Health or Labour, 

because he certainly didn't strengthen the case that the Minister of Industry and Commerce supposedly 

tried to make. 

 

I don't blame the Minister of Industry and Commerce for not wanting to disclose this information 

because it is not going to embarrass anybody except himself and the Government, because I don't know 

of any single industry that has ever been talked about in this province that received so much press and so 

much acclamation as, "The Roumanians are coming, the Roumanians are coming." 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

792 

Saskatoon got into the show and if they had been left on their own they possibly would have had the 

Roumanians in Saskatoon by now with an established plant, but no, some of the Saskatoon Members got 

into it and people from Moose Jaw got into it, some from Regina. The first thing we knew we had two 

delegations going over to Roumania, one from Moose Jaw and one from Saskatoon. The Minister 

himself made a trip to Roumania, I believe. I know that the Premier even on one or two occasions was 

checking into the Roumanians. I really think that it is of public interest and public importance to 

ascertain what generated all this activity, flying back and forth to Roumania and all the news releases, 

etc. 

 

The Minister of Health said that we were not very ready to release information on projects of this sort 

and I will remind him that all the documents in connection with the Pulp Mill were tabled with the 

exception of one and that was because Mr. Steuart was absent from this city at that time. It was tabled 

the following year. 

 

He spoke of Choiceland. Well, I don't think that Members opposite should point any finger at us over 

here about the loss of Choiceland because they are the ones who flushed Choiceland down the drain. 

And there has also been reference made about the Heavy Water Plant. Well let me remind the older 

Members on the other side because the new Members don't know anything about it, but when the Heavy 

Water Plant was announced by the Liberal Government it was as a result of the Federal Government 

indicating that the contract would be awarded to the Victoria Machinery Company whose bid was based 

on locating a plant at Estevan. We did not make the initial announcement. Naturally we were pleased to 

have this news come from Ottawa but the Members want to check their facts pretty carefully when they 

point the finger at our announcement about the Heavy Water Plant because it was made from Ottawa 

and not from Regina. 

 

Also, I don't recall it being headlined to the extent that the Roumanian Tractor Plant has been. If this is 

going to be a sample of the work of the Minister of Industry and Commerce, the procedure that he is 

going to follow when he fails to get an industry, that he is going to cover it up and not disclose to the 

people what was involved in the negotiations or why it failed after making such a fanfare, I think it will 

be most disappointing to the voters of this province. I am very disappointed that he is not prepared to 

make it available to the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear: 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, may I just rise on a Point of Personal Privilege. I am sure that the 

Member for Whitmore Park does not want to mislead the House by suggesting that I have been to 

Roumania. If he is in any doubt then I want remove that doubt and assure him that I have never been to 

Roumania. 

 

MR. GRANT: — I stand corrected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 60 
 

MR. GUY (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 60 showing: 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

793 

(1) Whether the 50 houses and 2 apartment blocks being constructed for the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan by Delta Systems Ltd., were advertised by public tender. 

(2) If so: (a) the date(s) it was advertised; (b) the number of bids received. 

 

HON. G. R. BOWERMAN: (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the question that 

appears under Item No. 19, Return No. 60, one might ask the question whether or not that question was 

in order in that it has presumed a number of things. It presumes that there were two apartment blocks 

and some houses constructed for the Department by a company and there are other matters in that 

question, as it appears on the paper which are an assumption on the part of the questioner. Therefore, it 

is necessary in order to get the facts before the House and for the information of the public; I propose an 

amendment to that question and that Return. 

 

That all the words after the word 'showing' be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

1. (a) Whether Delta Holdings Ltd., submitted tenders to the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan to lease staff housing accommodation to that Department, (b) Whether the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan solicited and received tenders from other sources for 

provision of staff housing in La Ronge. (c) From whom tenders were solicited, (d) The amount 

of each respective bid received. 

 

2. (a) Whether the lowest tender was accepted, (b) From whom the tender was accepted. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — On a Point of Order. I would submit that the essence of Return No. 60 is 

concerned with public tenders and whether or not public tenders were or were not issued. I would argue 

that the amendment denies the substance or the essence of the Return and therefore should not be ruled 

in order. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — That is not a Point of Order. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — A Point of Order, Mr. Speaker in the sense that I am requesting a decision by 

you. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The original motion asks whether 30 houses and two apartment blocks being 

constructed for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan by Delta Systems Ltd., were advertised by 

public tender and if so the date that it was advertised and the number which have been received. 

 

The proposed amendment says; did Delta Holdings Ltd., submit tenders to the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan to lease staff housing accommodation for that Department. I believe that is along the 

same line of though; as the other one. The original asked for Delta Systems Ltd. Did the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan solicit and receive tenders from other sources for provision of staff housing in 

La Ronge? And (c) from whom tenders were solicited, and what was the amount of 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

794 

each respective bid received? 

 

I would have to rule that the amendment is in order, it deals with Delta Holdings Ltd., and northern 

housing. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — I certainly accept your ruling, I just want to repeat what I think is the implication 

of the amendment and, therefore, I would rise in opposition to the amendment. The amendment is to 

slough off those two crucial words 'public tender' and that is the crucial concept in this Motion for 

Return. Was this done by means of public tender publicly requested by the Government, bids from 

different potential contractors; The fact obviously is that Delta Holdings must have submitted some 

statement about what it intended to do and what price it would charge, nobody's doubting that. The 

Government may also have informally gone and chatted with somebody else and said what would they 

have charged. That is not of particular interest I think to this motion, what was casually done by the 

Minister or his officials on this issue. The guts of the issue are, were correct procedures followed using 

public tenders? I don't think we have to go into the sorry story of Delta Holdings and that shadow 

company which was formed a couple of weeks before it was actually awarded the contract. I would just 

request that the House realize that this is the guts of the motion, the question of public tendering and the 

Government by this amendment is by sleight-of-hand trying to slide over that issue. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment as it is worded does appear to give some further 

information and in fact will give us more information than we ask for here. With that 1 agree, but I agree 

with the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) that what the amendment will succeed in 

doing is allow the Government to slide over or pass over or avoid facing the very unpleasant situation of 

what in fact they did do. We want to confirm publicly that what they did do was go to people who 

normally weren't in the contracting business and ask them for some submissions. They got some 

submissions. I would imagine that they knew before they ever got submissions they were going to be 

hired. It was a cosy little cooked up deal. No one can deny it. But we want the Government to face this 

and tell the public. They have been hiding this now from the public for quite a while and so with this 

amendment they are again going to give the appearance of giving some information while at the same 

time are trying to avoid the very unpleasant fact that not only was there misuse of government funds but 

in fact there could have been a great deal more than that in the very unusual, to say the least, and 

secretive way that this contract was handed out to a company — to people who were never in the 

contracting business before in their lives. Since we want to have time to submit a further subamendment 

to this, to try to force the Government to give us the information that we want or else give us a straight 

turn down as I presume they will, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 74 
 

MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Albert Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 74 

showing: 



 

February 26, 1974 

 

 

795 

The amount of money that has been spent or authorized by the Province of Saskatchewan for 

arenas, skating and curling rinks in Saskatchewan for the fiscal period ending in 1972, for the 

fiscal period ending in 1973 and for the current fiscal period to November 30, 1973 giving in 

respect to each such arena, skating or curling rink, the amount spent or authorized and the name 

of the applicant. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I am advised by the officials of the 

Department that the way the question is worded makes it difficult for them to answer it because they 

don't have the grants determined by virtue of project which is the way this is set out. The proposal rather 

is that we should indicate the grants made under program such as provincial, municipal, winter works 

programs etc. I think this amendment should provide the information that the Hon. Member is asking. I 

will therefore move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) that we delete all of 

the words after the word 'showing' and substitute the following: 

 

Grants paid under the Provincial-Municipal Winter Works Incentive Program, 1972-73, in aid of 

projects where arenas, skating rinks or curling rinks were involved, and applications approved to 

February 25 and the estimated amount of grants under the Provincial-Municipal Winter Works Incentive 

Program, 1973-74, in aid of projects where arenas, skating rinks or curling rinks are involved. 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, on the amendment, I am not sure if I take the Attorney 

General at his word in the sense that he is not trying to withhold any information. Are there any other 

Government programs for example in the Department of Culture and Youth Agency or anywhere else 

where grants or assistance to curling rinks for example could be forthcoming. This is the point that 

crossed my mind when the Minister put forth the amendment. There may well be other areas that other 

agencies of Government granting some assistance. And if the Minister can assure us of that . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I can't assure him of that. The officials simply advise 

me this way and in the rush of it I accepted their information. So if someone on the opposite side would 

like to adjourn the debate, I am prepared to accept that. I will undertake to inform myself. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — I would ask leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 68 
 

MR. A. R. GUY (Athabasca) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 68 showing: 

 

A statement projected of the estimated income from all present sources and expenditures by the 

departments of Government of Saskatchewan for existing programs and policies for the five 

fiscal years ending: March 31, 1973; March 31, 1974; March 31, 1975; March 31, 1976; 



 

February 26, 1974 
 

 

796 

and March 31, 1977. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS: (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments 

with respect to this particular Order. 

 

It strikes me as rather strange that a request for information with respect to the years ending March 31, 

1973 and March 31, 1974 should be made. The Opposition already has that information. They have that 

information for the fiscal year 1972-73; and the fiscal year 1973-74. They are well aware of the fact that 

the information with respect to the year ending March 31, 1975 will be tabled in this House when the 

Budget comes down in a few days time. It is obvious that no information could be supplied with respect 

to that particular item at this time. As far as the years 1976 and 1977 are concerned, the information is 

not currently available publicly. 

 

I think it should be pointed out that it is not the policy of this Government nor the policy of any other 

government in Canada, as far as I know, to issue five year projections of revenues and expenditures. The 

Government has to make policy decisions in due course in relation to allocation of expenditures and the 

sources of revenues they anticipate receiving. The information for the fiscal years, 1975-76 and 1976-77 

will be made to the public at the appropriate time. 

 

I therefore would ask this House to defeat this motion. 

 

MR. A. E. GUY: (Athabasca): — I was glad to hear the comments of the Minister because we really got 

the answer that we expected. The Government opposite have been hiring researchers and planners 

through every department of government for the last three years. We now find out that they have no 

projected estimates for the future. They have no plans for the future. There isn't a government in Canada 

today that has not made a projected estimate of their financial income for the next five and probably the 

next ten years. 

 

This is the Government that is supposed to be the planners. 

 

This is the Government that has been hiring people from all across Canada and the whole of North 

America and yet they can't even project for two years down the road what their income estimates are 

going to be. 

 

This is exactly the answer we anticipated from the Minister of Finance. They should have left him back 

where he was because he certainly hasn't contributed or added anything to the Cabinet when he can't get 

his people to work to provide a few simple estimates for the future. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:17 o’clock p.m. 

 


