



















































Hansard: May 09, 1974


2992 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

68th Day 

Thursday, May 9, 1974. 

 

The Assembly met at 10: 00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. K. THORSON (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased this morning to be able to introduce to 

you and to the Members of the Assembly, 24 students who are in the west gallery and who have come to 

Regina this morning from Estevan. 

 

They are members of the Grade Six class at the Hillcrest School in Estevan. They are accompanied this 

morning by their bus driver, Mr. Don Pindus and by their principal, Mr. G. Wahlmier, who is accompanied 

by Mrs. Wahlmier. 

 

I am sure that I speak for all of the Members of the Assembly in wishing them a very warm welcome here to 

the Assembly and to Regina. They are going to spend the day touring various sites, including the IPSCO 

Plant, the RCMP Museum and the Museum of Natural History. I am sure that we all wish for them an 

educational day and a safe journey home to Estevan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

FIRING OF LONG-TERM EMPLOYEE OF AGENT GENERAL’S OFFICE 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question probably to 

the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thorson). 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan I understand recently fired a long-term employee out of the Agent 

General's Office in England and the allegation was made that there was inadequate or unfair compensation 

pay. 

 

The only reason that the matter was not reviewed in England is because supposedly the office of the Agent 

General had diplomatic immunity. 

 

Is it the practice of the Government opposite to, (1) fire such employees of such long-term as over 20 years 

and, (2) to give such inadequate compensation and will the Government review their position? 

 

MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is No. 

 

MR. LANE: — No, you will not give adequate compensation. Well I think that is a pretty sorry blot on the 

records. I think it has brought us in a bad light in England. It has been a black mark against the province and 

I would hope the Government would reconsider its position. 

 



 

May 9, 1974 

 

2993 

MR. THORSON: — The question was, is it the policy to pay inadequate compensation on severance of 

employment and the answer is No. 

 

LONG DISTANCE CALLS 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should just like 

to ask a question of the Minister of Telephones. 

 

I see this matter has received some other attention but last week I tried for about 15 minutes to get a long 

distance call through to Ottawa, that was last Monday. This morning I just about wore my finger out trying to 

get a call through and I wonder if . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Quite frankly I wore my finger out without getting through to Ottawa and I wondered if 

the Minister could tell us what steps are being taken, if any, to rectify the situation with our telephone 

system. Now I know that this matter seems hilarious to the Government but I know that surely they are not 

deliberately trying to stifle the Opposition in this matter. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Minister of Government Services): — Sask Tel provides an impartial 

service, Mr. Speaker. The first step that we take in order to attempt to alleviate problems that might occur to 

customers is to ask the customer to check with the Trouble Department. There is a number that you phone 

and they will respond and deal with your problem. If the Member finds that is inadequate I would certainly 

be pleased to hear about it. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — I would just simply assure him that I have done so and I want to say to the Minister that 

his staff at the Telephones is doing an excellent job because they have started to put me through by the long 

distance operator, because obviously the direct distance dialing isn't working. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 

12 adult students from the Kelsey Institute of Applied Arts and Science in Saskatoon which is in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

I understand that they are here today accompanied by Mrs. Sigurdson. In case they are wondering what is 

going on in the Chamber today and haven't been able to establish it at this point, we are discussing the 

spending Estimates of the Department of Mineral Resources for the fiscal year that we are in at this time. I 

hope that they are able to make some sense out of what is going on in the Chamber and I also hope that they 

have a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 9, 1974 

 

2994 

HON. A. TAYLOR (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — I wonder if I could beg the indulgence of the House for a 

moment to introduce to you and through you to the Members of the House, a group of students in the 

Speaker's Gallery. There are 15 Grade Twelve students from Major with their teacher. With them are 11 

exchange students from Belleville, Ontario, with their teacher, Mr. Chapman and their tour organizer. 

 

I am sure the Members of the House will join me in welcoming them to the sitting of the Legislature and 

wishing them a good journey while they are here, particularly to the Ontario students. We hope they will take 

back to Ontario good thoughts of their visit in Saskatchewan and to all the students a pleasant and happy 

journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved third reading of Bill No. 128 — An Act to 

amend The Oil and Gas Conservation, Stabilization and Development Act, 1973. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 36 

 

Messieurs 

 

Dyck Michayluk Owens 

Meakes Byers Gross 

Wood Thorson Feduniak 

Messer Whelan Comer 

Snyder Kwasnica Rolfes 

Bowerman Carlson Lange 

Thibault Robbins Hanson 

Larson Tchorzewski Oliver 

Baker Cowley Feschuk 

Brockelbank Taylor Flasch 

MacMurchy Matsalla Kaeding 

Pepper Faris Richards 

 

NAYS — 15 

 

Messieurs 

 

Steuart MacDonald Lane 

Coupland McIsaac MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 

Loken Gardner  Wiebe 

Guy Weatherald Malone 

Boldt MacLeod  

Grant   

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:44 o’clock p.m. 
 


