
























































Hansard: March 05, 1974


989 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

22nd Day 
 

Tuesday, March 5, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. C. WHELAN: (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to this 
Assembly two groups of students from the constituency of Regina North West. They are located in the 
west gallery, .the first group I am pleased to introduce, Mr. Speaker, is made up of 53 Grade Eight 
students from the R. J. Davidson School. Their teachers, Mr. Duperreault and Mr. Peever are with them. 
The second group of students, Mr. Speaker, is from Saskatchewan House, their teacher, Mrs. Zikman is 
with 14 members of the class from the Institute of Applied Arts and Science. 
 
Members join me I am sure, in welcoming them and expressing the wish that their stay with us will be 
both informative and educational. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to the House a group of students from Bishop Murray School from Saskatoon. I 
believe they are in the Speaker’s Gallery. I realize that these pupils came to Regina today in company 
with another school and I think another Member will bring greetings to that group shortly. My 
understanding is Mr. Neiman is the teacher with the group from Bishop Murray. I know this school very 
well, it is within a block of my home. I often skate on their rink at night. I know a number of the 
students, I think I would recognize some of them who live in the neighborhood. 
 
I hope they have a pleasant stay in the Legislature today and I hope to meet them for a short period 
around 3:10 out at the Well. I sincerely hope they have a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. G. LANE: (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Hon. Member in 
welcoming these students from Bishop Murray School. I have a very close relative teaching there, 
namely my mother. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to join with the Hon. Member in welcoming 
them to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with my 
colleagues in welcoming the students from St. Dominic School who as I understand it, accompanied 
students from Bishop Murray. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
990 

St. Dominic is located in Montgomery Place in my constituency and the students are accompanied, 
Grade Seven and Grade Eight students, accompanied by their Principal, I believe, Mr. Lord. He is 
present also in the Speaker's Gallery. 
 
I am sorry that I likely won't be able to join the students for a few minutes because of the proceedings in 
the House this afternoon, but I certainly want to share the sentiments expressed by my colleague from 
Saskatoon and the Members opposite that they have an enjoyable and entertaining time and have a nice 
trip back to Saskatoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

GOVERNMENT PURCHASE OF PRIVATE BUSINESSES 
 
MR. H. E. COUPLAND: (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders- of the Day I should like 
to direct a question to the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kowalchuk). I understand that 
negotiations are under way or completed for the purchase of three private businesses in the Meadow 
Lake Provincial Park. I am wondering is it the policy of the Department to eradicate all private business 
from the provincial parks in the province? 
 
HON. J. R. KOWALCHUK: (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, no it is not this 
Government's intention to eradicate all private business within provincial parks, but in this case it was of 
very extreme importance that we proceed to deal, on a voluntary basis, to purchase these three 
businesses. It was freely negotiated and I think it was a real good job done. 
 
SOME HON.MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COUPLAND: — A supplementary question, will these businesses be leased out for operation or 
will they be run by the Government and be a place for a lot more civil servants? 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — This decision will be made in due time. We haven't completed negotiations 
yet and we will be making these decisions in due course. 
 

NOTICE FOR PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 
would like to ask you, Sir, and Members of the House for leave under Rule 17 to move a motion seeking 
priority of debate for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance. 
 
Briefly, Mr. Speaker, that matter is the continuing dramatic and drastic decline in the prices received by 
producers for finished beef cattle in the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
991 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McISAAC: — Very briefly, Mr. Speaker, a check of the one market that is closest to home for me, 
the North Battleford Livestock Pool Market, shows beef prices for finished beef January 18th to be 
$53.50 per hundred. That gradually declined, $51.60, $51.50, $48, $47, $45, $43 yesterday and $44 
today. A decline of approximately $9 in a five to six week period, Mr. Speaker, representing a financial 
loss per animal of $90 to $100. Mr. Speaker, I think this continuing dramatic decline in the face of rising 
feed costs and other rising costs that the producer is faced with deserve consideration under this Rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is the subject matter for your consideration and I ask for leave to debate that particular 
matter. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Hon. Member has submitted in writing the subject matter of the topic which 
he raised. Under Standing Order 17(2) it states that two hours' notice must be given to the Clerk of the 
Assembly so that it can be properly taken into consideration. So I believe that at this time I shall take 
this as notice for tomorrow. 
 
MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that two hours' notice wasn't given. I realize that 
there is provision to allow proceedings and I certainly accept your ruling in that respect. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Members opposite 
recognize the serious situation. I would be amazed if they weren't prepared to give leave. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — If I can speak to that, I don't think it is a matter of us 
giving leave, it is a matter of the Rule which I would invite the Opposition sometime to read. 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview): — If I may, the Rule provides that you can waive the notice 
and I would ask the Members opposite to give leave for you to waive the notice. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — That's right, it does provide for waiving of the notice, Mr. Speaker, but the 
reason for the waiving is some- thing that would have occurred within that two hour period which 
wouldn't have allowed the giving of the notice. Otherwise why would the two hour notice provision be 
in there. Do you mean to tell us that this is something that arose in the last two hours? This has been 
kicking around by the Liberals for the past one month, by the Federal Liberals. 
 
MR. T. M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington): — The matter that the Attorney General understandably 
being a lawyer wouldn't understand is that the market report came over today at 12:50 which was a 
substantial reduction today in the price of cattle . . . 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
992 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — . . . and which is within the time limit prescribed and that is precisely why 
the motion is brought in now. 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I have been in 
this Legislature since 1967 and we have had a number of priorities of debate and on every occasion 
without exception, Mr. Speaker, there has been the two hours' notice given. In this particular instance 
there has been a loss in regard to the livestock producers for some time. It hasn't happened within the 
last two hours, in fact, there have been a number of pleas made to the Federal Government to attempt to 
correct that and nothing has been done. Only now do the Members opposite decide over their dinner that 
they want a priority of debate and I agree with you, you take notice now and the decision comes from 
yourself tomorrow at the next sitting of the Legislature. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Members will be aware that under Rule 17 the Speaker can waive notice. Also 
under Rule 17 there are certain rules that the notice must comply with. I don't want to take the action 
either for or against the motion and the matter of fact that the Hon. Member stated the price of beef, I 
don't imagine it will change too much between today and tomorrow so I would suggest that I will take 
notice of motion that I will be in a position by tomorrow to see whether it complies with the rules and 
make a ruling which will not set a special precedent for the House, but will comply with the rules of the 
House. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PROVINCIAL COMMUNITY PASTURE FEES 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER: (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask 
a question of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). Last year you will recall that the provincial 
community pasture fees were raised by the Minister about 22 per cent. I am wondering if in view of the 
problems besetting the cattle industry today would the Minister of Agriculture give us assurance that he 
will not add to the burden by again raising the rate for 1974? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the Member for Moosomin’s question I will not give 
him any assurance that there is not going to be an increase. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Members will allow me to respond to the question 
that was asked by the Member for Moosomin. Had it not been for the inactivity of the former Liberal 
Government for years in administering the formula that set the rates and the charges for community 
pasture fees there would have been no such significant increase last year. As the Members opposite 
know, Mr. Speaker, there is a formula to 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
993 

be adjusted on a yearly basis in regard to cattle prices and that formula established what the carrying 
capacity and what the charge was for cattle in community pastures as well as grazing land. Because they 
never had the guts to raise those fees before we came into power in 1971, we had to adjust them in a 
most significant way, hence the large increase. The members and the patrons of those pastures know 
what the formula is and they know that it directly relates to the amount of money that beef is selling for 
on an average over the past six months for a given year and it will be up to this Government to make a 
decision if there will be an increase in light of an increase coming last year. We are now considering that 
but I cannot give the House assurance at this point in time that there will not be an increase or for that 
matter if there is an increase, how significant an increase there may be. 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, if I may ask a supplementary question. It seems then that the 
Minister is saying that he doesn't intend to hold the pasture rate in spite of the problems of the cattle 
people. I should like to ask the Minister if it is his purpose to deliberately make it as tough as possible 
for the cattle people at this particular time to soften them up for The Natural Products Marketing Act 
which I am sure he has in mind for them. Does he feel that if they have as many problems as possible it 
is going to make it easier for him to come along and force them under The Natural Products Marketing 
Act as he did the hog producers about a year ago and the barley producers a few days ago? The question 
is, is it your intention purposely to do nothing for the cattle people so that they are in a position where 
they would be more receptive to The Natural Products Marketing Act? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is no. No more so than the Liberal Government 
when they sat back and did nothing in regard to pork prices of 15 cents per pound in 1969 and 1970. 
 

OUTLOOK IRRIGATION PROJECT 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct another 
question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Boy, he's getting it today. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — In face of the near crisis conditions facing cattlemen in the southwest and central part 
of the province due mainly to the hay shortages and the inability of this NDP Government to move hay 
from northern Saskatchewan into the southern part of the province and the pathetic whining and crying 
which they are doing to Ottawa, hopefully trying to blame Ottawa for their inability in Saskatchewan, is 
the Minister of Agriculture finally prepared to admit his folly in the cancellation of the Outlook 
irrigation project? And immediately, because of the increased revenues which this Government will be 
receiving this year, will he assure the cattle producers of this province that they will continue with that 
irrigation project to ensure future fodder supplies in years ahead? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
994 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan and the Department of Agriculture is 
aware of the problem in southern Saskatchewan pertaining to shortage of fodder supplies, hay supplies, 
and I suggest that they have done everything in their ability to find hay in northern Saskatchewan. For 
the information of the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) there is a shortage of hay in many areas in 
northern Saskatchewan and it is not simply a case of moving hay or fodder from northern Saskatchewan 
to the areas of short supply in the South. We have identified several months ago where there are 
surpluses of hay in the North which could be moved into southern Saskatchewan and we notified 
livestock producers in southern Saskatchewan of that hay and attempted to help them in every way 
possible to move that hay to their operations or to the areas that are in short supply. 
 
The Member makes reference in regard to the South, Saskatchewan River Irrigation project. He has 
made reference to this on some occasions over the past months, and has suggested some 
short-sightedness in regard to the intentions of the Government to not continue the project on the west 
side, and that, in some way that contributes to the shortage of hay at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. This 
is absolutely ridiculous. 
 
The Member for Morse, as do all Members sitting to your left, Mr. Speaker, know that there are 50,000 
acres of land on the east side that are open to irrigation, that are not yet irrigated because there is not any 
desire by the farmers to have them irrigated. And we have stepped up programs in order to enhance and 
encourage farmers to irrigate on the east side three-fold in comparison to what they did as a Liberal 
Government a few short years ago. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — Yet the farmers in the area have chosen, because of the economies of grain 
production, to grow dry land crops rather than irrigate. And the Government cannot force them to 
irrigate, nor is it our intention to force them to irrigate. So until those 50,000 acres are at least assumed 
to be under development for irrigation, or will be undertaken to be irrigated, there is no reasonable 
reason for the Government to continue or expand irrigated lands on the west side, for which there is no 
guarantee they will be put under irrigation. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Supplementary question. The Minister of Agriculture has not answered my question in 
which I stated that, "Is he going to reinitiate this Outlook irrigation project?" Here again he has 
demonstrated the ineptitude of that Government there. They are blaming Ottawa for what's happening to 
the agricultural industry in this province, and here he is turning around blaming the farmers of 
Saskatchewan because we don't have irrigation at Outlook. It is not the farmers, Mr. Minister, at fault; 
it's the fault of this Government because they are not providing the opportunities for the people of this 
province to take advantage of irrigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case he forgot my supplementary question, which I asked, is he going to answer the 
initial question which I said — "is he going to reinstate the Outlook irrigation 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
995 

project in the forthcoming budget?" 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Are you going to continue to allow this House to be run like a shambles during the 
question period? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Speaker can only ask for the co-operation of the Members. He can't force it. 
 
MR. MESSER: — In response to the Member for Morse's supplementary Question, may I again say to 
him, that there is a very large acreage on the east side that is available to be irrigated, yet there has not 
been an attempt to irrigate that acreage. 
 
MR. STEUART: — You haven't encouraged it. 
 
MR. MESSER: — The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, says that we haven't encouraged it. 
 
MR. STEUART: — That's right. 
 
MR. MESSER: — We have introduced programs that would encourage irrigation, at least three-fold in 
comparison to the kind of programs that they had when they were in Government a few short years ago. 
 
When we stopped the construction work on the west side, I did not say that the project was terminated. I 
said it would be open to constant review and whenever there was an indication that farmers in the area 
wanted to expand and take advantage of further irrigated acreage, we would continue to develop the 
program. As it is now, we still have a surplus of 30,000 acres and there is no irrigation taking place on 
that, so it would be short-sighted of the Government to start developing more acres when we haven't 
been able to utilize what we have already developed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MOTIONS FOB RETURN 
 
RETURN NO. 135 
 
MR. J. G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a 
Return No. 135 showing: 
 

For the years 1964 to present, the rates for natural gas charged by the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation to: (a) Saskatchewan potash mining companies, and in particular Kalium Chemicals 
Ltd., (b) Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. (since date of commencement of operations), (c) 
residential consumers. 

 
He said: — Mr. Speaker, I trust we can be quite brief with this. I would like to give a little background 
information to the Motion and in the end I shall move a Motion for Return to 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
996 

provide the Legislature with the material about rates charged by the Power Corporation to Saskatchewan 
potash mining companies, and in particular Kalium, the Prince Albert Pulp Company and to residential 
consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the general situation with respect to natural gas is that it is a highly valuable fuel for 
heating purposes, and in the present context it is severely underpriced relative to other sources of heat 
based on a cost per BTU calculation. 
 
In Canada, despite the increase in reserves, the static index, that is, the number of years of supply that 
we have at current rates of consumption, has declined from 39 years of supply in 1956 to 23 years in 
1973. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the particular Saskatchewan context, we are faced with a situation of not being 
able to meet our own consumption needs. We produce about 52 billion cubic feet and we consume about 
114 billion cubic feet, and part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that we have got a grossly distorted 
pricing system. According to Oil Week, we have residential rates in 1972 in the order of 79 cents for a 
thousand cubic feet, ranging down to a mere 30 cents per thousand cubic feet for industrial users. What 
this Motion for Return is trying to get at is the precise nature of this rate structure in order that we, in the 
Legislature, and the people in Saskatchewan in general, can enter into the debate about what should be 
the pricing policy for natural gas, which is obviously, a key energy source, and if we don't, I submit, 
establish a pricing structure which is more reasonable, we shall find ourselves very rapidly exhausting 
this valuable resource. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, out of a total consumption in 1973 of 114 billion cubic feet, residential 
consumption amounted to a mere 20 — approximately one-sixth. We had commercial — 16 billion 
cubic feet; industrial — 37 (another gross waste), we were using in the order of 40 billion cubic feet in 
actual power plants that generate other forms of energy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us look at the Kalium situation in particular. We've got the Kalium Mine, the only 
mine using a solution mining technique, which according to virtually all the engineering reports, is 
grossly inefficient relative to room and pillar technique, which is dependent upon using a very high 
amount of cheap energy because its process is to put a hot solution down into the ground, bring it up, 
and then you have to evaporate it by heating it, and according to the sketchy information that I have, 
until 1971 or 1972, Kalium was getting away with 22 cents per thousand cubic feet for their price of 
natural gas compared with the residential consumer who was paying up to four times as much in the 
order of 80 cents. I understand that now there is a new scale which is starting at 35 cents per thousand 
cubic feet for the first six million, then going down, I haven't got the complete details. 
 
I think the Legislature would like to have them for, according to some calculations which were done for 
me, the present rate structure allows for something in the order of one-twentieth of a cent profit per 
thousand, cubic feet for a grand total of $10 a day out of the Kalium operation. I think that it is clear that 
the kind of pricing structure which provides cheap natural gas to wasteful industrial users, while 
charging a high price to the logical user (the residential 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
997 

consumer) is a gross distortion of our priorities. Something should be done to set this right. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, seconded by Mr. Meakes, an Order for Return as showing 
— Return No. 135. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It's been moved by the Member for Saskatoon University, seconded by the 
Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 135) as 
shown. 
 
The Member for Morse isn't in his seat now, but he was when the Motion was seconded. He walked out 
since that time. Is the House ready for the question? 
 
HON. K. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, so far as I am aware, it . . . 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, a point of information. I don't want to confuse the matter. I had 
arranged with Mr. Meakes to second this motion, who was in his seat when I rose, I believe, and it was 
not the Hon. Member for Morse. I don't want to implicate him in something with which he is not 
wanting to be involved. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If the Hon. Member would write so that I can read it . . . 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The Member did say Mr. Meakes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Meakes is not in his chair. Is it agreeable that one of the other Members of 
the 44 sitting on that side of the House would be agreeable? I understand that Mr. Meakes had cleared it 
with the Whip. 
 
MR. GROSS: — I'll second the motion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Assiniboia, has he agreed to second this motion seeing Mr. 
Meakes is not in his seat? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Gravelbourg! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Or from Gravelbourg! 
 
MR. THORSON: — Mr. Speaker, so far as I am aware, it has never been the policy of any Government 
of Saskatchewan to make the kind of information that is requested in this Motion, the subject of an 
Order for Return of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Such matters, of course, do arise in the course of the deliberations of the Crown Corporations 
Committee, when matters of rates charged by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation for 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
998 

natural gas and electricity are very often reviewed and discussed. 
 
It is very difficult for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in carrying out all of its responsibilities in 
the province, which include negotiating rates for electricity and gas with various kinds of customers, to 
carry on those negotiations very successfully, if there is to be full information about all matters 
respecting rates that are presently being charged or in the process of being discussed with a view to 
making changes in the rates that are being charged. 
 
Now, having said that, it will be clear that I propose to ask the Assembly to defeat this Motion. May I 
hasten to add that this kind of matter is certainly proper for raising in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. I have always taken the view, and many Ministers of the Crown in Saskatchewan have taken 
that view, that every Member of the Legislative Assembly is entitled to full information about any 
aspect of the operations of any Crown agency, but some of those Crown agencies involved in 
commercial operations cannot but be prejudiced if all aspects of their rates and costs are made public. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it has been the time honored custom in the Crown Corporations Committee to 
offer to Members of the Assembly, in camera, full information on the understanding that they will not 
make it public in such a way as to jeopardize the commercial position of the Crown agency. 
 
So with that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Assembly to defeat this Motion. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, we have an obvious precedent for this kind of information being 
provided to the House in the successful attempt of the Legislature last year to get the details of the 
contract negotiated between SEDCO and Intercontinental on the basis of Government participation in 
that corporation. The Crown corporation was involved in directly making the contracts. I think the 
Minister's remarks that this is something appropriate only for the Crown Corporations Committee a 
mere wangling and weaseling and attempting not to provide the Legislature with perfectly legitimate 
public information. If there is a subsidy to private corporations involved in the pricing structure, the rate 
structure for natural gas, it is perfectly logical for the Legislature to inquire into the matter and to discuss 
the matter as energy is obviously a crucial public issue of the day. And for the Minister in charge of the 
Power Corporation to offer to provide information in camera to Members provided that they don't reveal 
this information, is to try and make us accomplices in whatever nefarious pricing policy the Power 
Corporation is engaged in. 
 
I am not particularly interested in being part and parcel for some shenanigans going on in the Power 
Corporation, over giving low rates to private corporations — I want to see a public discussion in this 
Legislature and for the people of Saskatchewan about what is the rate structure. 
 
I think we have seen once again the secretiveness of the way the Crown Corporations are being 
conducted. The idea behind public ownership is that the public knows what is going 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
999 

on. The NDP in Ottawa, year after year, calls for disclosure of relevant financial information. What kind 
of credibility does the NDP have when it gets in power — it refuses to provide that kind of information? 
This is precisely the kind of" information which is perfectly legitimate for this Legislature to ask for. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Legislature to support the Motion and provide the Order for 
Return. Motion negatived. 
 

RETURN NO. 155 
 
MR. G. B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return 
No. 155 showing: 
 
Under the Saskatchewan Succession Duty Act: (a) the monthly collections during 1973; (b) the number 
of estates that were involved; (c) the number of beneficiaries that were involved; (d) the number of 
estates that were valued between $200,000 and $500,000; (e) the number of estates that were valued 
between $500,000 and $1,000,000; (f) the number of estates that were valued over $1,000,000. 
 
He said: — Mr. Speaker, before moving this Motion I should like to make a few comments. 
 
I think it is quite evident to a good many people in this province that the imposition of succession duties 
on beneficiaries under certain conditions residing in Saskatchewan has had a detrimental effect on the 
residency of estates in Saskatchewan. It is quite well known that there has been a considerable 
movement of people to the Province of Alberta in order to bypass the incidence of this tax in one way or 
another, either by their families establishing residence there or by establishing residence and making 
gifts. As I recall last year the figure supplied was somewhere in the neighborhood of $2 million — give 
or take, I might be out a little bit, but not too much, and it seems to me that this is a considerable price to 
pay for the loss of these people to Saskatchewan when we are desirous of holding our population (not 
necessarily increasing it, but we would like to hold it). That is really what prompts me to move this 
Motion to ascertain if this is really the big revenue producer that the Government anticipated it would 
be. It strikes me that last year the amount of revenue received hardly justified the end result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moved by myself and seconded by the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) that an Order of 
the Assembly do issue for Return No. 155 showing. 
 
HON. W. A. ROBBINS: (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments 
with respect to the words of the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). I realize, as I am sure all 
Members of this House realize, that we have argued consistently that succession duties should be under 
the jurisdiction of the Federal Government and that it should be applied uniformly across the country. 
Obviously there would be some problems in terms of tax havens, if that is not done. I note that the 
Member for Whitmore Park makes 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1000 

remarks with respect to people moving to Alberta and there may be some who have done that. I had 
contacts with people in Saskatoon two years ago who told me that they were moving to Alberta because 
of The Succession Duty Act. Last year they told me they were moving to Alberta because of The 
Succession Duty Act. I still see them around Saskatoon. They are still living in Saskatoon. That doesn't 
deny the fact that there may be some people who will move under those circumstances and obviously 
they are at liberty to do so. 
 
I think, also, the principle of succession duty is sound. It is a reasonable principle and on that basis we 
feel that The Succession Duty Act is a reasonable Act and a reasonable Bill. 
 
I might say that I should like to move an amendment to this particular Order for Return, seconded by my 
colleague Mr. Byers, but I should point out that the basic reason for this amendment is because the 
information cannot be supplied in the way in which it was asked, because it was asked that information 
be supplied on a monthly basis. Collections are not reported on a monthly basis and the Member, I am 
sure, is familiar with the fact that the federal authorities do the collecting for the co-operating provinces 
which include the Maritime Provinces, Manitoba and Saskatchewan. This information comes back on a 
quarterly basis and, therefore, the amendment will read as follows: 
 

That all the words after the word "showing" be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 
(a)the quarterly collections during 1973 under the Saskatchewan Succession Duty Act; (b) the 
number of estates from which some amount of duties were received; (c) the number of estates 
that were assessed for succession duty purposes during the period from April 1st, 1975 to 
September 30, 1973 that were: (i) of a value between $50,000 and $200,000; (ii) a value between 
$200,000 and $500,000; (iii) a value between $500,000 and $1,000,000; (iv) a value in excess of 
$1,000,000. 

 
MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, a question on the amendment. I wonder if the Hon. Minister meant to 
omit the number of beneficiaries who were involved. It is not included in the amendment. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, I don't think that was the intention. I am sorry if it was missed. 
 
MR. GRANT: — Yes, I would like to have that included. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, I don't know of any reason why it couldn't be given. I may be wrong. I will 
have to check with the Department. 
 
MR. GRANT: — Mr. Speaker, I didn't hear quite clearly what went on on the other side of the House 
and possibly you did. Could you convey to me what the Minister said in regard to that. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1001 

MR. ROBBINS: — I just said that I don't know why it isn't there and I can check with my officials to 
find out. That is all that I can tell you at the moment. I didn't even notice that it wasn't there. I thought I 
was reading off identically the same thing except for quarterly collections instead of monthly 
collections. 
 
MR. GRANT: — I don't know what the procedure is but I think this should be held over until that point 
is clarified because it is important information. If he doesn't wish to amend it we will have to move an 
amendment to the amendment. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to give this matter some attention and for that 
reason I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 — STABILIZATION PLANS FOR FARM COMMODITIES 
 
MR. L. LARSON (Pelly) moved, seconded by Mr. Thibault (Kinistino) 
 

That this Assembly requests the Federal Government to establish permanent stabilization plans 
for all farm commodities based on cost of production, and in particular, to immediately join with 
the Saskatchewan Government in its temporary Hog Price Stabilization plan to convert it to a 
permanent long term plan in order to guarantee fair returns to all hog producers. 

 
He said: — I think it is again rather timely, Mr. Speaker, to raise this question of stabilization. I think it 
is equally timely to urge on the Federal Government that a permanent stabilization plan be established 
for all farm commodities. The experiences of the last while have shown very clearly that it is necessary 
to have this kind of stabilization program. 
 
The acceptance by the Federal Minister of Agriculture that this is also a need certainly ought to 
encourage this Legislature to pass this Resolution asking for farm stabilization. 
 
As a long time associate in the struggle to impress the dire need for stabilization for farm income at a 
level where it will give some assurance of viability to the industry, I welcome the opportunity to move 
this Resolution. While at the present moment, the price of grain is relatively good, we all recall the very 
grim past when farmers were producing at a loss. To add insult to injury, we all recall the LIFT Program 
and the utter confusion and hardship that it has created. Equally vivid in the minds of farmers is the 
aborted stabilization program conceived by Otto Lang and his associates a couple of years ago, the 
principal effort and aim of which was to stabilize poverty and do nothing to accommodate rising costs 
and other related factors. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1002 

The struggle for farm income stability is a long and sad story. It dates back to the earliest days of 
farming in Saskatchewan. From this struggle has emerged some of the most important farm 
organizations as well as some very powerful and influential farm leaders. 
 
Although these men and their influence were able to establish some very important and valuable 
principles and some important and valuable organizations both in the realm of commercial enterprises 
such as the United Grain Growers, Sask Pool, Federated Co-ops, the Canadian Wheat Board, Federation 
of Agriculture, the Farmers Union and others, they were never able to establish an effective income 
stabilization program or principle: These men throughout the years carried on a continuing battle for 
parity prices, deficiency payments, as well as a host of other attempts in their struggle for the income 
stabilization principle. Needless to say that battle is not yet won, so the fight must go on with the violent 
fluctuations of today's economy and farm income it is not possible for the industry to remain viable or 
even to survive. 
 
MR. LANE: — Farmers don't believe that. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. LARSON: — I wonder if the farmer, across the way for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) will go out and 
cultivate his field or maybe clean his barn or something. It would be much more interesting for the 
House to watch him do that. 
 
MR. LARSON: — Mr. Speaker, what makes the situation even more intolerable is the fact that all price 
factors are out of the hands of the farmer. 
 
He is one of the very few left in today's organized society without any bargaining muscle. World 
markets, to a large extent, establish grain prices. The bargaining power of the farmer in this arena is very 
small. In the area of production costs the farmer’s bargaining power is also very minimal. These costs 
are by and large established by business enterprises which are concerned with a balance sheet than any 
other factor. 
 
The ability of farm organizations to influence the ups and downs, the demand or the lack of it on the 
international markets is just not possible. They have neither the manpower nor the political power to do 
this. Even the Federal Government is not able effectively to control these factors. Therefore it is 
imperative to have a federally sponsored and federally financed stabilization program that has an 
established sum of money available for it that can used to relieve the inevitable fluctuations that occur in 
the farm income picture. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1003 

Such a program must be implemented if the industry is to survive. That this principle is sound and 
acceptable has been demonstrated several times and in several places. Canada is one of the few 
remaining places that has failed to accept and implement this principle. 
 
That this principle is accepted by this Government has been demonstrated. We have not only 
consistently asked for implementation of this principle, but we have acted. When it became obvious that 
there was some trouble ahead for the hog producers last summer and fall, the Minister of Agriculture not 
only consistently urged the Federal Government to act, but proceeded to establish a realistic floor price 
for hogs. This is very popular with the producer in times of insecure prices and high costs. There is just 
as great a need for a similar program with regard to cattle. The cattle industry at the moment is going 
through some of its most trying times. It is now faced with having to pay realistic prices for the feed that 
they need for these cattle. 
 
Members opposite will no doubt be yelling that a floor price be established for beef. However, they at 
the same time know only too well that this is not practical or possible. What this Government has 
offered to do and will continue to do is to co-operate with others and the Federal Government to bring 
about as soon as possible a full national income stabilization plan that will cover all major farm 
commodities wherever grown in Canada. This program is vital if the industry is to survive. 
 
The present Minister of Agriculture has on several occasions indicated his willingness to adopt this kind 
of program. I feel that it is, therefore, very timely for this Legislature to pass this Resolution and to offer 
full co-operation in its implementation. 
 
I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER: (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say in connection with this 
Resolution I would hope that the Federal Government will stay away from any association with the 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission when they look at stabilization plans. 
 
We all know that the Hog Marketing Commission is one of the most unpopular programs that have 
come before the farmers of this province in a number of years. The Minister has attempted to make it a 
little more palatable in the last few months by sending a cheque out from the Hog Marketing 
Commission with his own signature, very large and bold letters right across the middle of the cheque, so 
there is no doubt that they are going to associate the cheque with Mr. Messer. However, in spite of this 
obvious attempt to make the Hog Marketing Commission a little more palatable, people are still fed up 
with it; we have many, many long time hog producers going out of the business simply because of the 
Hog Marketing Commission. I should hope that in no way will the Federal Government associate 
themselves with this particular Commission. 
 
People have come to me who have been in the hog business for years and said they are now fed up with 
the red tape. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1004 

"When the Government of the Province of Saskatchewan is going to regulate and run my hog business I 
am quitting." They just sell out their breeding stock and leave their hog barns empty and this is 
happening all over the province and every Member over there knows that it is happening throughout the 
province. The chief reason is because the farmer is fed up with the red tape and control that the Hog 
Marketing Commission has over his business. 
 
I would certainly hope that the Federal Government stays away from that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am rather surprised that this Resolution appeared on the Order Paper because the 
Members opposite should be the last ones to ever want to bring up the stabilization plan. This is 
something that they should hide their heads in shame when they hear about it. They should rather try to 
sweep this under the rug and forget about it. 
 
The message that I get from the people in the country is that farmers, in general, are fed up with political 
bickering and programs that affect them. And they are fed up with the NDP continually bringing 
partisan politics into important agricultural issues. There are about 75,000 farmers in this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) interferes in almost every federal issue. He 
sends out NDP propaganda to every farmer in the province, all of these 75,000. This is done at 
taxpayers' expense. We have many examples of this and any of you who are farmers have received these 
messages. 
 
You look back at the ones you received several months ago and you see how ridiculous now they are. 
The ones he sent out on the feed grains situation for example, statements he made that are obviously 
completely not in accordance with the facts. This is well proven in the months that followed since he 
sent these out. A good example of this is the rapeseed vote. Any program that is suggested by the 
Federal Government is automatically opposed by this NDP Provincial Government strictly for political 
reasons. They don't care whether the program is good, or whether it needs improvement. If it is 
suggested by the Federal Government they are automatically against it. 
 
Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Messer, Mr. Romanow put NDP politics first and the interests of the farmer second. 
They have done this on many occasions. This became very obvious with the Federal stabilization plan. 
The stabilization plan proposal was a classic example of NDP political interference in the affairs of the 
Saskatchewan farmer. The stabilization plan proposed by the Hon. Otto Lang in 1971 was basically a 
rather straight forward type of plan. It simply said that a fund would be set up to pay money out to 
farmers in years of low production, poor markets or poor prices. The stabilization fund would be made 
up in a very simple manner. The farmer would pay two per cent of his gross sales of grain. From the 
Federal Government four per cent of the farmers' gross sale of grain would be contributed. So this was 
really the basis of the stabilization plan. The Federal Government would put in four per cent of the gross 
sales of grain; the farmer would put in two per cent. This money would go into a fund and would be 
available for the farmers. The details of when it would be paid back etc. were 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1005 

relatively unimportant. The significant point was that all of this money would be available to farmers 
when they needed it plus interest. This money would be set aside for the farmers. The plan was long 
overdue and should not have been postponed for any reason political or otherwise. 
 
In 1973-74 the Federal contribution should have been $150 million on gross sales of an estimated 
$3,700 million grain sales. Where else would we ever get a chance as farmers to get a direct financial 
contribution of $150 million put into a fund for the benefit of the farmers of this province. In the past 
two years the farmers would receive a Federal and I stress Federal contribution of over $200 million. 
The farmers had an opportunity to get this large sum of Federal cash and they were entitled to it. But did 
the farmers get this $200 million when this works out certainly to about $3,000 for each Saskatchewan 
farmer? Of course, the answer is no, they didn't get the $200 million. 
 
In the fall of 1971 this NDP Government sabotaged and destroyed the Federal stabilization plan. They 
boasted about it publicly. I recall specifically the Attorney General getting up in this House, it is on the 
records of this House, he said we did it, we take credit for it and we are glad. They boasted about it 
publicly, they took credit for its destruction at that time. The records of this Legislature indicated clearly 
that they destroyed the 1971 Federal stabilization plan. I should like anyone to get up in this debate and 
tell us again that they did it and how they did it. I should like them to repeat the statements they made at 
that time when they said they were taking credit for destroying the stabilization plan. Those chiefly 
responsible were the NDP Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Messer, the Attorney General, Mr. Romanow. 
They were the ones who made the arrangements that got the NDP farmers from south of Regina 
organized and destroyed the stabilization plan. Because of their actions we will have no stabilization 
plan, we still have no $200 million contribution from the Federal Government. Mr. Speaker, no two men 
in history have ever cost the Saskatchewan farmer so much money. No one can deny that the farmers 
lost this $200 million due to the action of the NDP. I think this is perfectly obvious to everyone and I am 
sure that when the Members opposite get up^ they will also agree that they would have got this $200 
million, the farmers would now have it if they had let the plan go through at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the farmers of this province will look at these two NDP Cabinet 
Ministers and decide in their own minds which they would rather have, Mr. Romanow, Mr. Messer or 
$200 million. I believe that most farmers would give you a pretty quick answer to this question. If this 
question was put directly to the farmers they wouldn't have to think too long to give you an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government will likely reintroduce the stabilization plan in the next few 
months. I personally hope that it will not be greatly different from the original plan. I hope that we are 
still going to get the four per cent contribution from the Federal Government in cash which will be 
double the contribution that will be made by the farmers. This was the basis of the original plan and this 
was a direct contribution from the Federal treasury. I hope that this is incorporated in the plan when it is 
reintroduced. In spite of 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1006 

the fact that we have lost this for two or three years, we have lost this $200 million, I hope that at least it 
will get started now. 
 
Events have proved that beyond a doubt the NDP took the wrong stand on the previous stabilization 
plan. They were not on the side of the farmers. Another example of this of course is the rapeseed vote, 
they obviously took the wrong stand on the rapeseed vote. In this case the NDP Government spent 
thousands of dollars of the farmers' money to promote a plan that the farmers themselves rejected by a 
democratic vote. You know in any other type of organization the people at the head of the organization 
would resign if a democratic vote showed that they had been wrong as surely as they were wrong in this 
case. We got letters sent out at government expense, tens of thousands of dollars spent by the 
Department of Agriculture in this province trying to promote something that the farmers themselves in a 
democratic vote said that they didn't want. This is exactly what happened. The Minister of Agriculture in 
this case simply bet on the wrong horse. The NDP Government and the Minister of Agriculture again 
were not on the side of the farmers. So we would call this time on the Government to be constructive, to 
forget politics and to accept their responsibility to the farm people of this province. We hope that this 
time the NDP will co-operate with the Federal Government and accept the stabilization plan which will 
be of great benefit to our farmers in future years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. I. W. CARLSON: (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, the former speaker on the other side of the House 
made a few comments that I should like to deal with. He says he hopes that the program that the Federal 
Government has indicated it is going to bring in will be similar to the one they introduced a couple of 
years ago. I know that the farmers in Saskatchewan don't hope that. I know that this Government will 
certainly oppose it if it comes in in the same form as it was introduced originally. I must say that I am 
glad that the Federal Government has indicated a willingness to bring forth a stabilization program, I 
hope they are prepared to listen to western Canadian farmers, farm organizations, prairie governments 
and bring forth a realistic program, a program that will stabilize the agricultural economy at a level that 
will be beneficial to all of Canada, not only the farmers who are producing the products, but also the 
consumers. I believe consumers have as much at stake in a stabilization program as do the producers. 
Just a little bit of reasoning will indicate that if there is a stability in supply there will not be as much 
fluctuation, in the prices to the consumers as we have seen in the past few months. 
 
The consumer always seems to be the one getting the short end of the stick. When prices go up at the 
market, if you are talking about meat, specifically beef, as the price goes up for live beef, it is up within 
a couple of days in the supermarkets, when the price goes down again it takes weeks before the 
consumer gets any benefit of that reduction. Stabilization is important not only to the producer but also 
to the consumers of agricultural products. 
 
There are a few more points that I should like to deal with, some of the comments the Member for 
Moosomin made, and a few 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1007 

more suggestions of my own which I should like to deal further with at a later date. I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — FEED GRAINS POLICY 
 
MR. I. W. CARLSON (Yorkton) moved seconded by Mr. Owens: 
 

That this Assembly requests the Federal Government to immediately restore the pricing authority 
of the Canadian Wheat Board as it relates to domestic marketing of feed grains and quickly 
develop a feed grains policy that ensures fair and equitable prices within the Province and across 
Canada, under a system that leaves all of the powers of the Canadian Wheat Board intact. 

 
He said: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my speech I will be moving Resolution No. 8. But first I 
want to develop my arguments as to why the pricing authority should be returned to the Canadian Wheat 
Board for domestic marketing of feed grains. 
 
During the last Session in February of last year I moved a resolution calling on the Federal Government 
to establish a national feed grains policy that would provide three basic principles. 
 

1. It must provide a guaranteed price for feed grains through a Grains Income Stabilization 
Program, such price to take into account production costs. 

 
2. Establish a Feed Grains Reserve Bank which will guarantee delivery opportunities to feed grain 

producers and which will guarantee a supply of feed grain to livestock producers at all times. 
 

3. Establish equitable price relationships for feed grains throughout all of Canada. 
 
Since that time we have heard a lot of talk about feed grains. We now have an interim federal feed 
grains policy. However, it certainly doesn't resemble any suggestions made by this Legislature or this 
Government. The feed grains policy that was announced by Otto Lang was obviously developed by his 
Liberal colleagues from Quebec. I would think by now all Members of this House should be familiar 
with the principles of the Federal policy. I don't intend to repeat it in any detail, but I should like to point 
out some features that are of great concern to me. 
 
First, the Agriculture Products Board is being directed to enter the market as an additional buyer. .The 
price at which the Board will offer to purchase feed grains will be the estimated halfway point between 
initial price and the expected final price. Since during this crop year, at least, when supplies are 
extremely short, off-board grains should be selling at something close to the export equivalent price the 
entry of the Agriculture Products Board indicated price must be interpreted as an attempt to lead 
off-board prices down from what they would otherwise be. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1008 

Secondly, the Canadian Wheat Board will be directed to sell feed grains in other parts of Canada on the 
basis of the formula of off-board prices in Saskatchewan plus transportation and handling costs minus 
the feed freight assistance. This is of concern from two points of view. First the activities of the 
Agriculture Products Board appear to be intended to establish low off-board prices in order to ensure 
that the East will get cheap feed grains that it has been promised. Secondly, and more important, forcing 
the Canadian Wheat Board, which is an orderly marketing agency, to determine its selling price on the 
basis of small disorganized off-board market that is inconsistent with the principle of orderly marketing. 
 
Third, after August 1974 the private grain trade will be permitted to by-pass the Canadian Wheat Board 
by purchasing directly from farmers and elevator companies. The Federal Government's directive to the 
Canadian Wheat Board to base its domestic sales in eastern Canada on the off-board price in the prairies 
is a regressive policy. It is a regressive policy because an orderly marketing agency is being directed to 
base its selling price on an unregulated market functioning outside of the purview of the Wheat Board as 
a result of deliberate government policy. It is a regressive policy because the Prairie grain producer will 
be forced by the Federal policy to subsidize the eastern buyer of grain, since the Wheat Board cannot 
price domestically at levels consistent with world prices. 
 
It is estimated that barley may be sold for as much as a $1 a bushel less than could be obtained through 
the export markets during: 1973-74. The total loss of revenue to the Prairie grain producers as a result of 
this policy is expected to be approximately $50 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a regressive policy because the West's comparative advantage in livestock 
production will be determined. The subsidization by the prairie grain producer also means that the 
integrated grain livestock producer is at less of an advantage than he would otherwise be. This type of 
diversified farm accounts for well over 90 per cent of the prairie livestock production. As a result a 
continuation of the policy will result in a livestock production shift from diversified livestock farms in 
the prairies to specialized eastern feeding enterprises purchasing both teed grain and feeder animals in 
the prairies. This is clearly inconsistent with the provincial and federal objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of all the ridiculous policies that have originated out of Ottawa in the recent months this is 
the worst. In one breath, Mr. Lang says that everyone should sell to the Canadian Wheat Board since 
prices will be strong in the next breath he is saying the Agriculture Products Board is authorized to 
purchase this year on an emergency basis to protect farmers from distressed prices. This kind of talk is 
complete nonsense because Mr. Lang knows full well that the only farmers selling at distressed prices 
this year will be those misled into selling at the prices established by the Agriculture Products Board. 
 
Hopefully no one would be foolish enough to sell to the Agriculture Products Board, but needless to say 
many of them are. This is giving Mr. Lang a basis for his claim in eastern Canada that grain can be 
bought in the West at unrealistically low prices. It can be assumed that he hopes to use these 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1009 

prices as a basis for forcing the Canadian Wheat Board into selling cheap feed grains into eastern 
Canada. When Mr. Lang is in Saskatchewan he will deny that the policy was developed to provide 
cheap feed for the East. But what does he tell the farmers in Quebec? In Quebec, prior to the Quebec 
provincial election I might add the farmers were promised cheap feed grain. I have an article from the 
Free Press Weekly dated September 22, 1973 the headline reads, "Quebec Union Threatens Steps on 
Feed Policy." I quote: 
 

Quebec farmers apprehensive about federal implementation of the feed grains policy are 
prepared to take some imaginative steps if the government continues to hedge on the promised 
feed grains cost reductions, said the president of the 50,000 member Agriculture Producers 
Union. Paul Coutier told a news conference here last week that those promised cuts must be 
made. He was referring to a September 15th deadline set by Ottawa to implement the Interim 
Feed Policy. 

 
Mr. Lang must think he is living in 1874 instead of 1974 if he thinks he can get away with this kind of 
double talk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spent considerable time discussing and criticizing the Interim Federal Policy. It 
appears that the only way we can prevent the second phase from being implemented next fall is at the 
polls. It is obvious that the Liberals in Ottawa will not listen to any voice from western Canada. They 
don't listen to the Farmers' union, they don't hear the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, they refuse to consult 
the provincial governments. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they will hear ballots, dropping in ballot boxes 
next spring. They may lose some men, however, it may also be too late for some of them. Mr. Lang 
might very well retire from, politics with the consent of the majority of his constituents. Wouldn't that be 
a fitting reward for his efforts like Operation LIFT, Feed Grains Policy and his discriminatory rapeseed 
ballot. 
 
However, in case the Federal Liberals do decide to listen, I should like to make some constructive 
suggestions. Maybe some of the Members opposite will convince their friend Otto that he should pay 
some attention to Saskatchewan for the sake of the Liberal Party if nothing else. 
 
An entirely new Feed Grains Policy should be developed and should retain the Canadian Wheat Board 
as the sole marketing agency for prairie feed grains. 
 
When the Wheat Board was established its objective was to sell prairie grains at the maximum possible 
on behalf of the prairie farmers. This principle must be maintained. All sales by the Wheat Board 
whether domestic or export must be pooled so that every farmer selling feed grains gets a fair share of 
the various markets. Our quota system for delivering must be maintained by the Board to give equal 
opportunity to each and every farmer. We must maintain the Canadian Wheat Board, as I have indicated 
as the sole agent for western feed grain producers. Now I recognize and I'm sure that most farmers do, 
that the eastern feeders are faced with similar problems. What they need is one united voice to purchase 
grain on their behalf. They too can benefit from a single agency. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1010 

We already have the Canadian Livestock Feed Board, which should be given the authority to purchase 
on behalf of all eastern feed grain users. 
 
Thus you would have the Wheat Board negotiating on behalf of the grain producers and the Livestock 
Board negotiating on behalf of the livestock feeders or the feed grain users of eastern Canada. I am sure 
this procedure would produce more equity for each and every single farmer in Canada. Every grain 
producer would be treated equally and every feed grain user would pay a similar price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the farmers of Saskatchewan want orderly marketing and the stability it 
provides. No doubt the farmers of eastern Canada would also welcome a program that would provide 
them with some stability based on this kind of a reasonable approach, based on a negotiated price. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Member for Elrose that this Assembly request the 
Federal Government to immediately restore the pricing authority of the Canadian Wheat Board as it 
relates to domestic marketing of feed grain and quickly develop a feed grains policy that ensures fair and 
equitable prices within the province and across Canada, under a system that leaves all of the powers of 
the Canadian Wheat Board intact. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T. M. WEATHERALD: (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, today I listened with interest to the 
Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson). I wasn't surprised, I was disappointed, extremely disappointed in his 
remarks. Customarily the NDP when they find themselves in a jam usually appeal along the narrow, 
political, religious bias against Quebec, and unfortunately once again he entered into his speech with 
that narrow, parochialism against the people of Ontario and the people of Quebec, which we have so 
customarily come to get to know in this legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — It isn't surprising and shouldn't be of any surprise that their success in 
Quebec and east of Quebec has been negligible when one considers the narrow, parochial view of 
Canada, and particularly their views of the people of Quebec, that constantly creep into every speech of 
theirs in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the Feed Grains Policy, because the Feed Grains Policy 
that has been enunciated by the Federal Government, while I don't think it's perfect, I believe it's a 
substantial improvement over anything that we've had in the past. And if you take a look at some of the 
political comments emanating from the Provincial Government here it is obvious that most of their 
posture has been based along political lines and not really with any particular desire to develop the Feed 
Grains Policy for Canada as a whole. 
 
First of all, the first document we got, September 12, shortly after the federal announcement, we got a 
Feed Grains Policy paper from the Province of Saskatchewan at the taxpayers' expense with Mr. 
Messer's name on it, issued to all farmers in 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1011 

the Province of Saskatchewan. Much of it is inaccurate and is of a political nature, which was 
forewarning to the people of Saskatchewan and indeed as far as the Feed Grains Policy was forewarning 
that the arguments would be along political lines rather than on any rational basis. 
 
But it's interesting to note, very shortly after that, what is said in a number of publications about 
utterances coming from the Province of Saskatchewan. An article in a report on business by James Rusk. 
The debate about Feed Grain Policy in Canada has been entirely political and concerned with votes. 
That's one reaction to the Provincial Government's enunciation. 
 
Another, Mr. Speaker, that I should like to bring to your attention, is from the Winnipeg Tribune, 
August 17, 1973. This is the one where the Deputy Minister of Agriculture walked out of the meeting 
and we have had words of wisdom from the Attorney General on his moving from the meeting. 1 think 
the explanation given at the time was that he had to attend another meeting. Well, this will be one of the 
first meetings that any Deputy Minister has ever gone to, to represent the Province of Saskatchewan in 
negotiations with the Federal Government, where he tended to stay so short a time, because the headline 
in the Winnipeg Tribune said, "Western Leaders Bolt Meeting on Feed Grains". 
 
The meeting of western agriculture spokesmen and the Federal Government was little more than an hour 
old when Mr. Uskiw accompanied by the Saskatchewan delegation walked out. A little more than an 
hour old. The explanation that the Attorney General gave us was that the Deputy Minister of Agriculture 
here had to go to another meeting. Well, he sure didn't intend to represent Saskatchewan long with those 
negotiations if he only took an hour to do so. In other words it was a political set-up to begin with and he 
was simply carrying out the orders he had before he left the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — It's interesting to note that neither delegation from Alberta or British 
Columbia left the discussions and they continued at some length. It's also interesting to note that the 
only Deputy Minister attending those meetings was the one from Saskatchewan who had any comments 
for the Press afterwards other than Mr. Uskiw. The Deputies from both Alberta and British Columbia 
declined comments to the Press. 
 
So we can see that mostly the opposition to a possible feed grains policy for all Canada got started on a 
political basis rather than anything of a substantial note. 
 
Now I want to review for you just a few moments of the lineup that's been forthcoming on a feed grains 
policy, the suggested policy that has been given. 
 
First of all in the Western Producer, Thursday, February 28, it's interesting to note what the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture annual meeting here said. It was held on the 18th to the 21st of February, 
1974. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1012 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture was unable to agree on a feed grains policy for Canada and in 
fact decided to make no statement whatsoever as far as their policy was concerned. I'd like to read to you 
from the Western Producer on February 28. 
 

On the recommendation of the Board of Directors the contentious feed grains issue was not 
debated at the Canadian Federation of Agriculture's annual meeting here February 18 to 21. 
Instead a statement was approved by delegates, recognized as divisions, within the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture on this issue, the long and fruitless debates in past years and agreed not 
to tackle the thorny problem on the convention floor. 

 
Well that is approximately slightly over a week ago, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It's interesting to also note that Mr. Lockwood, Vice- President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool at the 
meeting said: 
 

The feed grains issue is a contentious issue that has been discussed at great length for many 
years. It has to be recognized that the Canadian Federation of Agriculture has within it both 
sellers and buyers of feed grains. The sellers have worked out what they can live with but this is 
not acceptable to the buyers. 

 
He supported the Board recommendation not to introduce any feed grains resolutions. So it's obvious 
that the Canadian Federation of Agriculture was unable at their meeting to offer any better program than 
has been suggested up until now. 
 
So we can follow through, Mr. Speaker, by looking at who has endorsed a plan, I don't see a plan 
precisely like the one that's proposed, but along those lines. For example we have the Palliser Wheat 
Growers in a press release issued saying: 
 

The Palliser Wheat Growers express its general approval about the short term and long term 
proposals. 

 
And it should be noted that the Palliser Wheat Growers is essentially an organization that represents 
grain producers and this is important because they would not be representing the cattlemen in the sense 
of a feeder wanting a substantial amount of cheap grain. 
 
The Saskatchewan Stock Growers, Mr. Speaker, represented the other side of the coin. The 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers in a press release issued, said that they approved of the government's long 
term Feed Grains Policy made public by the Federal Government recently. In fact, in their press release 
which I have before me the stock growers approve, quote: 
 

The long term Feed Grains Policy was made public by the Federal Government recently. Points 
raised by the stock growers papers included several essential features necessary in the program, 
which included the movement of grain freely over boundaries and a marketing system that would 
ensure buyer users a stable supply and a maximum access. Regional advantage was also another 
consideration which they said should be adhered to. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1013 

Now we have the Saskatchewan Stock Growers, also the United Grain Growers, as I previously quoted, 
in their annual meeting of delegates that Mr. Runciman and some 500 in Alberta, collectively all 
endorsed the principles that were suggested for a feed grains policy for Canada and it was interesting to 
note that these delegates freely endorsed the policy on their own. In other words there was no pressure 
put on the top for them to particularly accept the federal policy. 
 
Now, I want to come to the position of the Government of Alberta which I think is extremely important. 
In actual fact, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Alberta has asked that the Federal Government institute 
the present interim policy immediately. Their latest position has been that they would like to see the 
interim policy immediately converted to one of being a permanent policy. They have suggested a few 
modifications and these are perfectly legitimate, but essentially they have suggested a policy somewhat 
along the lines that has been proposed for all of Canada. I think this is important because I want to now 
read to the House some information which I think is of great interest and it certainly was of substantial 
interest to myself, because I have listened to the Premier of Saskatchewan (Mr. Blakeney) and the 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) and most recently the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) talk 
about the damage to the meat industry in Canada, how cheap freight rates helped eastern Canada and so 
on and so forth. Their apparent position has been that low freight rates have allowed for the shipping of 
live cattle east so that they would be processed in the east. They have alleged that cheap grain would 
help develop the livestock industry in the East at the expense of the West. But in actual fact statistics 
prove beyond a doubt that the largest livestock producer by a great and substantial margin is the 
Province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have with me the slaughtering statistics of cattle in Canada in 1973 and I think these statistics, (I wish 
the Premier was here, because I think he's been off on a wild goose chase and his high priced staff in the 
office haven't been doing much in-depth research for him), but it's most interesting to note that if you 
compare Alberta with Ontario and Quebec for example, Mr. Speaker, you'd find in the month of 
January, 1975 for example, Alberta slaughtered 86,000 — I round these figures off — slaughtered 
86,000 head of cattle. The Province of Quebec slaughtered a total of 11,000 cattle in the month of 
January, 1973. The Province of Saskatchewan slaughtered 12,000. It's interesting to note that in the 
month of February, 1973 the Province of Alberta slaughtered 87,000 cattle, Quebec slaughtered 11,000. 
Not even one-seventh of what the total slaughterings were in the Province of Alberta. Ontario 
slaughtered 65,000, some 25 per cent less than the Province of Alberta. 
 
I'm going to read you March, 1973. March — 109,000 in the Province of Alberta; Saskatchewan — 
15,000; Ontario — 86,000; Quebec — 17,000. Mr. Speaker, there wasn't one single month in the year 
1973 that the Province of Alberta did not slaughter more cattle than the Province of Ontario, and in 
practically every single month slaughtered seven times the cattle slaughtered in the Province of Quebec. 
 
It's also interesting to note that the Province of Saskatchewan in practically every month slaughtered as 
many cattle as did the Province of Quebec. 
 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1014 

When we talk about shipping cattle east to eastern Canadians because of low freight rates and cheap 
feed, the facts of the matter simply don't bear this out. The Province of Alberta is slaughtering more 
cattle per month than any province in Canada and has been for some time. The Province of Alberta is 
Saskatchewan's main competitor as far as the beef business is concerned. 
 
What is interesting to note — and I think of substantial interest to any one attempting to develop in the 
livestock industry and in fairness to the other provinces — what is interesting to note that last year the 
four western provinces, British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba, slaughtered 1,742,000 
cattle. There were only a total of 126,000 cattle shipped from those four western provinces to eastern 
Canada for processing. One hundred and twenty-six thousand or 7.6 per cent of the total cattle that are 
available for slaughter were shipped east out of the four western provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we had kept every single one of those in the west, in the four western provinces 
including the Province of Saskatchewan, for slaughtering we wouldn't have operated one packing house 
the size of Canada Packers. I think this shows that the bogey man that the NDP love to throw around and 
talk about how the East is getting the benefit of grain feed subsidies, subsidies on live cattle, it's shown 
beyond a doubt that the cattle industry has not been particularly moving towards the East, in fact, it's 
staying here in the West and most of the cattle are being slaughtered here in the West once they are 
ready for kill. 
 
I want, therefore, in that context to mention to you once again the Province of Alberta's position as far as 
the Feed Grains Policy is concerned, because their position as of just the last two weeks has just simply 
been that not only do they want the policy to go into effect, they want it to go into effect immediately 
and will negotiate for a few modifications for the future. 
 
I would suggest to the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Carlson) that when he talks about a feed grains reserve 
bank that we already have one. It's in every elevator in the Province of Saskatchewan and all you have to 
do is to get it out of there. So we have got a pretty good feed grains reserve bank. ^Barley is in 
practically every single elevator across the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — Mr. Speaker, I have attempted so far to pinpoint where the opposition comes 
from. It would appear that most opposition to the policy has originated either from the Farmers Union, 
to some extent with Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, but even in that particular instance as I already read 
what Mr. Lockwood said, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is rapidly modifying its position on feed grains 
as far as our province is concerned. 
 
I want to speak now for a little while about the market for feed grain. First of all if we start off with ten 
bushels of feed grain, Mr. Speaker, it would soon be shown that one bushel of that would be sold in 
eastern Canada to eastern feed grain producers. It could also be shown that two of those ten bushels 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1015 

would likely be sold for export and there is no suggestion so far as exported feed grain is concerned. It 
will be carried on under the Canadian Wheat Board, as it has been for the past years. 
 
There are left seven bushels of feed grain out of the ten used right where they are grown. In other words, 
out of every ten bushels of feed grain grown in Saskatchewan the larger part is used in our province and 
I think that amount is even higher in the Province of Alberta. So what we are really talking about is 
approximately ten per cent of the feed grain grown in western Canada. It is hard to see how this would 
seriously disrupt any particular market for grain if it is sold as has been proposed in eastern Canada. It is 
also apparent, I think, that once the policy is in effect that the very people, in all likelihood, will be 
transporting and selling feed grain in eastern Canada (and I say in all likelihood because it will take time 
to prove this) will almost certainly be such co-operatives as the United Grain Growers and the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. I would think that most likely the elevator companies which will be the ones 
that distribute feed grain, will buy feed grain here in western Canada and will arrange for shipment 
(which will still be under the Canadian Wheat Board) to the eastern provinces. It will, I think, present 
the co-operatives with an admirable opportunity to correct some of the grievances that I have heard them 
talk about at many of their meetings. I don't know how many meetings I have gone to of the Wheat Pool, 
or United Grain Growers, and listened to farmers talking about how much a farmer in Ontario had to pay 
for feed grain and what a terrible price the producer out here got for the grain. So here is an admirable 
opportunity for us to correct any injustices that exist between what the producer here in the West gets, 
and what the producer has to pay for it in the East, because our co-operatives can enter that market and 
reduce the margin that we have so frequently heard at meetings was unfair to both producers, at the 
consuming and the growing end. 
 
Later on in this debate I want to present some arguments and some improvements that we think can be 
made to a feed grains policy, Mr. Speaker. So with those few remarks I would beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 9 — POLICIES AND OPERATIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 

 
MR. A. R. GUY (Athabasca) moved, seconded by Mr. Boldt: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Saskatchewan Government to immediately convene an 
independent or judicial commission to inquire into all aspects of the policies and operations of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 
He said: — Mr. Speaker, it gives men great pleasure today to have the opportunity to move this 
Resolution calling for an inquiry into the activities and policies of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1016 

MR. GUY: — A year ago at this time DNS was one year old and it had growing pains, which were 
causing concern to the residents of northern Saskatchewan — the Indian and Métis organizations that 
were trying to deal with it, the employees, in fact the NDP supporters and others in northern 
Saskatchewan were concerned about the direction in which the new Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan was going. 
 
For that reason, at that time, I urged that an inquiry into the activities of the new department be carried 
out and, of course, it was ignored at that time by the Premier and the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan 
(Mr. Bowerman). 
 
I also introduced a bill which I thought (and Members on this side of the House thought) would assist 
the Government in carrying out the commitments which they had made to the local people when they 
first set up the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The proposals were two in number. One was that 
there would be local participation in the development of policy and secondly that there would be local 
consultation. Now these two recommendations were included in a bill which I introduced last Session of 
the Legislature and they were also turned down by the Government. The result, of course, has been that 
in the past year the unrest, the number of problems and the dissatisfaction in the DNS have increased to 
unparalleled pro- portions. If they had taken my advice and we had that inquiry earlier, the need for an 
inquiry today, of course, would probably not be nearly as great. However, at the present time the formal 
investigation of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is of the utmost urgency. 
 
Now I could use information today gathered by the Liberal MLAs, but I believe that the Government 
possibly would have thought that that was biased information, so I am prepared to use today reports, 
press releases, comments of people and groups that have been involved with the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan since its inception two years ago. I must say that I appreciate the close watch that the 
Press is keeping on the development and the activities of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, 
because I have some 28 clippings here that I want to refer to this afternoon, that- have come from 
various newspapers, not only in Saskatchewan but across the country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GUY: — They have given the reports, they have shown the unrest and the dissatisfaction of a 
number of groups that I wish to refer to this afternoon. Now these groups, and the Press, of course, these 
press clippings, refer to people who have no political axe to grind, therefore they can't be considered 
political bias. I think that you will find when I am finished that there is an urgent need, and certainly 
justification, for an investigation into the policy and problems and development of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The demand for an investigation into the work of the DNS started with an editorial in the Prince Albert 
Herald on February 5th, 1973, when the editor of the Prince Albert Herald referred to my legislative 
resolution that I moved last year, and went on to say: 
 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1017 

Mr. Guy asked for a legislative committee to investigate the new department. Of course, none 
will be established, but Premier Blakeney would be wise to at least demand some accounting of 
what is going on in the North from DNS Minister Ted Bowerman and his Deputy Wilt 
Churchman. 
 
We have certainly been disappointed at the obvious lack of policy of the new department and this 
lack of direction has had an effect on the morale of the Department of Natural Resources which 
Mr. Bowerman also heads. 
 
In the name of justice, we urge the Premier to at least look at the situation and if changes are 
demanded then be enough of a leader to make those changes. 

 
Well, of course, that was a year ago, the Premier refused to take the action that was suggested, he 
refused to take a look at the Department or make the necessary changes with the result that we have seen 
a year of unrest which we have never seen in the history of this province before. 
 
Then on February 22nd, 1973, another group decided to make their views known concerning the 
Department, and it was a group of teachers. This was in the Leader-Post, February 22, 1973: 
 

Teachers in northern Saskatchewan, although they are satisfied, are unhappy with the policy that 
is developing and the people who administer it. Teachers from north- western Saskatchewan 
discuss shortcomings of the new department in education policy, decided to express their 
feelings in letters to editors of newspapers. The letters said the Department is not developing 
along the lines described by Art Towill, Assistant Deputy Minister (he was then -he's not now — 
he was demoted after that) when he toured the North before the Department was formed. The 
people of the North were told that the idea behind the new department was to facilitate liaison 
between the residents of the North and the political entities that were to serve them. Despite 
being told that input from residents would be essential to development of policy, teachers have 
found their views ignored and educational decisions being made by department field workers 
who are not responsible to either the Director of Education or the northern school board. 

 
As a result of no changes forthcoming as far as the teachers were concerned, more than 100 teachers left 
the North last June and I suspect there will be an equal or larger number leave the North at the end of the 
coming year. 
 
Now the Métis Society of Saskatchewan has been foremost in the criticism of DNS, and there is no 
reason why they shouldn't be, as a large number of northerners are of Métis origin. They believe the 
Minister and the officials are the main problem as far as the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is 
concerned. On August 4, 1973, headlines appeared in the Leader-Post saying: 
 
Replace Government Officials and Improve Relations — the Métis Society of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1018 

The Métis have called for the replacement of top officials in the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan to improve relations between the Government and northern natives. 

 
They went on to say: 
 

It is our duty to inform you that as long as Mr. Bowerman remains Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan, and Mr. Churchman remains Deputy Minister, the Department will not have the 
confidence, support or co-operation of either the Métis people or the majority of the native 
people in the North. 
 

Well, at that time the Premier had the opportunity to act – he refused to do so, with the result that Mr. 
'Powerman', I mean Bowerman has the reins of power for northern Saskatchewan and there is still no 
credibility that he has been able to provide to the Métis Society who represent a large number of 
northern people. No changes have been made, there is no improvement in the relationship. 
 
Then in August, the first of many claims of the employees and former employees of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan became known. We had a press release in the Prince Albert Herald on August 4: 
 

Former DNS Employee Claimed Department is a Failure. 
 
Three of the four community development workers recently released by the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan have released information which they say illustrates the hypocrisy of 
that Department's program. The three stated that even on the basis of the objectives which the 
Department has set for itself, it has been a total failure. The responsibility for the Department's 
lack of credibility and acceptance among native people of the North must be placed square on the 
shoulders of G. R. (Ted) Bowerman, Minister in charge of the new Department and his Deputy 
Minister — J.W.(Wilf) Churchman. 

 
That was the first of the number of employees from northern Saskatchewan who have determined and 
decided the Department is a failure, at least from the view of employees who have worked for them. 
 
Now, by October, even the Minister himself was realizing that there was a situation developing in 
northern Saskatchewan which he had to take some steps to try and cope with. He was beginning to feel 
the heat so he decided to take the Press on a tour of northern Saskatchewan to brainwash them, so that 
the press releases would, perhaps, be a little more favorable towards Mr. 'Powerman', but the Press (I'm 
happy to say) were too smart for him. So was the Métis Society. They made sure that the true facts were 
presented to the Press when the tour finally took place. And again we have headlines: 
 
Ex-employee Says Government Programs Failing in North 
 
In a Leader-Post interview, Tuesday, Dennis Poudrier said the Department staff has failed to get to know 
the North and built a bureaucratic ghetto in La Ronge, DNS's northern headquarters. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1019 

He said the Department was created to give the North a voice in Government, but DNS staff has 
made no attempt to tour Indian reserves or towns to learn of northern problems. 

 
That's another ex-employee who feels that the failure of the Government has been one of large degree. 
 
And then as I say, the tour took place and we have then headline: 
 

Minister's Northern Media Tour Criticized Heavily 
 
This is from Flin Flon. 
 

A tour of northern Saskatchewan by Department of Northern Saskatchewan Minister Ted 
Bowerman and news media representatives from across the province has come in for heavy 
criticism from the Métis Society of Saskatchewan, representatives of the newly elected northern 
municipal council and three social workers from Flin Flon. 
 
At a press conference in La Ronge early Thursday, the Métis Society again publicly called for 
the resignation of Mr. Bowerman and his Deputy Minister, J. W. Churchman. All three groups 
alleged the DNS has lost its credibility with northern people and said the tour only takes 
newsmen into communities where Government policies have been successful, or where Federal 
jurisdiction precludes provincial intervention. 
 
The Métis Society accused the Government of inaction in economic development, for failing to 
provide adequate housing and of refusing to pay compensation to communities that have lost 
their fishing livelihood. 
 
What is the reason for the press tour one of the Métis Society members asked? Mr. Bowerman, 
Mr. Churchman and DNS have lost a lot of credibility with northern people. 

 
Then he goes on to point out what the tours hoped to accomplish as far as the Minister was concerned. 
He said: 
 

You are going to start your tour in La Ronge. Ask to see the houses the Government employees 
are living in which are separate from the community, and all called 'the ghetto'. Then ask to see 
the housing that is being started here for the people. Then take a look at the schedule — you will 
be taken to mines in communities which have very little to do with DNS. 
 
The Métis Society said the tour should have included La Loche, which would have shown lack 
of economic development; Sandy Bay, where the people have no electricity in spite of being 
within a few miles of a major power plant; or at Co-op Point where one family of 15 is living in 
a one-room shack. 

 
So there was the type of criticism which the Minister got on a tour where he hoped to whitewash the 
Press, but I say the Métis Society and others were a little too smart for him at that particular moment. 
 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1020 

From then on the Press reported things as they saw them, or as they were told by northern people, rather 
than as Mr. Bowerman wanted them to. 
 
There was a report which came out at about that time which also was given wide publicity by the Press. 
The Star-Phoenix, particularly, gave excellent coverage to this report, and again the headlines in the 
paper were: 
 

The DNS Failed to Meet Initial Objectives-Report. 
 
The credibility of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is being questioned by a report 
which accuses the Department of failing to live up to its original objectives. The report alleges 
political patronage in appointments, deplorable planning on the part of DNS and the lack of 
communication between the Department and northern residents. 

 
It further states: 
 
This was demonstrated once again by results of the Northern Municipal Council election in October, 
which saw four Métis candidates elected. It is alleged these candidates campaigned on an anti-DNS 
program. 
 
Then another report that appeared in the paper said: 
 
The Report Charges DNS Goals a Myth. 
 
The report was prepared by people presently living in the North, or working for DNS, so it came from 
reliable, credible staff and credible people who have got together to present this report on the situation as 
it was developing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this was an ideal time, you might think, for Mr. Bowerman, the Minister, to answer some of the 
charges which have been made. They had been made during the spring, they had been made during the 
media tour which had finished about a month before, now they were being made through a report that 
had been issued by northern residents. But how do you suppose, Member for Moose Jaw (Mr. 
MacDonald), how do you suppose the Minister answered these charges? 
 
MR. D. F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North): — How did he? 
 
MR. GUY: — He didn’t! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — He didn't? 
 
MR. GUY: — He didn't, that's right. Here was the opportunity to answer the charges of the Métis 
Society and former employees, and he refused to do so. Do you know whom he blames? Well, it says 
here in the Star-Phoenix of November 5th: 
 
Bowerman Describes DNS Press Reports as Being Prejudiced. 
 
He blamed the Press. Oh yes! The Press was wrong, nothing he did was wrong. It was the Press. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1021 

Press reports which criticized the Department of Northern Saskatchewan have been dismissed. 
 
They were dismissed as prejudiced by Ted Bowerman, Minister responsible for the Department. 
At a one and a half hour press conference in Regina today, Mr. Bowerman criticized the 
Star-Phoenix for printing stories which criticized the Department. 

 
In other words, this little empire that our friend was building is beyond criticism. Nobody ever criticizes 
the empire that Mr. 'Powerman' has developed for himself. It took him one and a half hours in Regina, at 
a press conference, to show why his little empire shouldn't be questioned by anybody. Unfortunately he 
has got the Premier and the Attorney General wrapped around his finger, so that they too are closing 
their eyes to a bad situation that is developing in the North. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — How far do you want these to go back? 
 
MR. GUY: — From the day that DNS was started. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I just want to go a little further. 
 
MR. GUY: — Well, go ahead, go right ahead. 
 

Referring to news stories in the Star-Phoenix quoting a critical report on the Department, Mr. 
Bowerman said because the story came from an anonymous resource it could have been written 
by anyone, including the journalist responsible for the story. 

 
He also said he was told — he was told, he didn't have any proof . . . 
 

Stories resulted from discussions that the journalists had in a beer parlor in Flin Flon. 
 
How low can the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan stoop in trying to slander and slur the Press for 
making statements about his little empire in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Even that one and a half hour press conference was a little more than what most thinking people (and in 
particular editors) were prepared to accept, and so it was only a few days for editors to make their 
position known. We have an editorial on November 7, shortly after his press conference which says: 
"Answer Ineffective". 
 

One and a half hours of press conference – answer ineffective. Without attempting to judge the 
veracity of the criticism of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan which the Star-Phoenix 
published last week, it must be said the reaction of Ted Bowerman, Minister responsible for the 
Department, was a major disappointment. 
 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1022 

In a lengthy Regina press conference, Mr. Bowerman failed to reply to the criticism, or to deal 
with it in any positive way, but instead chose to criticize the Star-Phoenix for its role in the 
affair. 

 
Then it concluded its editorial: 
 

Now, Mr. Bowerman, if you can forget about the injury you have suffered at the hands of the 
Press, perhaps you can tell the people of Saskatchewan what is really going on in the North. And 
if you cannot, perhaps a Royal Commission will be the answer. 

 
So here is another responsible editor calling for an investigation and an inquiry into the activities of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
That wasn't the only editorial — another editorial much along the same line appeared in the Prince 
Albert Herald of the same date. It says: 
 

Evasiveness won't Solve Problems in the North 
 
Ted Bowerman and his Department of Northern Saskatchewan have been under fire for some 
time. Last week further fuel was added to the fire with the release of a report questioning the 
credibility of the DNS and accusing it of failing to live up to its original objectives. The report 
was prepared by people currently working in the Department and others living in the North. 

 
It goes on to detail some of the criticism that I have already mentioned which appeared in other press 
releases and other editorials. But it ends up (and here I think is a significant part of this editorial); 
 

The proper approach by Mr. Bowerman at this time would be to show a genuine interest in what 
is happening and attempt to iron things out now before the situation worsens and the Department 
fails. 

 
But again, the Minister, in his little ivory tower, refused to consider the editorials of the newspapers that 
are very closely involved with keeping an eye on the development of northern Saskatchewan and they 
are in almost daily touch with northern residents. 
 
Well, then a few days later, November 7th, we have another group that's unhappy with the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan, and that's the outfitters this time. The outfitters want voting rights. We have 
a lot of outfitters who spend six or seven months of the year — they have invested their life savings in 
northern Saskatchewan in developing the tourist industry, but Mr. Bowerman said that they shouldn't 
have any vote when it comes to choosing the Northern Municipal Council. They've spent all their 
money, they spend their summers, they spend all their hard-earned cash and their energy and their time, 
but Mr. Bowerman says with the stroke of a pen, 'no — they are not going to have the right to vote in 
municipal elections'. Well he knows that they vote according to the facts, and that's something which 
Mr. 'Powerman' doesn't wish them to have. So that's another group that wants some satisfaction, 
 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1023 

some inquiry, from the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we come to the Northern Municipal Council election. You remember last spring the Minister 
made a great point of bringing in the legislation that would set up the terms of reference for the Northern 
Municipal Council, when the elections were all over and the smoke died away, we found that four out of 
the five had the support and the approval of the Métis Society of Saskatchewan. Of course, Mr. 
Bowerman said, 'but the Métis Society — we don't pay any attention to them'. It's about time he paid 
attention to the Métis Society, because whether he wants to acknowledge it or not, they have a presence 
in northern Saskatchewan, whether they live in the North, or whether they represent the Society here in 
the South, they still have a presence there that has to be reckoned with. 
 
But one of the reasons that the Northern Municipal Council was to be elected in the first place was so 
that they could run the affairs of the North. The Minister promised they would be elected by the local 
residents, they would have their own opportunities to run the budget, to run their own affairs, and the 
first thing that we see in the paper after they have had their first meeting, Mr. Bowerman is interfering 
with them again — "Salary vote termed irresponsible" (Bowerman). So here it is, the heavy hand of the 
Minister, in their very first meeting, their very first resolution that they passed as the Northern Municipal 
Council has now been vetoed by the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Since that date I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the credibility of the Northern Municipal Council, of course, 
has gone to nil because they know that everything they say and everything they do is still related to 
whatever the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan wants them to do. So they have no more autonomy, no 
more authority today than they had before the northern municipal elections were ever held. 
 
Well, then we find that after about three months of the^ Department of Northern Saskatchewan looking 
into the activities of some of their former employees, we find that some of the DNS employees get 
reprimanded. "DNS Employees Reprimanded for Criticisms." 
 

Three Department of Northern Saskatchewan (DNS) who prepared and released a report critical 
of DNS policies and practices in the North, have been reprimanded by the Department officials, 
one of them said Friday. 

 
But what was interesting that in December of 1973 was a letter appearing in the Prince Albert Herald 
from a Sister Patricia Traynor in Sandy Bay who praised the Department, but she never got 
reprimanded. So it appears that as long as you praise Mr. Bowerman, there are no reprimands, but if you 
dare to criticize his little empire, then you are not only reprimanded, but you eventually get dismissed 
from the Department. That's the fair and equal justice that Mr. Bowerman believes in as far as the 
employees of his Department are concerned. 
 
MR. BOLDT: — They got fired, didn't they? 
 
MR. GUY: — They got fired. 
 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1024 

Then we all remember that we had the Meadow Lake merchants protest DNS tardiness — up to six 
months that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan have delayed paying bills, and it isn't because 
they are running out of money, because they are spending money up there like drunken sailors, however, 
they are not paying their bills. They have got the merchants up in arms. A later report by the Deputy 
Minister said they are only one month behind. I know that that's a complete falsehood because I was in 
La Ronge just a week ago and I saw bills that are not only six months old, but they are over a year old 
and have not been paid yet. 
 
Then we come to another interesting criticism of the Department, and guess where this criticism came 
from? Well, it came during the NDP convention: "NDP Executive Told to Investigate Housing 
Contracts." 
 
The newly elected executive council of the Saskatchewan\ New Democratic Party have been handed the 
job of investigating charges that the contract for construction of Government housing in La Ronge was 
awarded on a patronage basis, after charges of pork-barrel politics in awarding the housing contract to 
Delta Holdings, were levelled at the Department of Northern Saskatchewan by northern delegates at the 
meeting. 
 
Interesting also that Premier Allan Blakeney and most of his Cabinet voted against the motion for the 
investigation. All the rank and file NDP supported it and those who had something to hide were the ones 
who tried to get it taken off the floor of the convention. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you vote against it, Roy? 
 
MR. GUY: — No, I think Roy voted in favour of it. I think Roy and the Ministers that are trying to take 
over as Premier voted in favour of it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I want to go back to contracts in 1969 now. 
 
MR. GUY: — That's fine. But I also find it rather interesting that the Premier has been away for a day 
and a half and there have been at least seven Cabinet Ministers try out his seat in the last 15 hours. I 
don't know whether that's significant or not, but I thought I would just throw that out just as a matter of 
interest. Now I saw the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan spend the longest time of all and the 
Minister of Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank) has tried the seat out three times to see whether it 
would fit. 
 
After that charge that was made by the NDP executive, and after our Liberal MLAs' visit last year, we 
find that at least one of the officials in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan would welcome a 
probe: "Independent Probe Welcome — Official." 
 

An independent investigation into the Department of Northern Saskatchewan would be 
welcomed by Art Towill 

 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1025 

the Department's Associate Deputy Minister. 
 

And if you look in subsequent press releases you never find that term 'Associate Deputy Minister' used 
again, because about that time they appointed a new Associate Deputy Minister and where Art Towill is 
today, no one knows, but he's down with the rank and file somewhere. So the motto is — don't ask for 
an independent probe of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan or Mr. 'Powerman' will get to you 
before the night is through. 
 
Mr. Towill went on to say: 
 

There are some problems with the morale of DNS employees, he admitted. 
 
Well, I guess the morale among DNS employees increased substantially after he received his demotion 
as a result of his call for an independent probe. 
 
Following the new year we find that matters became even more serious, as the first sit-in in Buffalo 
Narrows occurred. "Natives Occupy DNS Office." 
 
This was in the Star-Phoenix of January 18. 
 

An occupation of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan offices in Buffalo Narrows over 
reduction in cancellation of welfare payments has resulted in a list of demands from the 
occupying natives. 

 
So now the militancy and violence is starting to come forth, the result of the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan's failure to act on any of the justified problems which have been brought to his attention 
during the last nine months. And, of course, the Minister, not wanting to accept any of the responsibility 
for the sit-in — guess whom he blamed this time? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who was it? 
 
MR. GUY: — Well, I'll tell you. There are a couple of interesting ones. 
 
Métis Sit-in Termed Power Play — Official Blames Society. 
 
Mr. Bowerman said he arrived in Saskatoon at midnight and has tried, without success, to contact DNS 
officials in La Ronge to learn more about the demonstration. 
 
He didn't know anything about it — his officials were out for lunch, so how do you expect 'The 
Powerman' to know what's going on when he can't even get in touch with his own officials. But, he 
knew that these officials were right and that the Métis Society was wrong. It was a power play, that's 
what it was. Then the most interesting thing of all was the next day — January 18, Mr. Bowerman's 
reports: 
 

Waffle Using Métis Like Pawns. 
 

He even brought the Waffle Society into the sit-ins in Buffalo Narrows. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1026 

I think the Waffle is determined it is going to get after Ted Bowerman and it is encouraging the 
Métis Society of Saskatchewan to do the same, Mr. Bowerman said. 
 
The Minister suggested those who are organizing demonstrations and complaining about 
Government policy in the North are representatives from the Métis Society. 

 
So instead of accepting his responsibility, again he blames the Métis Society and throws in another joker 
in the deck — he now blames the Waffle organization for the sit-ins and the unrest and the things that 
are going on in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You'll notice that again he blames everybody but himself, then the sit-in moved on to Saskatoon and we 
have: 
 

Indian and Métis Sit-in in Saskatoon 
 
The influence of a sit-in at a government office at Buffalo Narrows has spread to Saskatoon. The 
Tuesday press conference by leaders of the Buffalo Narrows Action Group also charged 
government patronage, bribery and mismanagement. 

 
This is the fist time that bribery has become involved in the criticisms of the Métis Society. 
 

Dennis Poudrier a former employee of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and currently 
a consultant for the Métis Society, said residents of La Loche were bribed with emergency food 
vouchers into supporting the DNS position at a public meeting in that community on Monday. 
They (meaning the social workers) paid these people $50 a piece, then they called a large 
meeting. They agreed, after having received their $50, so that the sit-in wasn't worth the risks 
they would have to take in terms of the possibility of being refused government services. 

 
That was the Minister’s approach to the sit-in when it had moved to Saskatoon. 
 
It is not surprising that the Métis Society and the people of La Loche and Buffalo Narrows were a little 
upset about the lack of government action as far as their welfare allowances were concerned, because on 
February 25 they picked up the newspaper and they saw, "Contract Offer Ratified by Government 
Employees' Union"". For months and months the people of northern Saskatchewan have been asking for 
a very minimal increase in their social welfare allowances, and we find that one of the terms of the 
agreement that had been ratified, was a 50 per cent increase in northern allowances for government 
employees. It is all right for the southerners to move north and get a 50 per cent increase in their 
northern allowance, but don't, for heaven sakes, give the northerners any increase in their welfare 
allowances. That would be terrible. After all, we've got to keen the white bureaucracy on top of the 
pudding. So it is not surprising that at that time there was another sit-in and this sit-in took place in La 
Ronge and again it was on the same basis — welfare, lack of economic development, lack of housing. 
They looked at the housing in La Ronge, looked at the number of houses that nave been completed by 
the Minister of northern Saskatchewan, and the protest continued. How do you suppose 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1027 

the Minister got around this protest? He said to people who were protesting — "You don't really 
represent the people of northern Saskatchewan, therefore, he can't meet with them." He can't meet with 
them because they aren't really the qualified people who should be representing the North. So as a result 
of that the Métis protesters then refused to meet with the Minister. I think that they were probably closer 
to being right — that he doesn't represent the people of northern Saskatchewan and, therefore, they 
refused to meet with him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GUY: — Well, this refusal by both the Minister and the Métis Society to get together and try and 
resolve the problems, of course went on to . . . 
 
MR. LAKE: — Where is the next sit-in? 
 
MR. GUY: — Well, the next one is in La Ronge. Again, this time, militancy threatened unless plans 
improved. It was at this time that the sit-in at La Ronge had a gun cache in order to back up their 
demands. But again, our friend Mr. 'Powerman' refused to take any action and there was nothing done. 
In fact, when he and the Premier were asked if they would attend a meeting, he said, "I'm sorry, we're 
too busy". 
 
MR. LANE: — They could light a case of dynamite under them. 
 
MR. GUY: — I don't think it would make that much difference. First of all it wouldn't budge him and 
secondly, if it did he wouldn't have any answers. 
 
Well, finally the last report I have here was from another group and this was the Social Workers Society 
of Saskatchewan who were concerned about the firing of a social worker in northern Saskatchewan, who 
again, had had the audacity to even suggest or criticize anything that Mr. Bowerman or his Department 
did. So he got fired. 
 
MR. LANE: — Did they have a sit-in? 
 
MR. GUY: — No, they haven't yet, but the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers and the 
Saskatchewan Council of Anti-poverty Organizations today both levelled criticism at the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan over the firing of social work supervisor Art Baalim of Creighton. In supporting 
Mr. Baalim who was fired last week the society says there is sufficient evidence for the people in 
Saskatchewan to demand an unbiased investigation into the activities of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So unless the Premier and the Minister pay more attention I am afraid that these unfortunate events are 
going to continue to occur and that eventually someone will end up being seriously hurt and we shall all 
end up being sorry. 
 
So in summary, Mr. Speaker, I think that all thinking people at least will agree that I have presented 
sufficient 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1028 

evidence to justify an inquiry immediately. We have heard complaints from the Indian and Métis 
organizations, from the social workers, from teachers, from business men, from the Press, from 
employees past and present, from NDP supporters and concerned northern residents. We have heard 
accusations of failing to live up to objectives and goals, of political patronage, of appointments in 
awarding contracts, deplorable planning, inefficiency and lack of communication, low credibility, racist 
attitudes and hostility. Surely these complaints and accusations demand some action by the Premier. 
 
The question is: will he shirk his responsibility, bury his head in the sand and ignore the situation that 
could lead to serious trouble in the future? If there is nothing to hide he should welcome an 
investigation, and if there is something to hide, then the people of northern Saskatchewan and the people 
of the rest of Saskatchewan are entitled to know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GUY: — The type of inquiry is not important as long as it is independent of the Government and 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The responsibility lies heavily on the shoulders of the 
Premier to see that the accusations, grievances and complaints receive their immediate investigation and 
action. 
 
For more than one year matters have gone from bad to worse. The time for action is now. Unanimous 
support of this Resolution by this Legislature may be the prod that the Premier needs to carry out his 
responsibilities in this regard. On that basis and that context, I therefore urge unanimous support of this 
Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, we have just finished hearing, I think, well 
in excess of an hour . . . 
 
MR. GUY: — No, it wasn't. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well it only seemed well in excess of an hour, because it was a boring recitation 
of newspaper clippings and some of the statements advanced by the Liberal Opposition in past speeches. 
 
One of the interesting things about this debate that has happened from time to time is that nowhere have 
the people of Saskatchewan heard yet what the Liberal Party proposes by way of a policy or action with 
respect to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan or northern Saskatchewan. No one from the Party 
opposite . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think that Members will be better advised if they would let speakers on 
both sides have their speech without constant interruptions. I believe the mover was given very good 
courtesy with a lack of interruptions. This could be a serious debate and I would hope that Members will 
give other Members the courtesy of making their speech without interruption. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1029 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I was about to say that I don't think that anyone in the Province of 
Saskatchewan really knows what the Liberal Party would advocate with respect to a policy for northern 
Saskatchewan. We don't know yet whether or not their alternate approach would be a Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan or whether it would be a different administration still within the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan or what they would do with the attempts to begin to organize the elected 
community representatives in northern Saskatchewan. We don't know precisely what they are going to 
do with respect to northern Saskatchewan if they should ever get into office again. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that we don't hear from the Liberals opposite as to what their approach and 
policy is because they don't have an approach or policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I suspect that we don't hear from the Liberals opposite as to what they think 
positively can be done because their approach is to let things rest the way they have let them rest, Mr. 
Speaker, for seven years when they were in office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — We don't hear now, when they are in Opposition, how they feel the native 
people should organize themselves to overcome their economic and social injustices that they have been 
battling for years, regardless of the political party in office. We don't hear that now and I suspect 
because this is an extension of their program and their policy from 1969 to 1971, which was a 
do-nothing policy, which was a policy of divide and conquer, a policy of increasing welfare payments 
every time before a general election of the province was called. It was a policy of selling out all of the 
timber and rich natural resources of the Province of Saskatchewan — not to our native people, no, but to 
New York entrepreneurs, to Toronto and Montreal entrepreneurs. That is what their policy was for the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, hopscotching along. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Talk about what you are doing. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I'll come to that in a moment. And so all that they can say is what they have 
been saying with respect to this particular Resolution — the need for a judicial inquiry or an 
independent inquiry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea is absolutely laughable. The idea advanced by the Members opposite, coming 
from the Members opposite and their record of indifference, their record of absolute discrimination by 
neglect, coming from them, it is absolutely laughable and everybody in the Province of Saskatchewan 
knows it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Is there any credibility for the Members opposite to 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1030 

come forward now to ask for a judicial inquiry in the face of this overwhelming evidence of lack of 
action; this indifference by neglect. What evidence is there? It comes, Mr. Speaker, from a bankrupt 
party, composed of bankrupt political party members who have no ideas as to how to advance their 
policies for the North. It comes from the Member of Athabasca (Mr. Guy) whose proclivities with 
respect to the judicial inquiries and the calling of them are well known by all of the people in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. What credence or what believability would the people of Saskatchewan have 
in a resolution advanced by anyone of those Members sitting opposite I ask you, Mr. Speaker. I suggest 
not one, not one person who looks at this matter objectively and the complex problems would lend any 
credence to this statement, this request by the Liberal Members opposite at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they talk about the questions of the difficulties of northern Saskatchewan and the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, of which there are hundreds I am sure everyone admits, and of which 
there have been mistakes and errors and which everyone admits, when they talk of the need for a judicial 
inquiry I say the actions of seven years of Liberal indifference speak louder than the words of Liberal 
politicians opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege. The Hon. Member is accusing 
a former Member of this House, the former Premier, of doing nothing in his seven years as Premier of 
this province. The Hon. Member full well knows that there was no Premier and no Provincial 
Government who made a greater effort on behalf of Indian and Métis people, than the former Premier 
Ross Thatcher. For him to stand here and try to sell that lie to this House is a breech of privilege, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think that is part of the debate and it can be brought into debate. 
 
MR. McISAAC: — . . . for the Hon. Member to cast aspersions and tell lies about the very sincere 
efforts of a Member who is not here to defend himself. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, it seems all right for the Hon. Member opposite who is leaving his chair, 
to cast aspersions on this Government but not all right for us. It seems that it doesn't cut two ways for 
the Hon. Member for Wilkie. You are here to defend your Government. I am accusing you when you 
were on the Treasury benches. You get up in this debate and you tell us what you did for seven years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You did absolutely nothing! So don't come on and call us names. It is an 
absolutely hypocritical approach by the Member opposite. He lowers himself in the eyes of this 
Legislature and all the people of the province. All of you Members in the front rows who have had a 
hand in this policy, 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1031 

a hand in the seven years of inactivity, you have a chance to get up and defend yourselves. I challenge 
you to defend your- selves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to say, again, what I said a moment ago just before I was so rudely interrupted 
by the Member for Wilkie. Seven years of Liberal inaction speak louder than any Liberal words of any 
Liberal politician today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, what does the Hon. Member say today to call on support for this 
question for a judicial inquiry? He calls on the Star-Phoenix." He calls on the Leader-Post. He calls on 
two or three other sundry articles. He calls on certain quotations from groups in society, calls on 
quotations from one or two individuals. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I had to smile to myself when I saw the 
Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) get up and call to witness for the judicial inquiry, the Métis Society of 
Saskatchewan, especially when just a couple of days ago the Liberal Party opposite was calling in to 
question the expenditures of the Métis Society of Saskatchewan and urging the Government to call a 
judicial inquiry into those expenditures. That is what they were doing yesterday when there was no one 
else in this gallery. But, today, their position is that they call the Métis Society to question now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a bigger smile when I saw the Member opposite talk about even calling for support, 
they called on everybody in support and they even went so far as to call on the Waffle in support of the 
judicial inquiry. Did I hear them call on the Waffle for support? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Yes. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Why I even thought that they would have called Next Year Country in support, 
Mr. Speaker. Did they call Next Year Country in support or not? See what happens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been no analysis of the statements made by the Hon. Member in presenting the case for a 
judicial inquiry. None whatsoever! He just simply comes before this House, recites clippings for over an 
hour, for nearly an hour, newspaper clippings, any statements made by anyone and then asks the House, 
a responsible body, to accept those statements with- out any criticisms or judgments on his part or 
advice on his part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the call for the judicial inquiry coming from the Members opposite can only be 
best described by some people in northern Saskatchewan, quoting from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 
Friday, November 30th as hypocritical. 
 
The Member opposite doesn't live in northern Saskatchewan. He says that he was in La Ronge lately. I 
don't know when he was lately in La Ronge. I know that he is running now in the constituency of 
Rosthern and that is his privilege, I don't criticize him for that in any personal sense. I want to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are people who call this Motion by the Liberal Party sheer hypocrisy, which does 
not add one 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1032 

iota to overcoming the problems that all of us have, regardless of being Liberal, NDP, Waffle or Métis 
or FBI. All the problems are there for all of us to help to overcome after the long standing years of 
inequity and injustice in northern Saskatchewan. We are not going to get at this by the type of actions by 
the Member opposite. 
 
The Premier, in 1972, when he set up the Department of Northern Saskatchewan said that the aim of the 
Department was to help the people in northern Saskatchewan, and I quote his words: 
 
To develop their interest in self-government and their skills and decision-making, an essential task to 
assist them in this way. 
 
This has been the policy, the basic policy of DNS. In the end, it is the people of northern Saskatchewan 
who will matter and not the administrative structure. I think, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing evidence that 
the people of northern Saskatchewan are developing a keen interest in self-government. The people of 
northern Saskatchewan are beginning to organize. They are beginning to speak out. They are beginning 
to stand up for their rights. They are beginning to make demands and that is precisely what the 
expectations and hope of this Government was and is for DNS. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I don't even think the Métis Society, Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, 
anyone you would call on, would deny the statement that I make. Basically three years ago or so, the 
people of the North were silent as they had been for generations. They expected nothing very frequently 
and they got nothing from government. 
 
In order for us to understand what is happening in the North, we have to understand the process that is 
going on. It is a process that groups of underprivileged people go through when they begin to realize that 
there is something, and there must be something, that can be done about the situation to assist them. And 
it is not unreasonable or unnatural for them to expect that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
should be a first target. Why would it be unreasonable or unnatural to expect that DNS would be a 
target? This is the first sort of organized effort, the objective being to help the native people and the 
people in the North to organize themselves, and why wouldn't these people organize themselves and use 
the target of DNS? It is part of the way to develop the awareness in self-government. If you organize 
against DNS it is a good way to start organizing. It is easy for people who don't understand this process 
or the Liberals who don't want to understand this process, to blame the dissent on the NDP Government. 
It is very easy for the Member for Athabasca to say, who doesn't understand this particular process or 
who understands it but refuses to accept it and wilfully betrays it. It is very easy for him to say that there 
is something wrong with the NDP, that there is patronage and all the other stuff, and ask for a judicial 
inquiry, failing to understand the basic aspect of what is happening in northern Saskatchewan. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1033 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if the NDP had not become the Government, I think that absolutely 
nothing of any meaning would have been done to help the people of the North. I say that white 
colonialism would have continued. I say that northern resources would have continued to be given away 
by the Liberals to American corporations. I say that if the NDP had not been elected, acute social 
problems would have been allowed to fester and to compound and to be neglected and to be ignored. 
But I also say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is the NDP, this Government, this Minister, Ted Bowerman, 
which has had the courage and the foresight to start the process of debate going. Once that started, to 
start the protests and the self awareness, I want to tell my friends opposite, no matter what happens in 
1975 in a provincial election, I predict that it's a process that not even you people will be able to reverse. 
A process of native people and people of the North organizing for themselves to control their destiny 
and all the difficulties that are attached to this. 
 
I say to you that we are seeing two things happening in the North, Mr. Speaker. One, we are seeing the 
beginning of the dismantling of a colonial structure. We haven't got any- where near it. The Member for 
Lumsden (Mr. Lane) laughs. I am not saying that it has got anywhere near completion. Nobody is saying 
it. But it is the beginning of the dismantling of that process, partly by the DNS, partly by the people of 
the North in opposition to DNS and in the times of the protests and the politics of protests have 
developed. Secondly, I say that we are seeing the encouragement of our native people and the 
development of the native people taking over their fair share of power and responsibility. And rightly so. 
We are seeing many of them saying that we are not going fast enough. That's the basic fact of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Liberals may not want to analyse it that way. Maybe society 
might not agree with it fully. The Federation of Saskatchewan Indians may oppose it but they are 
organizing and they are being heard and that is a fact of the DNS. 
 
The fact that there are problems, Mr. Speaker, doesn't warrant the calling of a judicial inquiry to undo all 
of this that we have begun. We don't want to go back to the old Neanderthal outlook of the Liberal Party 
from 1964 to 1971, sticking their heads in the sand and forgetting there is such a thing as northern 
Saskatchewan. We don't want a Liberal Party or an approach in this province that seeks to stifle the 
interests and the voice of the North. Absolutely not. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there are in my 
judgement great accomplishments despite the difficulties that have been experienced in the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. Great accomplishments in northern Saskatchewan and I'll come to them in a 
moment but you won't accept them. 
 
Somebody mentioned the protest at Buffalo Narrows. The Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) talked 
about the protest in Buffalo Narrows. Yes, there was a protest there. Also a letter that the Minister is 
kind enough to lend to me dated September 10, 1973. A list of 241 names of Buffalo Narrows' residents 
protesting the demonstration to the Legislative Building. They want the Government and the people to 
know that they in no way represent northern people. I don't want to get into that aspect of it. I'm just not 
in a position to say whether they do or not. I am not going to comment on that but I do want to comment 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1034 

that there are 241 names on this petition and I'll table a copy of it I am sure the Minister has no objection 
to it. Not 14 or 15 Liberals sitting in Regina but 241 people from Buffalo Narrows. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I know that there are many problems with respect to getting economic 
development under way. I wonder if the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) reads his own 
newspaper, The Meadow Lake Progress. In case he doesn't, I draw to his attention a newspaper article, 
November 21, 1973. I can table a copy if you want. "Big Changes Occur in Beauval . Pictures, some of 
the examples of some attempts at economic progress that I think have been going well. Did you read 
that, Member for Meadow Lake? Do you deny that? Of course he doesn't deny that. He accepts that 
"There are economic actions that are continuing in this area. I have a letter here also forwarded from the 
Uranium City Chamber of Commerce. Again, you judge whatever value you want on the Uranium City 
Chamber of Commerce but in my judgement they do represent some people of the North. I am not going 
to belabor it but again they say that the DNS is at least beginning to unleash these types of force that I 
nave talked about. That's a fact. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are going to be difficulties in the North. There are going to be administrative 
governmental difficulties in the North. 
 
MR. LAKE: — Will you table that? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’ll table a copy, yes, a photocopy. You can have all those materials that I have 
tabled there. The Hon. Member doubts that that is the letter. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we realize that there are administrative problems. Why, even 
the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) when he was Minister of Public Works his department 
experienced I think administrative problems with_ respect to government activity and government 
construction in the North. The Member for Athabasca wouldn't deny that. I m sure he wouldn't. For 
example, Mr. Speaker, in 1970 I am advised by the Minister of Government Services, that there was a 
school to be built at Wollaston Lake. The Department of Public Works, of which the Hon. Member for 
Athabasca was the Minister in charge said the estimated cost would be $28,300. Three companies 
responded to public tender. I'm not going to name them other than to tell you that the low bid came in at 
$26,900. The next bidder came in at $28,400. The next one came in at $28.500. Now on August 18, 
1970, all the tenders I am advised were rejected because they had failed to state the date of the 
completion of the project at Wollaston Lake. It was supposed to be 42 days to the completion of the 
project. That was on August 18th they were rejected. On the same date, August 18th, a contract was 
awarded to the high bidder and the final payment was made, not what the bid was for $28,500, but a 
little bit over $28 822. I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the low tender was rejected because they 
couldn't complete the Wollaston School project in 42 days. So how long do you think it took the man 
who got the project to complete it? 406 days! 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1035 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that somebody could say we need a judicial 
inquiry into this. Someone could say that we would like to have some people under oath as to all about 
this. But I don't think that's the right way to go because I realize as the Hon. Member for Athabasca does 
that in these types of situations in the North if you try to use local people, you try to use local 
contractors, you've got weather problems, you've got road problems, you've got supply problems, you 
are going to have problems like this, just like we have problems administratively. But no one gets up 
here and calls for judicial inquiry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I honestly don't want to get involved in this business of recitation of activities that went on 
in former administrations in the past. Whatever the Opposition may think of me I feel awkward in 
saying this because it has an implication and a connotation that I don't want to convey. My point that I 
want to make is that there are administration difficulties and there are errors and the Member for 
Athabasca and his Government made them honestly and legitimately and our Minister and our 
Government may make some errors honestly and legitimately. But, is the answer to call a judicial 
inquiry? Is the answer to get up and take the political position that the Liberals do and to call for a 
judicial inquiry? I am sure that even my friend for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) would reject 
that approach and will reject that approach. We are not talking about political tactics as I am sure the 
Member for Saskatoon University will agree. We are talking about concepts and directions to liberate 
and start the people of northern Saskatchewan on the road to true independence as we are asking for 
them to do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go through what I think are some excellent accomplishments in the DNS in 
one short year. Just think of the start up problems, Mr. Speaker, of getting a deputy minister and an 
administrative staff and getting the accounting procedure, just the forms set up. Just think of the 
difficulties that are inherent in that. You even set up a bureaucracy with that, you know, and 
bureaucracies can offend people. That's an unfortunate fact. Luckily in the North we are getting some 
counter forces against these bureaucracies. But just imagine the start up difficulties, Mr. Speaker, in one 
short year. What do we see? A Northern Municipal Council elected. I ask the Liberals when is the last 
time you people passed legislation for the election of a Northern Municipal Council? When was the last 
time you people talked about having elections and democracy and elected people speak for the North? 
When was this? The Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) can get up and pooh-pooh that ail that he wants, 
and he can throw any innuendo he wants on the elected people. He can say that four people were against 
Ted Bowerman or four people were for him or one was against him. What does that matter? What does 
it matter? There are five elected people who speak for the North and if they are against Ted Bowerman 
or against the DNS they will be heard. That is why we set up the legislation for them to be heard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1036 

MR. ROMANOW: — The Member opposite keeps on telling us that somehow we should be 
overlooking this. Is this cause for an inquiry? Because there are four people who are elected and given 
the democratic right to voice their complaints against the DNS, somehow he says that this is a cause for 
a judicial inquiry. I say that is a reason why not to have a judicial inquiry because the procedure and the 
laws work. How about a Northern Development Advisory Council being established to include Northern 
Municipal Council members and representatives of organized people in the North, trappers, fishermen 
and teachers and the Métis Society and the FSI and so forth? How about local community authorities? 
Procedures are being established to ensure full participation and consultation with local community 
authorities by the DNS. How about northern school unit boards, previously appointed by the 
Government? Now it is being recommended that they be filled by election. Is it 21 nominated for the 
board at Ile-a-La-Crosse? Twenty-one people nominated by the people of Ile-a-La-Crosse. Not by 
Liberal politicians sitting in Regina, but by the people in Ile-a-La- Crosse. That's what we did. We 
increased the budget and transferred it to the board. Why does the Member get up and say that there are 
some teachers who are protesting the change- over to DNS, that we should have a judicial inquiry? We 
are setting up some local school board authorities and what does the Member for Athabasca say, we 
should have a judicial inquiry. He cites that as evidence for a judicial inquiry. Mr. Speaker, they are 
showing their old proclivities again to quash local and regional autonomy. They did it in other fields 
when they were in power and now they seek to do it here. 
‘ 
What about economic development? Economic Development Fund Regulations were passed in the 
summer of 1973 to establish providing loans and grants to northern residents and organizations. 
Economic development, I say, is on the upswing in the North. Not fast enough, I agree. No one says 
that. But I can give you many examples of sawmills and jobs that are being generated and loans being 
advanced, wood cutting operations, cabin and boat rental operations, garage operations, taxi operations, 
commercial trucking operations, commercial trapping and fishing operations and nobody can deny that. 
Nobody, not even the Liberals opposite, not even in their wildest dreams. If the Press gives this even the 
slightest bit of credence the people of Saskatchewan won't accept any of the statements made by the 
Liberals opposite. How about a Prospectors' Incentive Program? Training, contract prospecting, a first 
step in developing northern people and getting their participation in the development of mineral 
resources. Training farms, adult education and training. For example Ile-a-La-Crosse recognized the 
need for someone to be able to repair the growing number of oil furnaces being used.' Plumbing and 
heating along with electrical training is scheduled for Ile-a-La-Crosse. All right, maybe it's not there yet 
but what did you do in seven years? At least we've got it on the go. 
 
La Ronge Community College is being established and is operating. What did you do in seven years? 
Where was your La Ronge Community College? A regional Adult Education Office has been opened in 
Uranium City, Buffalo Narrows and La Ronge. Operation of a bursary program to provide post 
secondary education opportunities to northern residents is under study as well. Those are facts, Mr. 
Speaker. Can anyone deny them? 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1037 

Mr. Speaker, what about housing? I could cite a long list of the works that have been undertaken with 
respect to housing. I can tell the Members opposite about the northern housing program designed to 
improve the quality of accommodation for residents of northern Saskatchewan. I can tell the Members 
that an agreement with Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation to provide 625 homes over the next 
five years has been signed. I could tell the House that the quality and size of homes have increased from 
previous years. I could tell the House that in the current year 99 houses are under construction and 40 
per cent of these (which is probably out of date now) are complete. An additional 40 units are to be 
undertaken to maintain the 125 units per year commitment. These are complete, Mr. Speaker, with 
electrical wiring, bathrooms, kitchen fixtures and plumbing facilities. I can tell that to the Members of 
this House. You ask me are there enough houses for northern Saskatchewan and I answer, no. You ask 
me if all the people of northern Saskatchewan have housing and I say, no. But this Department has only 
been on the go for one year, Mr. Speaker, and look at the tremendous accomplishments made today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the 1973 program for home construction represents over a 300 per 
cent increase over any other previous year in the history of Saskatchewan. That's what the DNS did. 
 
What about the field of social services and health? Additional child welfare workers have been added to 
the northern staff, 90 employees generate a weekly payroll of $10,000 to $12,000. Next year's payroll is 
expected to be higher. Provision for social assistance reduced with the advent of new development 
programs such as at Beauval. We want to get people off social welfare. Everybody is for that objective. 
A child care centre is now being constructed at Sandy Bay. When was the last time you constructed a 
child care centre in Sandy Bay? That's when we should have had the judicial inquiry when you did 
nothing instead of now when we are beginning to develop them. 
 
I could tell you about additional medical staff. What about sewer and water, planning and design 
systems at the village of La Ronge. I want the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), you are to represent La 
Ronge still, I hope you haven't vacated that responsibility. But I want to tell the Member in case he 
doesn't know it that the village of La Ronge has received a $220,000 grant, provincial, towards a water 
and sewer system presently under construction. 
 
MR. GUY: — That's not the first grant. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I'm not saying it is the first grant. It's an additional grant. 
 
What about the new wells at Jans Bay, Cole Bay, Beauval, Buffalo Narrows? Wells are being attempted 
at Green Lake and Sandy Bay. How many years late is that in your terms? Far too late. All of us are at 
fault. Where were you people when this was underway? How many wells did you start in your seven 
years? 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1038 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and talk about roads, air strips, power, field services, schools, a new gym and 
science facility at Buffalo Narrows, portable classrooms at Ile-a-La-Crosse, Rabbit Lake, and so on. I 
could talk about all of these. Now, Mr. Speaker, sure there is criticism to be made against the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. There is criticism to be made against the Department of the 
Attorney General, the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Health. Why don't you ask for a 
judicial inquiry in those areas? Knowing the Liberal Opposition, undoubtedly you would. You are that 
irresponsible to ask for it. Knowing you, you would do it. You are irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, beyond 
any imagination whatsoever. 
 
I can't really understand why it is that the Liberal Party takes the position that they do take. I have 
concluded that they take this position like they do in all matters. Mr. Speaker, because — I say this 
sincerely now as a matter of my own view of the political philosophy of the Liberals – I think they have 
nothing basically, other than the vague commitment to something called free enterprise. Whatever free 
enterprise means. Catch as catch can. Sometime I'll work up a PA pulp mill deal with you there if I can 
work it out with free enterprise. That's good old fashioned free enterprise. We put up 75 per cent of the 
cash. The free enterpriser puts up 25 per cent of the cash. And the northern people are supposed to be 
happy with that. That's the Liberal development of northern Saskatchewan. I think this is the reason why 
we have this incoherent, nonsensical, laughable resolution before us. 
 
The Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) talked about a quotation from the Prince Albert Daily 
Herald. Well, they are entitled to their opinions, but I tell you one thing. At the time of the introduction 
of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan Bill the Prince Albert Daily Herald was one of those 
which supported the concept of the single agency like DNS, to the hilt. What did you do when we 
introduced DNS? You know what you did. You opposed it. You opposed it then. Now you call on the 
Prince Albert Herald because it happens to fit in temporarily with the short-run political argument. But 
you don't deal one iota with what the Prince Albert Herald says about the concept of the development of 
the North. Not one iota at all! 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are fair- minded. I honestly believe that. I believe the 
people of Saskatchewan don't believe in the personal vilification of any individual in politics as the 
Liberal Party has engendered against the Minister of northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). I tell the 
House, and I speak for myself only, that there is no man better qualified to lead the department of DNS 
than Ted Bowerman, that's my judgment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I want to tell you, that Ted Bowerman, like all of us, like even the Member for 
Athabasca, has some failings. But I tell you Ted Bowerman lived in the North. He knows the North. He 
has the respect of the people of the North and he is trying full out to do something for the North. That's 
more than you ever did, anyone of you over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1039 

MR. ROMANOW: — I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in my judgment, vilification and 
witch-hunting and innuendoes of this kind by the Liberal Opposition is falling on deaf ears. The only 
thing the Liberals can do is bray from a sitting position as the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) does 
every time I take part in debates. The only thing that the Liberal Party can do is to cat-call and to 
name-call but not make one positive proposal for the North. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I stand behind the concept of the DNS. I want a liberated North. I 
stand behind Ted Bowerman. I reject this phony and specious call for a judicial inquiry by the Liberals 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 44 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. T. M. Weatherald for 
Return No. 44 showing: 
 

The amount the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited paid to the Government of Saskatchewan 
during the year 1972 for: (a) stumpage dues; (b) ground rental and fire prevention; (c) fire 
suppression; (d) other specified purposes. 

 
HON. J. R. KOWALCHUK: (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment to 
that motion. The amendment is to show a total concept of what the Government of Saskatchewan 
received from each of the major users of our forests for more than just one year; to get an accurate 
picture of what kind of an input is generated for the people of Saskatchewan, by whom it was generated 
and. for what years in the immediate past and to change from the calendar year to the fiscal year. That is 
the way records are kept and for comparison purposes, I propose this amendment. Mainly the 
amendment will provide additional comparative information, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) an amendment thereto: 
 
That all the words after the word 'showing' be deleted and following substituted therefore: 
 

The amount the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited, Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation and Meadow Lake Sawmill Company Limited paid to the Government of 
Saskatchewan during the fiscal years 1969-70, 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73 for: (a) stumpage 
dues; 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1040 

b. ground rental and fire prevention; (c) fire suppression; (d) other specified purposes. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse) for 
Return No. 47 showing: 
 

The mileage of the Provincial highway system at September 50, 1975; (a) in total; (b) according 
to surface treatment; (i) paved; (ii) oil treatment; (iii) gravelled; (iv) dirt. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Romanow: 
 
That all the words after the word 'showing' be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

The mileage of the Provincial highway system at April 1, 1973: (a) in total; (b) according to 
surface treatment; (i) paved; (ii) oil treatment; (iii) gravel- led; (iv) dirt. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate on this motion, I find it rather unfortunate 
that the Government has decided to adopt the amendment as for April 1, 1973. It is a contradiction to a 
similar motion that was passed in the Legislature last year in which I asked relatively the same 
information dealing with the highway construction that had been undertaken during the year 1972. 
 
As the Members opposite realize the only reason this question is asked is because we wish to find the 
information prior to the debate on the Budget which will be presented this week. The date has been 
changed to April 1, 1973. The highway estimates and .the debate on the Budget will more than likely be 
completed by that date. I can't see why the Government is not prepared to answer or to provide this 
information at this date. When the motion was first proposed, I had suggested to the Attorney General at 
that time who moved the motion that I would be quite agreeable to have -the date changed to February 1, 
as the case may be, which would allow them more time in which to answer this question. 
 
This should be a very simple question to answer, almost four months. You can't tell me that the Minister 
of Highways does not know today the amount of highway system which he built in 1973. First of all be 
budgeted for it in the spring of 1973 he had the entire year to work on it and they have had four months 
after completion of that system in which to tabulate the information. I would hope that the Members in 
turn would defeat the motion as amended which would then allow me to submit another question, asking 
for the information as of today's date. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1041 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 — ESTABLISHMENT OF GOVERNMENT FINANCED CHILD CARE 
CENTRES 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. G. Richards 
(Saskatoon University): 
 

That this Assembly urges government consideration of the establishment of a network of fully 
government financed child care centres to service all the families in the province, such a program 
to provide for: (a) universal accessibility at no charge to the user; (b) the control of child care 
centres by parent groups, co-operatives, community agencies; (c) twenty-four hour operation 
where need exists; (d) improved and well enforced standards; (c) the implementation of courses 
to train child care workers. 

 
HON. G. MacMURCHY: (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, when I spoke on this Resolution 
earlier, I indicated there are several situations in which child care services could be necessary. 
 
These cases could be where both parents must work to make ends meet or a single parent family is 
forced to draw welfare to look after their children, or where there is seasonal or periodic need for both 
parents to work, such as in the rural parts of the province at seeding time, harvest time or pre- Christmas 
sales in small businesses. 
 
Now the Government recognizes the need of many people in these situations and we are developing a 
program for them. Mr. Speaker, I expect Saskatchewan child care will be publicly supported, 
co-operatively organized and parent controlled. Just as there is a need for real parent participation in 
schools, so there is also a need for parent control in pre- school child care. 
 
One of the pitfalls that child care programs must avoid is the tendency to satisfy demands as opposed to 
meeting needs. I believe there will prove to be a difference between those who are vocal and demanding 
child care and those maybe less vocal but who have a much greater need of the care. Much of the 
pressure for child care today comes from people at the top end of our income ladder, people whose need 
is social, not economic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't say that these people should be ignored, but I say that their needs should not receive 
the highest priority. If parent control is desirable in child care the use of co-operatives to organize the 
parents would, in my opinion, be absolutely ideal. The co-operative organization involves each parent 
directly on a 1 to 1 basis, provides for an easy movement into and out of the organization as people 
come and go and as children grow older in the program. 
 
The co-operative allows parents who use the service to operate it themselves or to use an elected board. I 
believe that this sort of operation is preferable to a contract relation- ship for an agency to provide the 
service to the parents. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1042 

Mr. Speaker, setting up these co-operatives will pose some problems just as those with less need tend to 
be most vocal and demanding service, so I suspect these same people would be the first to organize a 
co-operative. A child care plan that hopes to reach those who need its service the most, is going to have 
to reach out. It will have to actively pursue those on modest wages. It will have to provide 
encouragement. It will have to provide start up money and plenty of organizational help. This work calls 
for the talents of a fair sized staff. I am not sure that the child care services, as such, should attempt to 
locate and hire the necessary people itself. I think it would make good sense to use the Department of 
Co-operative staff in this work. 
 
Co-operatives have several new field men. I might say that it is finally catching up, strengthening after 
several years of starvation under the Liberal Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think there is a pool of talent that is ready to take on a challenge such as a 
program of child care. The Department has liaison with other established co-operatives and these 
relationships could benefit child care groups in getting established. I think that child care should be 
developed on a stable foundation such as our co-operative movement offers.^ I would very much 
encourage the use of co-operatives as a basis of delivery. The Department of Co-operatives is a major 
tool for establishing the local organization. 
 
Mr. Sneaker, child care is a new field. There are very few trained people around to operate quality 
centres. Most parents don't know what to expect in child care. The service will require a strong backup 
from an educational program. Where parents want to run the co-operatives themselves, they will have to 
be trained. Where the parents hire staff, they will have to be trained. Ongoing operations of child care 
calls for managerial and organizational skills, again, requiring training. In each case, Mr. Speaker, the 
demand for education is decentralized and it will be difficult, if not impossible to meet, through 
centralized formal programs. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, I see an important role for a community college system in meeting child care training 
needs. Each parent group will have some unique characteristics, some special needs that a standard 
training program simply would not accommodate, because community colleges themselves are adapted 
to local circumstances, they are suited to supplying whatever the child care co-operatives, in their areas, 
require, they can back up the organizational services of the Department of Social Services, the 
Department of Co-operatives with on-site training, I think community colleges are ideal for this situation 
and their involvement is insured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principles of parent controlled province-wide service, public support and access 
without penalty due to income are sound. Mr. Speaker, I urge Members to support the Resolution and 
the introduction of child care on this basis. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1043 

MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, this Resolution was debated some three months ago. I 
believe it was on a Friday afternoon and I had left early. I did not hear any of the speeches that were 
made but I did read all of them and all three speakers, including the Leader of the Opposition, devoted 
some time in the remarks to things that I had said on some previous occasion. 
 
I feel that the Minister of Education who spoke sometime ago on the Resolution challenged me that I 
should make my views known and I appreciate that remark and I certainly do not want to back down and 
not take part in this debate. 
 
The reason I am opposed to government financed day care centres as this Resolution spells out, is 
because perhaps of my family and cultural background. I realize that this is a serious Resolution. I 
firmly believe in the principle that a mother's place, while the children of the family are growing up, is 
in the home, and no civil servant, regardless of how sincere the civil servant is, is going to replace the 
average good mother. 
 
I am interested in the remark made by the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) and I hardly 
think that it is worthwhile commenting on it, but for his clarification — and I don't think he is in the 
House — he said on a previous occasion in this House that the Hon. Member for Rosthern is always in 
the dark. I appreciate that this is partly taken out of context, but this is what he meant that I was always 
in the dark. I am sure that no other Member in this House subscribes to his remarks. Members of this 
House, the Liberal Party and my constituents always know where I stand. I have been elected and 
re-elected in four provincial elections. And if the Hon. Member for Saskatoon University will be able to 
earn that kind of success, then I might be able to assess his philosophy and opinions with a greater 
degree of sincerity. 
 
But I realize that my hon. friend from Saskatoon University has been under tremendous strain and I 
really do not want to hold him accountable for all the remarks and utterances he makes in this House. He 
assesses himself as an intellectual, but his record of judgment and achievement falls far short of the 
mark, both in his teaching and political career. He is a Waffler, got elected on the NDP ticket, parted 
company with the NDP several months ago, sits alone as an independent of nothing and will never be 
back after the next election. He can say anything he likes in this House, particularly on this Resolution. 
He can tell the Government to spend piles of money because he knows he will never be called upon to 
back up what he says. 
 
In reference to the motion, I want to make it quite clear that I am not opposed to women working. But 
where I part company is that I believe, with the greatest sincerity, that mothers with young children 
should not attempt to do two jobs at one time, and this is particularly true in the case where the husband 
is working. 
 
I have heard dozens of parents say, and I am sure that all Members of this House have, "If only I had 
looked after my family, my daughter or son would not have gone on drugs, or run away from home, but 
now it is too late. I thought I needed that extra dollar to keep up with my neighbors more than they 
needed my love and attention." 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1044 

So that is one of the reasons we are concerned, as the Government today and. I am sure the Minister of 
Welfare is concerned, with delinquent children, the drug pusher and the drug user, and the governments 
are asked to pick up where the parents fail. The governments are asked to rehabilitate these, once 
innocent, fine children who at one time were the greatest blessing that arrived in the home. 
 
The Motion calls for universal coverage, with no direct costs, on a 24-hour basis. It is estimated by the 
welfare officials that if this program were implemented and utilized by all working mothers — and I am 
sure that not all would — it would cost the province over $-100 million. I commend the Government 
and I commend the Minister for not plunging into this program on a 100 per cent basis as recommended 
by the Motion. 
 
In the first place it can never be implemented. You just could not find one-tenth the staff that would be 
needed to look after these day care centres. How can anyone in his right mind even suggest that staffing 
would be no problem? If a mother does not want to look after her own child, what would make her think 
that someone else will? 
 
If universal day care were implemented without reservations, the centres, in my opinion and I am sure 
the opinion of the Government, must be staffed by qualified personnel. I can imagine if one child should 
die for lack of, competent staff, or be injured for life, the uproar from the public would be so pronounced 
that I just would not want to be the Minister of that Department, nor the Government for that matter. 
 
There is another area of great concern if day care centres are set up and that is the support we lend to the 
unwed mothers. I am confident that the vast majority of parents in this province, or in this country, 
perhaps in the world, do not want their sons and daughters involved with sex relationships outside of 
marriage. Every parent that has had this unfortunate experience with their child, has been left with a 
mark of sadness and disappointment in that home. It has also left a sense of shame, sadness and guilt 
upon the son or daughter. Adultery and fornication are the greatest sins as related to us in the Holy 
Scriptures. 
 
Governments of all stripes have more or less shut their eyes to the immoral teachings and practices of 
our modern permissive society. The results are, of course, obvious and of real concern to me and I am 
sure to the Government. Venereal disease is running almost out of control, marriages end up in divorce 
as never before, and more and more children are being born out of wedlock. The fact that this is with us 
does not mean that society or governments have to accept that fact. 
 
By setting up day care centres, are we then not saying to young people, to the unwed mother, "Sure, you 
have the child, we will look after it for you while you work at no cost to you, you just carry on, you have 
no responsibility." 
 
I believe that the teaching or education, whatever you may want to call it, certainly has to be taught by 
the parents, but apparently some homes have utterly failed, some schools have utterly failed, some 
churches have a miserable record, so finally when the home has failed, the school has failed and 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1045 

the churches have failed, as a last resort the government must step in and tell our young people that to 
bring a child into the world, there are some serious responsibilities. And one of those responsibilities is 
to provide for that child, a home and love. It is not the state's responsibility to look after these children, it 
is the responsibility of the parents. And if there is only one parent then the mother must take full 
responsibility. 
 
If the single mother cannot get support from the father of the child, then, of course, I support 
government assistance, keeping in mind at all times that the child be taken care of by the mother. All 
governments, past and present, are guilty of promoting the welfare state. 
 
Governments are guilty of taking away responsibilities from the home and the church. Homes and 
churches are equally guilty of shirking responsibility and are pushing it by leaps and bounds into the lap 
of the government. Prevention is much less costly than rehabilitation. As an example, the Fire 
Department is far more concerned with safety and prevention than putting out the actual fire. The same 
rule applies to the society in which we live. Rather than teach and enforce good moral standards, we 
have accepted and condoned immorality. 
 
The parents, the society and the Government have accepted the use of the pill as a counter measure. If 
the pill fails you can have an abortion. If both fail, the Government will look after the needs of your 
wanted or unwanted child and you may feel free to follow your own career. I do not believe that this is 
the kind of society that the majority of us want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have devoted my remarks particularly to the child of the unwed mother. I fully realize 
that there are fine, respectable parents who have extreme hardships and the day care centres would also 
be available to them. However, I do not want to withdraw from the argument that the mother in this case 
should be able to go out and hold down a job. I believe the Welfare Department is moving in the right 
direction, that low- income earners can be supplemented with assistance, without the mother being 
forced out of the home. 
 
I have to agree with the Minister of Welfare that, if a skeleton program is to be implemented, it must be 
available to those in need only. I would be vigorously opposed to making day care centres available to 
those parents, free of direct cost, who would have an income away above what is considered to be the 
poverty level. 
 
I also want to make my position clear as to those mothers who do work and provide their own child care. 
It is a decision of each individual and really none of my business to tell these parents what they should 
do. I am sure that most mothers and fathers have thought this matter out very carefully. I am sure that 
every parent realizes the benefits versus the present and future harmful and dangerous effects it might 
have on their children. That chance they must take and if problems arise then these parents should not 
blame our educational system, or the school teacher, or the church, or the government, but the blame 
rests solely and fully on the individual. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1046 

If the child goes astray, which many of them do, it could cost the government a great deal of money to 
try to rehabilitate indeed if it is at all possible to do so. 
 
I want to say to this House that I was elected in 1960 as a Member of the Opposition, my responsibility 
in the ensuing years, up to 1964, was as critic of the Department of Welfare. In 1964 to 1971 as a 
member of the Executive Council I believe my reputation proves that I have consistently advocated in 
what areas the government has a responsibility and I have strongly stressed the responsibility of the 
individual and particularly the parent. The government has no business suggesting that they will offer to 
raise my child. As a matter of fact, I would not want them to do so and I hope that many parents take 
that same attitude. 
 
The most important years of a child are from birth to age six. These are the years of rapid growth and 
development. You teach the child how to walk, you count the teeth as they appear, you teach them to 
take the first step, to say the first word, you teach them the first song, the first hymn and hopefully the 
first prayer and I don't think that these matters are the responsibilities that lie with the government or 
with the civil servant. It is the responsibility of the parent and I cannot stress that more than to say to 
every individual parent that they should realize what this Resolution really means and what we are 
promoting. And as I said in my remarks that if we are going to have a day care centre, certainly it must 
be on a very limited basis. Secondly, I don't think you can go into it on a large scale because we haven't 
even got nurses, trained staff, to look after our sick people let alone looking into an area where there 
really should be no need. 
 
Again, I want to make it very plain that I'm not opposed to women working, females working, 
particularly if they are not parents, but the danger is there and we as a government, should not promote 
immorality. Many schools, perhaps it might not be the responsibility of the schools, but some schools, 
some teachers fail. There is no argument about that. I don't think it is the responsibility of the 
government always to pick up the pieces and try to make a citizen out of someone that the parent has 
neglected. For those reasons I do not support the motion as introduced by Mr. Richards. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. H. ROLFS: (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on the 
motion as introduced by the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards). 
 
First of all let me say that I listened very intently on what the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) had to 
say and I wish to compliment him on what he had to say. I don't necessarily want to say that I agreed 
with everything that he had to say, but certainly he said it in a very sincere tone and I think he really 
believes in what he has said. But I do want to ask the Member simply this question. Would he and I'm 
sure he would, would he not step in if he saw a child that was severely suffering because of the 
irresponsibility of parents? Would he not have stepped in as the Minister of Welfare, when he was the 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1047 

Minister, to see to it that children would not be penalized because of the irresponsibility of those 
parents? And I'm sure his answer would be yes, that he would have stepped in, that he would not 
penalize that child. What I would say to the Member for Rosthern that we have many such children and I 
for one cannot stand by and see these children suffer and grow up as people who really become bitter 
against society and grow up with corrupt minds and with corrupt attitudes. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I do not support the motion as introduced by the Member for Saskatoon 
University and I intend to move an amendment when I finish. 
 
I agree with the Member for Rosthern that the mother's place is in the home, but again there are mothers 
who do not want to remain in the home and we cannot command them to remain in the home, and if we 
do, I think again the children will suffer and what we must do is look at the welfare of the children. 
Would the children be better off if these mothers were permitted to go out and work and let someone 
else take care of the children either in the family home as we have provided under the new regulations or 
let them set up a neighborhood day care centre? I think the child probably would be much better off if 
that would happen. I again agree with the Member for Rosthern that the mother should not attempt to do 
two jobs at one time. Society in certain instances forces both parents to go out and work in order to 
make sufficient income to provide for their family. So really the blame has to be put on the society that 
we have established and I would have to say that both the Member for Rosthern and myself have had a 
part to play in developing that society. Really what has to be done for a certain, segment of society is to 
assure them that they have sufficient income so that only one of the parents needs to go out to supply the 
basic needs for that family. That is the problem that we must address ourselves to. 
 
I agree again with the Member that I am not very happy with the present day morality. I'm not very 
happy about children being born out of wedlock. I'm not very happy with legislation which condones 
abortions. I just read an article today, 39,000 abortions in Canada. But again it was politicians who 
legislated these kinds of laws that permitted it. It wasn't the church, it wasn't the home, it was the 
government and I would have to say to the Member opposite and here maybe I do have to blame him 
somewhat because I've never heard him say anything against the originators of the abortion law. Never 
once have I heard him demand that the Federal Government do away with the law that permits so-called 
therapeutic abortions. 
 
I'm not getting into a political argument here, I am simply saying that I don't agree with it and I'm 
simply saying to the Member for Rosthern that I think both he and I and all the Members in this House 
could do a lot by making public statements, by writing to the people that can do something about it to 
change those laws. I don't argue with him, I don't agree with the law, I wish it were changed, and think 
everybody in this House knows where I stand on that particular issue. 
 
But I think also that we can't put our heads in the sand and say well, all right we won't support day care 
help or day care centres because the mother's place is in the home. I am absolutely convinced that many, 
many of our children from year 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1048 

one to year four or five, before they enter kindergarten, need qualified staff. They need the help and I 
hope that the new program that our present Minister has introduced will make available to these day care 
centres qualified- staff so that they can use this particular time to diagnose and observe these children. 
 
In my maiden speech, I spoke about prevention versus rehabilitation. So again I agree with the Member 
for Rosthern. It's much much cheaper to do prevention. And I think that the schools ought to reach out 
into the community, to make professional staff available to those parents who need help for their 
children. Not to take over, but to be there to help. It's a complicated society, we have conflicts of 
opinions on morality and many parents simply don't know which direction to go and they welcome some 
help. 
 
I was a little bit disturbed, by an article in yesterday's Leader-Post. "Little Improvement Seen in Day 
Care Financing" comments Tricia Eaton. I don't know who Tricia Eaton is. Bu Tricia says that there will 
be very few changes, very few changes or improvements because of the extra, almost $2 million that this 
Government is providing for day care. I object very strongly to the Member for Saskatoon University 
saying that, well that's nothing, $2 million is nothing. I think the cost for universal quality day care is 
simply prohibitive. I don't think we need it and I think that what the present Minister is providing in 
co-operative day care will provide No. 1 that parents will be in charge. Parents will decide what kinds of 
day care they want and I think that is very very important. No. 2 and as the Member for Rosthern has 
indicated the program will provide free day care services for those parents who need it financially. 
Therefore, I support that particular program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support day care as proposed by the present Minister. I do not support universal free day 
care for this province. I think that universal free day care is a low priority and I think there are many 
other needs to which this Government can put its money to use. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move an amendment, seconded by the Member from Nipawin 
(Mr. Comer): 
 

That Resolution No. 1 be amended by striking out everything following the word "Assembly" in 
the first line and substituting the following: 
 
commends the Government of Saskatchewan for (a) providing greatly increased funds for day 
care; (b) devising a program which will make day care available to all income groups; (c) 
establishing criteria which will ensure that each day care centre is parent controlled; (d) 
providing a program which will be flexible and responsible to the desires of parents; (e) 
providing for additional grants for those day care centres which offer integrated service to 
handicapped and non-handicapped children. 

 
HON. A. TAYLOR: (Minister of Social Services): — I'd like to take just a few moments on this debate. 
Let me say first of all that I will be supporting the amendment as put forward, which probably comes as 
no surprise to anyone. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1049 

The program which was announced recently will be increasing our support for day care from about 
$200,000 annually to about $2 million in the coming fiscal year. It will involve the immediate 
establishment of a day care branch within the Department of Social Services and will provide support 
for the day care of children in family settings as well as in centres. The program will also involve 
increases and start up grants, renovation grants and income related subsidies. Most of these went into 
effect on March 1st. We are at present attempting to engage personnel for the day care branch. Personnel 
which will number, Mr. Speaker, about 13 people. 
 
I'd like to comment briefly on the objectives and the priorities upon which Government commitment to 
day care is based. I'd like to say at the outset that what we intended to offer was not in any way intended 
to represent free universal day care. Instead, we attempted to meet the greatest unmet need for day care 
in the total community, at realistic cost to the parents and the taxpayers of our province. We believe that 
what we have introduced is indeed a responsible fiscal policy. I might say that decisions that had to be 
made were not always arrived at very easily. 
 
The Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) is right by my own figuring, and these are not official figures, but 
I estimated a universal program would have cost about $100 million a year. I did not believe and I don't 
think most Members of this House believe that this is the way we ought to be expending our funds at the 
present time. 
 
It was also a concern to me that by providing total free universal day care we would be in effect saying 
to parents, either you use day care and place your children there or you suffer a financial loss. Because if 
the day care were totally free, including the meal a day that must be provided when the child is there for 
ten hours or even for eight hours, at no charge, then we are saying to the parents if you keep your child 
home it's going to cost you more. This seemed to me to be most unfair. I might also say that universal 
free day care also seems to me to be a regressive form of taxation, because it has to be provided out of 
general tax revenues. Low income people paying income tax would then be subsidizing higher income 
people in their use of day care. 
 
The objectives that we set out for our program are as follows: 
 

1. To increase the degree of control and participation by parents, because we believe that 
children are the responsibility of their parents and the parents ought to decide the direction in 
which their children are going, 
 
2. To ensure a high standard of emotional and physical care of children, 
 
3. To promote and organize the development of new services on a neighborhood and small 
community basis, 
 
4. To provide day care services equally to all income groups, 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1050 

5. To promote the use of services by all income groups in relation to the needs of the child, and 
the family. 

 
Finally, we will continuously support and monitor the program to ensure that these objectives are met. 
 
The priorities that we have accepted are such that the following persons will have first claim on the 
program. 
 
First, a single, working parent. Mr. Speaker, I am sometimes a little disturbed when we mention the 
single parent to find that people automatically assume that we are talking of a single female parent. 
There are many men in our society attempting to raise families after the death of their wives. These men 
do need assistance, particularly if they are on low income, attempting to struggle to earn a living and 
they need some help in looking after their children. The option is for that man, or woman, as the case 
may be, to go on total welfare. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that there are cases, and I have known of some, where the person would be 
better off and the family better off by accepting public assistance and remaining at home with the 
children. But this is not very frequently the case. 
 
I think it is simplistic to blame (as the one Member did although he did not really do this so definitively) 
drug abuse, delinquency, etc., on working mothers. It is a far more complex problem than that, and if 
one looks back into history, we find that it is not only the mothers who have given up something in the 
home, but far more extensively — the fathers. The day is not very far gone, in a rural society, an 
agrarian society, when the father was at home all the time, when he was in the yard working and the 
children were around him, and when his authority was exercised. It is all too often not mothers, but 
fathers, who have opted out of their responsibility. 
 
The second group to have priority is the single parent enrolled in education improvement, upgrading or 
training, for the same reasons, so that they too, can better themselves and their families. 
 
Third, a two parent family in which one of the parents is disabled, or where both parents are enrolled in 
educational improvement upgrading or training. 
 
Fourth, a family assessed to have special needs. For example, a physical, emotional, mental, language or 
other handicap, or a family experiencing short-term crisis and emergency. We think here of the case 
where a mother is taken ill, has to go to the hospital, while the father works, some care is needed for the 
children. 
 
Fifth, the family in which both parents are working, but on marginal income. The alternative to this is to 
provide some form of subsidization for income. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, personally, that our nation — Canada — is working towards this goal. 
 
This is not to say that the program should be restricted to these persons, but rather that the emphasis in 
developing new services should relate more particularly to these target groups. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1051 

The program provides for two types of day care – family day care which will accommodate a maximum 
of five children from two weeks to five years of age, in approved private homes. Children from six to 12 
can be accommodated on an out-of-school basis. 
 
Now there is some concern for this particular aspect, Mr. Speaker. But I might say this is the most used 
type of day care in existence today. There are far more children in this type of situation already than in 
any other type of day care. Through the program we will be able to regularize this, inspect the homes 
where this is being done and ensure that proper care is given to the children. 
 
Neighborhood day care will be for children from 18 months to five years of age, in specifically designed 
centres other than the children's own home. Again, children from six to 12 can be accommodated on an 
out-of-school basis. We'll provide start-up grants of $100 a space to any new centre and $50 to existing 
centres. These will replace the old $10 and $40 grants. We will also be providing transportation grants 
where they are necessary and up to $100 per space assigned to a handicapped child, whether physically 
or mentally handicapped. It is our belief that the best kind of day care centre is an integrated centre 
where all children, handicapped or otherwise, work and play together. 
 
Subsidies to parents will be related to income and will cover up to 75 per cent of the rate charged to a 
maximum of $60 per child for family day care and 80 per cent of the rate charged to a maximum of 380 
for neighborhood day care. Plainly then, Mr. Speaker, except for those in extreme need all will have to 
expend some funds themselves for the care of their children. 
 
While we have attached a great deal of emphasis to parent control of day care, this is not to say that we 
minimize the problems of actually achieving this. Since the centres will be publicly supported we 
believe they should be operated on a non- profit basis. Since they are to be parent controlled they will 
require, in our opinion, a majority of parents on the board in order to meet this goal, we will require that 
all centres incorporate as non-profit centres, preferably under The Co-operative Associations Act, since 
we believe this provides greater stability. Centres will not qualify for grants or subsidies unless this 
condition is met. 
 
I might say that those centres now operating will be given two years in which to become non-profit 
organizations. I have yet to hear anyone complain about this aspect, since most of the day care operators 
I have talked to have always told me that's the way they operated anyway. 
 
We will also, Mr. Speaker, be appointing, in the very near future, a provincial day care advisory board, 
which will continue to guide the direction in which our program is going. 
 
Let me say once again, I think it would be wrong at this moment in history, to go in the direction of the 
original motion and to opt for universal free day care. I believe the program that we have introduced is 
one which does meet the needs that are there and yet is fiscally responsible. For this reason, Mr. 
Speaker, I will support the amendment. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1052 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY: (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to go on record by saying a few words on 
the amendment and the proposal as put forward by the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. 
Richards). 
 
Before I go on, I want to refer to the Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) and say, and I want you to 
pay particular attention, that I thought that your words were wise. I thought the things that you said were 
to the point, and as I mentioned, wise, and certainly things that a lot of people think, but may not 
necessarily want to say in public. I want to commend the Member for what he said. 
 
Insofar as the universal accessibility of day care centres as in the original motion, well, the cost factor 
was mentioned, and of course that would be, prohibitive, but I do want to say that certainly even if the 
money was available, a scheme such as that would not wash down well in which I will call 'our western 
society'. I think something like that — and I won't go into the details — would really and truly promote 
family breakdown. 
 
As a teacher, one who has been exposed to students, who has been exposed to family breakdowns, and 
one who has worked in various parts of the country, I think this should be a concern of everyone. 
Anything that is going to promote-or possibly promote — family breakdowns, I think we should take a 
good hard look at. I should just like to refer Members to a CBC program on TV the other night — I 
believe it was on Sunday — where it was a program on behavior and learning and they were 
interviewing various young boys and girls — ages 7, 9, 10, 11, and they asked questions of these boys 
and girls who were housed in this particular school, where they had emotional problems, etc., etc. The 
one burning thing that every one of those boys and .girls mentioned when they were asked: What would 
you ask for if you had a wish? The one thing that they all remarked was that they wished that their 
mothers and fathers were living together again. They wanted to be part of a family again. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed Government program is good, and I see that it will be geared to 
the ability to pay for those who are experiencing hardship, and it is a principle that's dear to my heart. It 
would be helping people who are in trouble financially or otherwise, and this would be good. I believe 
that the proposed Government program will actually help to prevent family breakdown. For that reason, 
I think it is a good program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting the amendment, and voting against the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MB. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I do have the right to speak on the amendment, do I? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1053 

MR. BOLDT: — I should just like to make a few remarks regarding the amendment. 
 
Before doing so, I should also like to state my position in regard to some of the legislation that is being 
passed, or has been passed at the federal level. I'm certainly opposed to it — I think many citizens are 
opposed to it — many doctors, many hospitals, many nurses are opposed to it and I think it's a crime that 
we are committing. When we talk about a government — I am the government — you are the 
government — the people are the government. The government is no institution, they are human beings, 
and whether it's the home, or the school, or the church, we as citizens are the government and let's not 
blame the government, we blame ourselves. 
 
In regard to this amendment which spells out day care in a limited degree, I believe, if I were to assess 
the situation right, the need for day care centres are in the northern areas — at La Ronge, at La Loche, 
Meadow Lake — and I would doubt very much whether that's where the day care centres are going to be 
set up. They are going to be set up maybe in the city of Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, where they 
are not needed to such a degree. Surely we, as neighbors, have responsibilities. If there is a hardship in a 
family particularly in sickness, in a city like Regina, Saskatoon, a community like Osier, this is being 
done on a day to day basis, where neighbors help out each other. That is our responsibility as citizens to 
not always run to the government for financial aid. If this motion is being passed and the program that 
the Minister has outlined, as I said before, if you are going to come out with a program, then I have to 
agree with the Minister's intention, but I am concerned as to where these day centres are going to be 
established. Let's not put them in Saskatoon, let's not put them in Regina, or Prince Albert. Let's put 
them in the area where we have the welfare people, the people that are really in need, in need of 
guidance as mothers. That's where they belong. It is going to be very difficult to set them up. It is very 
difficult to staff them. These are the points that I would like to raise that when the government does set 
them up that they put them in the places where they are most needed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT: (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to speak on this 
resolution, but I must agree with a lot of what has been said here this afternoon and this evening. In the 
implementation of a program, I think the stress of trying to see to it that it does not promote family 
breakdown, I think is a very important one. I can recall last year when I attended the Alcohol 
Commission convention here in Regina, of a young man who said the thing that he resented the most in 
all his life was when they took him away from his father and his mother, who were both drunks. Instead 
of trying to rehabilitate the father and the mother, he said, they took me away. He was a man of about 40 
some years old. He said, "That, I can never forgive them for." 
 
Now I just wanted to tell the House this particular story, because perhaps we take the shortcut 
sometimes and take the 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1054 

kids away. But first of all before we do that, I think we should explore every possibility of trying to keep 
the home together. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this resolution, I 
should like to say at the outset that I congratulate all of the Members who have spoken before me for the 
obvious sincerity of their remarks, and for the obvious great deal of preparation and consideration that 
went into them before giving them to this House. 
 
As you are aware, I have not been in this Assembly for very long, but I must say that the remarks 
tonight, in this debate, have risen to a new high, compared to some of the remarks of earlier days. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, at the outset that I agree with some concept of day care. I must say as well 
that I disagree — either largely or to a smaller extent — with, I think, all of the previous speakers on this 
debate. I agree with the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) and some of the priorities that he has 
set in his Department. However, I disagree, and I disagree greatly with the emphasis on co-ops. I can see 
no reason whatsoever for not allowing private enterprise, in some form or another, to participate in day 
care. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that, again, is typical of this Government.\ 
 
I would say in connection with the remarks of the Member who sits far to my left (Mr. Richards) that I 
disagree with the universality of his resolution and I think it is too wide in concept. I also disagree with 
the resolution in that it is too narrow in some other concept in that the resolution seems to think that day 
care is a glorified babysitting service for only young children. I can envisage it being something greater 
and bigger than this. 
 
As I indicated to you, Mr. Speaker, I disagree basically with the co-op aspect of the plan that the 
Minister proposed through the news media recently. However, I do agree with some of the priorities that 
he has indicated that his Department will give to day care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have further remarks to make about this subject at a later date, and I would now beg 
leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned' debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Weatherald (Cannington) 
for Return No. 45 showing: 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1055 

The amount the Simpson Timber Company paid to the Government of Saskatchewan during the year 
1972 for: (a) stumpage dues; (b) ground rental, and fire prevention; (c) fire suppression; and (d) other 
specified purposes. 
 
HON. J. R. KOWALCHUK: (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment 
to that motion. It will also provide a change from the calendar year to the fiscal year ending March 51 of 
each preceding year, because, again, the departmental records are kept in that manner. Also, that the 
proposed amendment will provide additional comparative information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Sir, there will be the deletion of Section (d) in my amendment, which I am told is very difficult for 
my departmental people to compile. It could include any different number of specified purposes and 
would be difficult to compile. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla): 
 

That all the words after the word "during" in the second line be deleted and the following 
substituted therefore: 
 
"the fiscal years 1969-70, 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73 for: (a) stumpage dues; (b) ground rental, 
and fire prevention; (c) fire suppression." 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 
Return No. 9 showing: 
 

(1)The number of airplanes that the government owns for executive use. (2) The model of 
aircraft that is used for executive use. (5) The total number of flying hours of the executive 
aircraft for the years: (a) 1971 ; (b) 1972; (c) 1975. (4) The total .number of hours of use that 
were made by each of the Cabinet Ministers and senior departmental and agency officials of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
HON. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, since the 
information requested in the motion cannot be supplied because records are not kept in that fashion I 
have prepared an amendment which will give the Member the information as near as possible that can 
be supplied by the Department. I move, seconded by my seatmate, the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. 
MacMurchy) an amendment thereto: 
 
That all the words after the word "showing" be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1056 

(1)When the government first purchased an aircraft to be used primarily for executive travel. (2) 
The model of each government aircraft used for executive travel and the length of service. (5) 
The total number of miles flown by each aircraft in (2) above for each fiscal year, up to 
November 30, 1973. 

 
MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I see the reason for the amendment from the point of 
view of the Minister of Government Services. I wonder why he omitted to include part (^) of the original 
motion in his amendment, whether deliberately or whether he hasn't got the answers for it. Part (^-) 
reads: 
 

The total number of hours of use that were made by each of the Cabinet Ministers and senior 
departmental and agency officials of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Surely to goodness he is not trying to tell us in this' Legislature that that information is not available. He 
has the records of how many Cabinet Ministers, he has the logs, there is no reason in the world why that 
information could not be provided. It may be an oversight on his part, but he didn't include number (4) 
in his amendment. Without that information certainly the amendment is not satisfactory to the 
Opposition. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Well . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Hon. Member cannot close the debate on an amendment, he has exercised his 
right to speak. 
 
MR. GUY: — Maybe the Attorney General could answer the question for me. I should like to have that 
information, why part (4) was omitted from the amendment. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the House ready for the question? 
 
MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I have asked a question and I would hope that in 
closing the debate the Minister can provide the answer. Whether we receive this information is going to 
determine whether we support the motion or whether we don't. We want the information that he is 
willing to provide, but it is only part of the information that we want. We want the additional 
information and surely to goodness they are not going to sit there like bumps on a log and not have 
anybody answer my question. Why can we not get this information? If it is not available, I will accept 
that answer. I want that answer before we vote on this question. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Government Services 
must have failed to recognize that every person who flies in that aircraft, and every time that pilot takes 
off and lands he has to officially record the individuals in, the time of departure, the time of arrival. That 
information is readily available and can be obtained. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1057 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well I realize that the Hon. Member wanted further information. There is nothing 
that the Chair can do about that. Had he just risen and asked if the Minister would answer a question 
before he took his seat, the Minister would have been permitted. But when he makes a speech, then the 
Minister can- not come back and make another speech. 
 
MR. GUY: — Could I ask the Member before he took his seat, is that information available. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — After two or three words are spoken, you are both out of order if you do. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the information is not available as the question is 
asked. There is a problem of the senior department officials travelling with the Minister, and they only 
log the total hours, so making all that information is not possible. That is why it has been deleted. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Guy for Return No. 16 
showing: 
 

(1) A list of all reports and studies commissioned by the Government, Crown Corporations, 
Boards, Commissions or any other Government agencies since July 1, 1971 to external 
consultants, (b) The names of these consultants and estimated costs of their studies, (c) The 
number of preliminary and final reports of each of these studies, and their final costs. 
 
(2) (a) A list of the titles of all reports and studies undertaken within the government since July 
1, 1973. (b) The number of reports or studies completed. (c) The number of reports or studies 
pending. 

 
HON. J. R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I move that Return No. 16 be 
amended thereto: 
 

That clause "(2)" be deleted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reasoning for removing subsection (2) is that I believe that a similar type of question 
was asked in the last session of the Legislature. The information that was tabled was in fact virtually the 
same as what is being asked for in subsection (l). Subsection (2) asks for (a) a list of the titles of all 
reports and studies undertaken within the government since July 1, 1973; (b) the number of reports or 
studies completed and (c) the number of reports or studies pending. I think that the Hon. Member for 
Athabasca is well aware that there are probably hundreds of studies being 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1058 

carried out by various departments and agencies of departments that are necessary in order to further the 
administration of the Government. They, generally speaking, are studies that are confidential to the 
Government, to the department or to the agencies. The information will assist them in making the kinds 
of decisions that the public of Saskatchewan would wish the Government to make. I think that it would 
be virtually impossible when we relate to studies or reports in trying to define just exactly what would a 
study or report be when an agency or a department is furthering its ability to have information brought to 
it in order to conduct its services as it has been instructed to do. 
 
I believe that these were the arguments that were put forward -when the similar Question was asked in 
the Legislature at the last sitting. At that time, we brought forward I think a sufficient amount of 
information which will also be brought forth by answering subsection (l) of Return No. 16. 
 
MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the comments made by the Minister of Agriculture. If he 
provides the sane information that he provided in the other Return that would be part of the answer, 
that's true. Of course, we have asked since July 1, 1973, which was never covered by any other return. 
This is a new return covering a date since the last sitting of the Legislature. 
 
His comments about the number of reports and I was interested when he said, there are hundreds of 
them, because this is exactly what we are under the impression, that there are hundreds of reports, that 
the taxpayers of the province are paying hundreds of thousands of dollars for these hundreds of reports. 
These are never made public, but are put on the shelf, and it is only a matter of providing work for civil 
servants who are probably for the most part defeated candidates and friends of the Government. This is 
why we want to know what are the reports that are being carried out, who are Carrying then out and 
what is the cost to the people of Saskatchewan. I think they are vitally concerned about the amount of 
money that is being spent in so-called research by so-called questionable researchers if I may use that 
term. That was the reason for the second part of this question. We would like to know how many of 
these reports are being carried out, who is carrying them out and particularly at what expense to the 
public. We have seen in the past, and the Minister of agriculture mentioned that a lot of the information 
was provided in an earlier return. This is true, and it caused a great deal of consternation throughout the 
province at the number of reports and the cost of these reports and we have never seen any action. They 
have been put on the shelf. They have been a make-work activity for friends of the NDP Government. 
This is why we would like to have it all out in the open. The attorney General says, can't you be proud of 
us because we are such an open government. They gave us information in the previous return which we 
didn't want, now they are trying to cut us off from information which is vitally important to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Hopefully you will reconsider and pass the motion as it appears on the Order Paper. I 
think the people of Saskatchewan whether there are hundreds or thousands of these reports are interested 
in the number. We don't necessarily care so much for the names of the reports — although we would 
appreciate that too — so we can follow them up and see what 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1059 

great conclusions you have reached. After all you are very intelligent Ministers and hopefully you would 
read these reports very conscientiously and make sure that all the recommendations are enforced before 
the next election. There is the Attorney General reading a report right now that I am sure will be of great 
value. I hope that you would pass this resolution as is and not listen to the sort of hanky panky language 
that we got from the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy for Return No. 17 
showing: 
 

The total dollar value of Kraft products purchased through the Government Purchasing Agency 
or any other Government Department, Agency, or Crown Corporation for the period February -1, 
1973 to September 30, 1973. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Boldt: 
 

That the words "September 30, 1973" in the third line be deleted and the words "February 25, 
1974" be substituted therefore. 
 

HON. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the same 
reason on this motion as I rose on the previous one as I stated at the beginning that the information is not 
kept. This applies to this motion and consequently to the amendment which is irrelevant without the 
main motion". I would therefore ask, since the information is not maintained in the department and is 
impossible to obtain, that the Members defeat the amendment and the motion. 
 
MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe the words of the Minister of 
Government Services. Here we see Government Members' cars with "boycott Kraft" on them. We see 
resolutions from the NDP convention commending their Government of their strong attitude towards 
boycotting Kraft projects and you mean to tell me that Government Services who are in charge of the 
three cafeterias in this Legislative area are not keeping track of the amount of Kraft foods that are being 
purchased and sold through these cafeterias. I tell you, you are going to be in trouble with your own 
NDP political party if you don't keep track of the number of Kraft foods because this is the real crux of 
the situation. We're concerned that the Government of the day doesn't keep in touch with the grassroots 
of their political party to the point that when the next election comes around you're all going to be turfed 
out. This is our concern, we are really worried about this and this is why we want to know whether you 
really monitor the questions that are being raised at your NDP conventions about the amount of goods 
that are being bought by the Government from Kraft Foods. I think it's terrible and I hope I have the 
opportunity to attend your next convention and make a speech on this particular subject. 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1060 

MR. A. E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am amazed at the Hon. Member for 
Athabasca saying that in case of the three cafeterias that are being operated on the grounds here that the 
Government somehow should have the record of the Kraft products that they buy. The Hon. Member 
should be very well aware that the cafeterias aren't being operated by the Government. Obviously you 
didn't know your department when you were the Minister of the Department of Public Works. The 
cafeterias are operated by the Government Employees' Association. It is the Government Employees' 
Association through a management committee that they established, they do the purchasing, they 
provide the services that are here. The Department of Government Services does not do the purchasing, 
therefore how would they know since really that service is contracted out to the Government Employees' 
Association. It is quite obvious that's why he is sitting on the other side of the House because he really 
never knew his department. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — We certainly buy a lot of food for the various institutions. The orders are placed by 
the institutions on the basis of food stuffs that they need. Now how would it be possible for anybody to 
keep track of all these items that are ordered and the various brands that come under different company 
names? Kraft Corporation owns a whole series of subsidiaries under different names. It would be just 
humanly impossible to be able to answer that kind of a question and he knows that fully well. It is a 
frivolous and a foolish question that the Hon. Member asked with the hope of creating some kind of 
political embarrassment but indeed there is going to be no political embarrassment. I do support the 
Minister of Government Services that this motion be defeated. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — It is kind of interesting that the Minister would stand on his 
feet and say it would be stupid to inform the institutions not to buy Kraft if we don't know what Kraft 
products are, but they are trying to tell everybody else in the Province of Saskatchewan not to buy Kraft. 
So the point is that all you have to do if you're going to boycott Kraft is to instruct your institutions and 
the purchasing people in your institutions not to buy Kraft products. You made no attempt whatsoever to 
boycott Kraft. It is nothing but a political hoax. If you say you can't control your institutions how in 
heavens name can you control the public of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, I only have one very short comment. I think this is a typical example of the 
hypocrisy of the NDP. They try to tell the people of Saskatchewan that they should boycott Kraft. They 
go around in their cars with their little funny stickers on the back windows trying to tell everyone to 
boycott Kraft. It is obvious tonight that they as the Government of Saskatchewan who are in a better 
position than anyone in the province to boycott Kraft have set no example and made no attempt to 
boycott Kraft products. As I say in the typical hypocrisy of the NDP Government towards not only Kraft 
products but towards everything they do as a government of this province. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1061 

Amendment negatived. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

RETURN NO. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy (Athabasca) for Return 
No. 22 showing: 
 

(1) All printing contracts with their values, given to Service Printing Company, from January 1, 
1973 to February 25, 1974 by all Departments, Boards, Agencies, Commissions or Crown 
Corporations of the Provincial Government. 
 
(2) (a) With respect to the above the contracts that were tendered and whether the low tender was 
accepted in each case. (b) Where the low tender was not accepted, if any, the name of the low 
tender, and the reason that it was not accepted, (c) With respect to the above the contracts that 
were not tendered. 

 
HON. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, this question 
seeks information about printing contracts and I intend to give the information that the Members 
opposite seek. Also in this amendment that I am going to offer to supplement it by giving them a little 
extra information being well aware of the fact that they have illustrated the need for extra information a 
number of times. Consequently I move the amendment, seconded by Mr. Kowalchuk (Minister of 
Natural Resources) as follows; 
 
That all the words after the word "showing" be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

Total dollar value of all printing contracts given by Queen's Printer to Regina printing firms for 
fiscal periods 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73, 1973-7'4- to date showing (l) (a) the total amount 
allotted in each period; (b) the total amount tendered in each period; (2) (a) all instances where 
low tender was not accepted; (b) if any, reason why low tender was not accepted. 

 
MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised that we are getting some additional 
information, in fact, I am very happy that we are getting some of the information for 1970 and 1971, 
because it will show very clearly that no printing contracts have gone to any supporters of the Liberal 
Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GUY: — There are no printing contracts given to a printing company that is owned by the Liberal 
Party. This is something that will not be true for the years 1971-72, 1972-73, 73-74. We are all aware 
that the printing company owned by the NDP political party have been draining off funds from this 
Government from the day they became the Government. This is one of the worst examples of moral 
degradation that any government could ever fall into. To take their own printing company, 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1062 

take the taxpayers' money and funnel it into it without tender, without any means of providing an 
opportunity for other printing companies that do not bear the NDP label to get this printing. I found it 
very strange, Mr. Speaker, that the other day I asked a very simple question that could have been 
answered in one word or probably two words, 'Service Printers'. I asked who were printing the blues and 
whites for this Session. It was a question that could have been answered like that and what did they do, 
they made an Order for Return out of it. They don't want to provide the information. I would be very 
surprised when that information comes back if it isn't Service Printers that is providing them because 
otherwise they would have been so happy to provide it overnight or in the 48-hour notice period and we 
would have had that answer on our desk if it had been Commercial Printers, if it had been Peerless 
Printing, we would have had that answer back the next day and they would have been sitting there with 
grins on their faces a mile long. The fact they made an Order for Return makes it pretty obvious who is 
doing the printing of the blues and the whites. No, they probably won't answer it until the next session, it 
is such a difficult question. The Minister of Government Services probably has to go back and ask four 
or five of his Department officials who has been doing the printing of the blues. 
 
However, we are pleased to get this additional information and it will show, I am convinced, that there is 
a great deal or a great sum of money that is being paid by the taxpayers of this province that is going to a 
printing company that is owned and operated by the Government of the day, the NDP, that will be used 
for election purposes and which, as I say, is one of the lowest levels of moral degradation that any 
Government has ever fallen into. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a few words about this motion 
about Service Printers. 1 came into this House in 1960 as a Member of the Opposition and I don't think 
there is a year that this motion hasn't been on the Order Paper. I think it has been on the Order Paper 
every time that the House met when we were on the Opposition. I have to say this about the Members 
opposite, I have served on the Highway Committee, a Safety Committee with six Members of the other 
side of the House and I appreciate the fact that I know them a little better. I am absolutely convinced that 
the six Members on the Highway Committee are as honest as the day is long and I doubt very much 
whether the Government and the political party really think it is necessary that we have to criticize you 
for advertising and giving business to a newspaper that is printed and owned by the NDP. You are not 
going to win the election because of the money that you're going to make on the advertising. I think the 
backbenchers, should tell the Cabinet that this is unethical, I am not saying it is crooked but I sure think 
it is unethical. I know that as a member of the Executive Council this did not happen. We were not 
advertising in the Saskatchewan Liberal for political purposes, government ads in the political paper. I 
think you should rise above this criticism. What if the party loses $100,000, maybe I can chip in a few 
dollars for your party if you are that hard up. I would urge you to keep the slate clean because after all 
you know we have to set examples. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1063 

What happens to a political party, a government or an individual, let's not kid ourselves, the Watergate 
affair in Washington is a reflection on every politician in the country or in the world. It is a reflection on 
us. I was in the States only a few weeks ago and whenever you talked about Watergate they would say, 
well, every politician is crooked. They are all under the same status. Well, I don't believe that, 99 per 
cent of the politicians are honest. If they become involved, if I was to become a dishonest politician I 
would say it was because the man on the street asked me to be dishonest. The most dishonest person is 
not the politician. It is the pressure that you get from the man that walks the street and wants the 
Minister to do something that isn't right. They get sucked into it. I think the former Vice-president of the 
United States is a typical example of what happens and once you get sucked into an area like that you 
have no way out. You go in deeper and deeper all the time. 
 
I think it is very important for each individual Member of this House and for each political party 
represented in this House, to keep this unethical business out of our parties. I am sure that all Members 
of your party would be much happier if you didn't advertise with Service Printers. I am sure that your 
party members and all the people of Saskatchewan would recognize the fact that you are trying to 
correct a mistake that you made years and years ago. I would strongly recommend that you do away 
with that kind of business with the printing company. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to put forth one comment. At the 
fall sitting of this Session when it first opened, the Attorney General presented to Members of the House 
a White Paper on Conflict of Interest. Now conflict of interest is becoming of increasing concern to not 
only members of the Canadian public but to people right across North America and other political 
jurisdictions in the world. Conflict of interest is really a question as where does the influence of 
politicians and their right to make decisions that influence themselves and their political party begin and 
stop. Perhaps that is an over- simplification, but surely Service Printers is a conflict of interest to every 
Member sitting on that side of the House. I would suggest that if the Attorney General does not support 
the removal of giving government business and taxpayers' money to Service Printers he is making a 
farce out of his paper on Conflict of Interest. I would suggest that he has asked for comments and if 
there is one comment that certainly should be general from all Members of this House on his White 
Paper on Conflict of Interest it is Service Printers and the terrible political dishonesty that has, gone on 
for the last 15 years in relation to Service Printers. 
 
MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I really hadn't intended to speak on this but after the 
remarks of the Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) and my hon. friend from Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald), I feel obliged to rise. 
 
I want to say that I see no sense of conflict of interest in this. It is a public company owned by some 
40,000 people in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is not owned by us, as Members 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1064 

here, it is owned by some 40,000 people in the Province of Saskatchewan, with a board that has 
completely broken away from the Party and no member of that board that controls those printers are in 
any way connected with the Government and as such I see no conflict. 
 
The other remarks that my hon. friend from Rosthern said, I appreciate it and I believe that he is sincere 
and I believe that he knows that I am sincere when I say what I have just said. 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR: (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to follow something that 
the Member for Touchwood has said. He speaks of the Service Printers as being a public company. This 
is very true. I happen to be a member of the co-op and I am proud of it. Does this mean that the 
Government should make no purchases from the co-op? I think not. 
 
There has been no question raised, at least I haven't heard it, it hasn't even been insinuated — that unfair 
rates are being paid for advertising done. I think it is noticeable that this sort of charge is not being laid. 
We are paying for services, in the case of the Commonwealth, for wide circulation. If you want to 
advertise I might well say that we want to advertise in the paper with an enlightened readership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) said that they never advertised in the Saskatchewan 
Liberal. Let me say from the Public Service Commission's point of view, when we advertise job 
vacancies we would gladly advertise in the Saskatchewan Liberal as soon as they tell us when they are 
going to publish on a regular basis. 
 
MR. J. G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Member for Touchwood 
is wont to say, "I didn't intend to get into this debate," but an idea just crossed my mind that if the 
Government is really intent upon proving their willingness to place ads in different journals of different 
political stripes. Next Year Country is always on the lookout for a little bit of advertising revenue. I can 
assure the Members of the Treasury Bench that Next Year Country is read by the kind of people who 
might be interested in politics and government administration. It has a wide readership among civil 
servants and potential civil servants, read by progressive people on the left with good education, an ideal 
kind of market which surely the Government wants to be able to reach in its advertisements. Our 
advertising rates are quite reasonable and we would be able to match the Commonwealth, I am sure, in 
columnage prices. I would be hoping that the Hon. Minister of Government Services will be taking this 
offer up at the earliest occasion. 
 
The next issue of Next Year Country will be out in due course. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The debate continues on the Motion as amended. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1065 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out to the Minister that we have listened to 
this kind of justification for many many years and in no way can you justify a corrupt and a rotten 
political practice. When you compare the co-op movement – an economic movement in the consumer 
field — with a political party which has its specific purpose to elect you and put you on that bench, this 
is the height of nonsense, the height of a juvenile mind. That is all that I can say. 
 
We have listened to you, stand up in this House for years and years and justify this position. I only say 
to you when that Conflict of Interest White Paper is discussed, I hope that then you will sit down and 
discuss your Service Printers. 
 
MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, I shall be very brief. I must agree with my colleagues that I found it very 
disgusting the comments of the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor), a Minister — and I use the 
term minister in a clerical sense tonight – to suggest that the co-op movement is part of the NDP. If he 
had thought of the co-ops in the terms of being co-ops in the name of the NDP then it would be a corrupt 
practice if the Government bought all their supplies from the co-ops. But thank heavens, the co-op 
movement in Saskatchewan today, under extreme pressure is trying to defy the attempts of the NDP 
Government to make them a part of their political organization. 
 
The Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) in his comments was not exactly correct. I don't know 
whether he was deliberately trying to mislead the House or not. He said that Service Printers was owned 
by 40,000 people. These 40,000 people have one share apiece probably. I think that he will agree with 
me that the majority of shares in Service Printing are held by the NDP, they are not held by individuals, 
and he knows that better than I do, because he is probably one of those Members who is holding shares 
at this particular time. He knows very well that the majority of shares in Service Printers are not held by 
individual NDP members throughout the province, they are held by the NDP and that is what makes this 
such a corrupt Government to get the taxpayers' money and channel it into their own political party for 
their own political benefit. 
 
I am glad that we are getting the information that we have, but all the information that you provide in the 
world will not overcome this corrupt practice which you have fallen into and it appears that you are not 
prepared to mend your ways. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca) for 
Return No. 70 showing: 
 
All payments made to the newspaper, the "Commonwealth" by the Government or any of its agencies or 
Crown Corporations from July 1, 1971 to November 30, 1973. 
 
And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Boldt; 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1066 

That the words "November 30, 1973" in the third line be deleted and the words "February 25, 
1974" be substituted therefore. 

 
HON. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to offer a 
sub amendment which will give the information that the Member is seeking and additional information 
as well, as I know that he will be interested in additional information. The subamendment that I wish to 
offer to this motion is: 
 

All payments made for the fiscal years •1971-72, 1972-73, 1973-74 to date, for advertisements 
by the Government or any of its agencies or Crown Corporations to (a) each Saskatchewan 
newspaper having greater than 10,000 circulation; (b) all other newspapers with a circulation of 
10,000 or less. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — The question before the House on Order for Return No. 70 which was moved by 
the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) seconded by the Member for Rosetown (Mr. Loken) to which an 
amendment had been offered by the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) seconded by the Member for 
Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). 
 
Now the subamendment which is now offered by the Minister of Government Services, seconded by the 
Member for Natural Resources (Mr. Kowalchuk) should pertain to the amendment because it is a 
subamendment. But this proposed subamendment seeks to amend the main motion. It does not deal with 
the amendment which is on our paper, so I have to rule the subamendment out of order. 
 
The amendment agreed to. 
 
The debate continues on the motion as amended. 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a second 
amendment to the motion. 
 
That al the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

All payments made for the fiscal years 1971-72, 1972-73, 1973-74 to date, for advertisements by 
the Government or any of its agencies or Crown Corporations to: (a) each Saskatchewan 
newspaper having greater than 10,000 circulation; (b) all other newspapers with a circulation of 
10,000 or less. 

 
I so move, seconded by Mr. Bowerman. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I want to just make a comment and bring something 
to the attention of the House and the Attorney General in particular as Minister in charge of SGIO, to 
indicate how insidious the Commonwealth is in its influence on political 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1067 

patronage in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Commonwealth, each year, writes a letter to all SGIO agents and my colleague the Member for 
Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) is an SGIO agent; Mr. Whelan has received this kind of letter, 1 presume, 
when he was an SGIO agent. I would be glad to submit the letter but I don't have it with me this 
evening, to the Attorney General. It was given to me by an SGIO agent in the Province of 
Saskatchewan.] 
 
He said I am afraid not to take an advertisement in the Commonwealth because at the will of the NDP, 
which owns the Commonwealth, my livelihood and my agency can be cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore this particular SGIO agent sent an advertisement to the Commonwealth against 
his will, against his political philosophy; it cost him money to support something because he was afraid 
of me political implications if lie did not do so. This is another example. Here we have the Government 
of Saskatchewan advertising in the Commonwealth, their own political newspaper, out of the taxpayers' 
funds. I gave you another example of blackmail of the Commonwealth of people who have agencies and 
who make their living because of the wishes or the power of the decision of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
1 just point this out and I would hope, once again, that backbencher Members, if the Cabinet won't do it, 
will point out to the Government that this is a conflict of interest and a very serious conflict of interest. 
In fact it smells of corruption and that they will urge the Government and the Treasury benches, the 
Premier and the Attorney General, who is the dispenser of .justice in the Province of Saskatchewan, that 
this is a foul practice and ask that the Attorney General and the Treasury benches prevent the 
Government of Saskatchewan placing advertisements in their own political newspaper for their own 
political benefit. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard today many funny 
statements during the course of the debates on these Motions for Returns but 1 must frankly say that one 
of the silliest was the statement from the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). 
 
The business of agents being cancelled because of political operations of this nature, I am afraid that he 
is thinking of the good old days when the Liberal Members were in power. I don't think that the Member 
seriously suggests this. I would certainly be pleased to receive any evidence that the agent refused to 
advertise in the Commonwealth. I should like, for example, to ask when the Member for Meadow Lake 
advertised in the Commonwealth and it is my belief that he still has his agency. 
 
I can tell you one thing, that between 1964 and 1971, you talk about conflict, you talk about corruption 
in the highest places, I could name you at least one or two agents right in this room who were cancelled 
summarily without any reason by you in the present Opposition. They weren't even asked to advertise in 
the Liberal paper. 
 
I really say to you that this is one of these difficult operations to get into. The Hon. Member for 
Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1068 

in another debate referred to the question of politicians and the image of politicians and I agree with the 
comments that he made. But you know, to suggest that because the Commonwealth writes a letter of 
invitation to agents and he refused to advertise in the Commonwealth that his agency is going to be 
cancelled is absolute nonsense. Well, it's absolute nonsense because the facts simply belie that. All that I 
say is that I even hate getting dragged into the debate, because I can show you memo after memo during 
your administration when you cancel- led agents/period. You didn't even give them a chance to advertise 
in the magazine "The Liberal". If they had had a chance to advertise in "The Liberal" maybe they would 
have done that to save their livelihood. We didn't raise this issue of cancellation of agencies, and for you 
now to raise the red herring in this debate, I say it does not really behoove the Hon. Member who I think 
generally has a solid contribution to make to the House. On this one, he is way off base. 
 
MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK: (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I haven't participated in any debate since we 
met here last month, but seeing that we are now on the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office 
agency I want to comment briefly. In respect to the Commonwealth writing letters to SGIO agents 
soliciting ads in the Commonwealth I want to say this. A number of years ago when I was sitting on the 
other side of the House and the Hon. Member, the then Minister of Highways who was in charge of the 
SGIO tabled the annual report for SGIO and the revenues for that fiscal year were the highest ever 
recorded by the Crown Corporation. I rose in the House to question the increase of the rates for fire. 
SGIO rates had been increased in all the small urban and rural communities. I was accused because I 
had a relative who was an agent that I was given wrong information. The Minister got up on the floor of 
this House and stated that the agency at Krydor was already cancelled as of that day. This is the 
treatment that we got. 
 
The Minister, the Deputy Premier has just risen and asked the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
Coupland) if he has ever put an ad in the Commonwealth. He hasn't. His agency has never been 
threatened. We've been the government since 1971. I mentioned what went on when the Hon. Members 
opposite were on this side of the House. 
 
Just by association or by having a relative as an SGIO agent the agencies were cancelled. The then 
Minister of Highways did cancel SGIO agencies in this manner. 
 
I don't think that the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) has been threatened because he didn't 
advertise in the Commonwealth. 
 
MR. M. FEDUNIAK: (Turtleford): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I must be pretty small and not seen. I 
tried quite a few times, finally got up here to be recognized. I wasn't going to say anything about this but 
when I listen to the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) get up and tell us a bunch of bunk and 
untruths which he always does. I'm not a bit surprised. This is his theory. When he talks about conflict 
of interest I think I should relate that he should probably say conflict of truth would be more appropriate. 
But anyway when the Saskatchewan Government or the CCF Government brought in the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, it was away back in 1945. I believe I was the first person appointed, 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1069 

or not the first but one of the first at that time, and I sold insurance for the Saskatchewan Government 
for years. About 10 — 12 years ago I sold my insurance business to my company, incorporated 
company in Glaslyn, and all these years, now that's 28 years of continuous service to the people in our 
community there, where I come from, where I live. I've never been asked by the Commonwealth to 
advertise, I've never advertised in the Commonwealth relating to the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance for 28 years and the insurance has never been cancelled. I don't know, I think they couldn't see 
me, I'm so small and so quiet that they kind of by-passed me, there is a lot of bush around that north 
country and they never got that far. 
 
However, I just thought that I would get up and put the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 
straight, because I think this House and the Members on this side should have an apology from the 
Member. If he has any integrity about his own conscience, he should get up and apologize for the 
untruths that he has been conducting and saying every time he gets up. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. MATSALLA: (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald) indicating that there is a conflict of interest with respect to the Commonwealth asking 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance Agents to advertise I certainly can't see anything wrong with any 
newspaper asking anybody to advertise in their paper. There's absolutely nothing wrong with that and 
when he goes on to say that in the event that they don't advertise that there is a possibility of their 
agency being cancelled, I want to say this, that this is just imagination on the part of the Member for 
Milestone. This isn't the first time that his imagination has gone wild. When he talks about cancellation 
of agency contracts, I should like to relate to him that I have been an agent with the SGIO. I was 
appointed in 1956. In 1965 on May 2nd I went to the post office to get my mail. I pick up this mail and 
there's a registered letter and I've already thought to myself, well this must be it. The axe must be falling. 
I got back into the office, I opened this letter and my agency was cancelled, not the day I got the letter, 
but the day before that, on May 1st. 
 
Now when you talk about cancellation of agency contracts you take a look at your record. It's very 
shameful. 
 
This is the record of the people across the way and you certainly haven't got any room to speak about 
cancellation of agency contracts. 
 
MR. D. BOLDT: (Rosthern): — I just wonder what the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) will say 
after the debate for the last half hour, having made a comment about an hour ago that the debate had 
reached a high level here tonight, but I don't know what he would say to what has happened the last half 
hour. 
 
I will admit that agents were cancelled when I was in charge of SGIO. There was nobody cancelled 
because I wanted them cancelled, the local people wanted them cancelled. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1070 

MR. BOLDT: — Incompetent. I didn't know that seller from Adam. I didn't know whether he was a 
Liberal or who he was. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOLDT: — I ask no pardons, but I want to tell you one thing that you overlooked. We gave an 
agency to the now deceased Ross Brown after we were the government. He asked for it and we gave it 
to him. And we all know who Ross Brown was. He is not here to defend himself so I won't comment. 
 
The other thing that I should like to point out, is that during the election campaign you were trying to 
convince the people that they should vote for you, the Premier went on record that there would be 
nobody losing his job. Well, that hasn't panned out the way the Premier said it would. 
 
Let's take a look at the former Ross Thatcher. When Mr. Lewry, Moose Jaw, was defeated as the Mayor 
of Moose Jaw, I believe the Premier phoned him and offered him a job and he gave him a job and he 
was a political enemy, not a personal enemy, but a political enemy. I am certainly not going to stand up 
here and say that I didn't cancel out any agents, I sure did. I'm going to be honest about it. Every one that 
was cancelled, they were asked for by the local people in that area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOLDT: — Sure they were Liberals. I don't think the NDP bothered me half as much as the 
Liberals did. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOLDT: — Sure, and I'm going to tell you that the Liberals aren't bothering you half as much, Mr. 
Romanow, as the NDP are. 
 
I'm telling you who is bothering the Minister of Highways. They are not Liberals. They are the NDP. 
The former Minister, Mr. Willis told me personally in this House that, well, we never have any trouble 
from the Liberals. The ones who are really pressuring us are the NDP. Where is the Minister of 
Highways (Mr. Kramer) today and I'd like to tell him I know politics. The Liberals don't bother you; it's 
your friends that are bothering you. That's a fact of life and if a back- bencher hasn't been a Minister of 
the Crown, he'll find that out very very soon if he should move to the front benches. 
 
This is not the argument. I have never denied that I haven't cancelled out agencies. I took the position 
that you are either for or against and if you're against, by gosh it will be a little tough. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOLDT: — I make no apologies for it. 
 
I got my criticism for it, I took that action, I stuck my neck out and I accepted criticism for it. 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1071 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 
The Member who is speaking has not related one word to the item that's before us at this time and I 
wonder if you could just bring him back to order. 
 
MR. BOLDT: — Mr. Speaker, we have roamed all over SGIO and I’m sure that I’m out of order, so 
were others, so I'll just sit down. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, near! 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, it's nice to see one Member who sits 
to your left at least attempting to be honest. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Hon. Member moved this amendment. He cannot speak again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I believe I moved an amendment to 
the amended motion and I did not at that time exercise my privilege to speak and I’m wondering 
whether or not because of moving that motion to the amended motion whether I do not retain the right to 
speak in the debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — My records show that it was the Minister of Government Services (Mr. 
Brockelbank) who moved the amendment to a motion when there was already an amendment there and 
he was out of order. But the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) seconded by the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) moved the amendment which is now my hand. The Minister spoke at 
that time so he has exercised his right to speak on this motion. 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER: (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it, appears that the Cabinet Ministers opposite 
are going to have to get some help. They may have to bring back some of the Members who are touring 
Canada or where ever they are touring. They seem to be pretty badly disorganized tonight. 
 
We have been getting away from the question, the actual question that we have here is, did the 
Commonwealth send a letter to insurance agents asking them to advertise in the Commonwealth? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The question before the House is for Order for Return No. 70 as amended. It’s not 
the question of insurance agents. That was a matter brought in by the Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald). The matter before us is Motion for Return No. 70. 
 
MR. GARDNER: — The question is, Mr. Speaker, why didn’t they write to grocery stores, or cafes, or 
garages, or some other people rather than writing only to the people that are completely under their 
control. It is an obvious case of pressure and coercion 



 
March 5, 1974 
 

 
1072 

on a group of people that they have control over. They didn't bother writing to the garages in the 
province, or the cafes, the grocery stores or other people. They wrote to the SGIO agents who they were 
sure would be afraid to not support the NDP. This is the question we are asking, if they did send the 
letter. Nobody has denied that the letter has been sent out and this is really what we are concerned with. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The chair does not ask for that. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Since my amendment was out of order I assume that I am in order now to 
be able to speak on the present amendment. Assuming that 1 am in order, Mr. Speaker, I will say 
something about the amended motion that is before us which gives, not only the information that the 
Member sought, but more information. I think that everybody should be perfectly clear that all 
newspapers charge a rate for advertising that is based on their circulation. Therefore, any money that is 
paid to any newspaper in Saskatchewan for advertising purposes, whether they are declared Liberal 
newspaper or whether some other newspaper, is based on the rate of value received, that is, related 
directly to their circulation. The information that will be given here will show that the advertising that is 
paid for is related, in one newspaper, the same as it is in any other newspaper. It s for value received for 
the advertising that was done by that newspaper. I see nothing wrong with it, since it is based on 
circulation and henceforth the province gets the value, it the readers read it, regardless of what 
newspaper it is in, whether it is the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, which declares itself to have a Liberal 
Editorial page, hence a Liberal paper or the Regina Leader-Post which is owned by the same company 
and declares itself to be a Liberal newspaper. Therefore the information will be provided and I think it’s 
false for the Members to attempt to judge at this time, what the figures will show, until the figures are 
before them. 
 
MR. D. F. Mac DONALD: (Moose Jaw North): — I just like to say that I, well, I think that would 
likely be in order, another amendment would likely be in order, but I’ll leave that up to the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 
 
I don't know about the discussions made as to whether threats were made to or letters sent out in order to 
get advertising, that this somehow made a threat. I don t know about this. I just wonder. In Moose Jaw I 
know that there was only one new agency or a transfer of agency made and that happened to be by the 
NDP defeated candidate, Mr. Gifco. As I understand, this is the only new agency given out in Moose 
Jaw and I'm sure this has got nothing to do with the political party. 
 
But the reason for the question being on the Order Paper is that I think we have a right to know just how 
much the Government is subsidizing the NDP paper. Now the point is that when the NDP makes their 
paper the Commonwealth they have certain expenses to be met to print this paper and it appears to us on 
this side of the House that they decide how much the expenses are going to be, then they divide this up 
amongst the different departments of government, whether it is the Department of Municipal Affairs, 
Natural Resources or Crown Corporations, 



 
March 5, 1974 

 

 
1073 

they decide how much money they are going to need to put out their Commonwealth paper. They just 
tap the Minister responsible for the different Crown Corporations and so on, they tap him on the 
shoulder and say, we would just like to have a little advertisement to help defray the costs of the 
Commonwealth. 
 
We on this side of the House want to know how much in one year the Commonwealth is subsidized by 
the Government in power. This is important to us. We have no desire whatever to know about how much 
money is going to the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the Leader-Post . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . the Moose Jaw . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well, this is a different question all together. We are asking how much the 
Government is subsidizing the NDP. The Commonwealth, a paper set up as a business, it is set up for 
political propaganda. We want to know how much the people of Saskatchewan are paying to keep 
political propaganda going out. The Crown Corporations of Saskatchewan, the departments of 
government are subsidizing political propaganda. This is what we want to know. We don't want to know 
how much honest advertising is going out to the Leader-Post, the Times Herald, money that is based on 
good advertising principles. The rate is not based on circulation for the Commonwealth; it is based on 
how much is necessary to keep the Commonwealth going out. That is how the rate is determined. We 
have a right on this side of the House to know exactly how much the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
people of Saskatchewan are subsidizing the NDP. We have found out through Public Accounts how 
much the people of Saskatchewan are paying to the NDP through Service Printers. We have found this 
out and we will find out again. We are going to bring it to the attention of the Saskatchewan people, that 
this is a corrupt practice. It is just as corrupt a practice by sending advertisements to the Commonwealth. 
I would think that an amendment might be in order, if the Minister is so willing to give us all this extra 
information, on just how much government advertising is going into the Liberal paper. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . they won't take it because they don't publish regularly. 
 
MR. Mac DONALD: — Oh, we publish regularly. Mr. Speaker, may I call it 9:30? 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


