
























































Hansard: May 03, 1974


2901 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

64th Day 
Friday, May 3, 1974. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce through you to this 
House a group of students from the Annaheim School in my constituency. There are 23 Grade Five students 
who are accompanied here by their teacher, Orville Theisen, the Parish Priest, Father George Brodner, as 
well as a number of parents. I want to extend to them a welcome to the Legislature this morning. I know that 
they have a number of places that they will be visiting today and I am sure that they will enjoy their stay in 
Regina. 
 
I want to, on behalf of the Members, welcome them here and wish them a good day and a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, may I join with my colleague in 
welcoming the students from Annaheim. Anaheim is a little town, if I remember correctly, where I was born 
and raised. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Well, it's such a long time ago since I have been there. I certainly want to give a special 
welcome to Father George and I hope that the students and Father George will enjoy their stay here in the 
House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. GROSS (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I should like also to introduce 24 Grade Seven, Eight and 
Nine students. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Allen from Bateman. I trust they will have an 
informative morning and I look forward to meeting them later this morning. I believe they are seated in the 
Speaker's Gallery. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether it is Annaheim or 
Bateman which is the separate school but I, on behalf of the Catholic Church and the Liberal Party, should 
certainly like to welcome them all here. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

INCREASE IN RENT AT PIONEER VILLAGE 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2902 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question I 
wish to direct to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
The Minister is aware, I believe, that there have been a drastic increase in the rentals to be paid by residents 
of the Regina Pioneer Village. I believe some people will be paying as much as $140 more each month. The 
Minister announced yesterday, at least according to a press report, that those people at Pioneer Village who 
receive social aid will merely have the increase absorbed by increased assistance. However, I am sure the 
Minister is aware as well, that there are many people at Regina Pioneer Village who don't receive social aid 
but are probably just on the borderline and do not get it a this time. 
 
In view of this, my question is, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister and the Government prepared to look at the 
situation and perhaps arrange for a further subsidy to Regina Pioneer Village to offset this drastic increase in 
rent? 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, the board of Pioneer Village is the 
authority responsible for establishing rates. The Department of Social Services is more than happy to assist 
those who are in need of assistance and there are some, quite frankly, who are not receiving assistance at the 
present time, but because of the increased rate may need that assistance and certainly to them the assistance 
will be provided. 
 

INCREASE IN COST OF LIVING 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
Living costs have increased in Saskatchewan 8.1 per cent in the last year and last month Regina and 
Saskatoon had the third highest increase in Canada, in food costs, housing components, transportation, all 
factors in which the Provincial Government is involved. 
 
I am wondering if the Minister would give consideration to a Prices Review Board to be established by the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the first priority of investigation be Intercontinental Packers which is 
owned by the Government of Saskatchewan and its effect on food prices in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I think first of all, Mr. Speaker, there 
needs to be a point of clarification, in that Intercontinental Packers is not owned by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The Government of Saskatchewan is involved in Intercontinental Packers to the extent — if 
the Members will be orderly I will continue my answer — of 45 per cent. There have been good reasons 
given for that particular decision when it was made. 
 
We have not considered establishing a Prices Review Board in Saskatchewan. There is a National Prices 
Review Board. We don't see a need for establishing a duplication of Prices Review Boards throughout the 
country in each individual province. As said in this House before if we are going effectively to tackle 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2903 

the issue of inflation we have to have some concrete action that is taken at the national level because the 
influences that cause inflation are national as well as international. I have said that before and we continue to 
maintain that position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of a supplementary, I wonder if the Minister is aware of a statement made by the 
now Premier, in Melville, on June 11, 1971, when he said the only way to fight inflation was to introduce 
price controls and if elected he would set up a Prices Review Board to protect all the consumers from 
unwarranted price hikes. Then on June 14, in Swift Current, the Hon. Premier said the Saskatchewan NDP 
Government would impose selective and wage controls if inflation continued and if Ottawa failed to act. So 
there is every indication that the Government of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! We can't have a statement, the Member can ask a question. 
 
MR. LANE: — I am going to ask the reason of the Minister why he is either being shafted by statements by 
the Premier or there has been a complete reversal of NDP promises and policies since the election of June, 
1971? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, anybody of fair mind who wants to examine those commitments 
and how they have been acted upon will know that out of 139 commitments made, 133 of them have either 
been fully carried out or are in the process of partial completion. And for the Member to stand up and say 
that we have not kept our commitments to the people of Saskatchewan is totally erroneous. 
 
MR. LANE: — Can't you make it 134 and put up a Prices Review Board? 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 — EQUAL PARTNERSHIP IN MARRIAGE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Resolution by Mr. Malone: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to forthwith introduce legislation 
to recognize the concept of equal partnership in marriage so that the contribution of each 
spouse to the marriage partnership 

 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2904 

may be acknowledged and that, upon the dissolution of the marriage, each will have a right to 
an equal share in the assets accumulated during marriage otherwise than by gift or 
inheritance received by either spouse from outside sources. 

 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the Member rose so quickly that I 
didn't get a chance. But let me just simply say this, Mr. Speaker. I have delivered my comments with respect 
to this motion. I am going to be introducing an amendment to the motion. Quite frankly, it was my belief that 
the motion should not go to a vote in its present suggested form. I stated, I thought, some comprehensive 
reasons for that. The implications with respect to the other aspects of the division of marital property; the 
questions with respect to alimony; questions of what happens if the wife received after marriage by way of a 
bequest a substantial part of her family's estate — does that go into part of the pot for division on an equal 
basis. I have also outlined to the Members why I felt that we need to have a thorough review of the situation. 
 
The Members will know that the Province of Ontario has been studying it for the past, I would say, several 
years and has not yet come up with any amendments or with any legislation in this area. Neither has the 
Federal Law Reform Commission. The problem is fraught with many difficulties. I believe that many of the 
Members on the opposite side believe that the nature of the problem is one that cannot be dealt with 
superficially. 
 
The Members will also know that we tabled for first reading yesterday a proposed amendment to The 
Married Women's Property Act which in many ways is itself a superficial amendment and that's why we 
have not pursued it as an alternative to become law. The amendment that we tabled does not say that it is a 
straight question of economic equality in marriage but it certainly allows a judge upon consideration of all 
circumstances to so rule, given a particular case, given the facts of any particular circumstance. The 
important thing is we hope that the amendment will provoke discussion, criticisms and comments from 
women's groups, other organizations, from lawyers, from the bench and from the Law Reform Commission. 
 
I have already told the Members of the House, and I repeat to the province, the Law Reform Commission has 
been asked by myself to look at this problem and we are so doing. I am led to believe that there is a good 
possibility that the Commission will hold two or three public hearings in the course of the summer and fall in 
their consideration of legislation and possible amendments. I think the result will be when we reconvene 
next year, a set of amendments. I hope if everything works out well, that it will be not only meaningful for 
women, today's women, but practical, having in mind all the various implications which this type of a drastic 
change in the law would have. 
 
Let me say that to a large extent the law with respect to married women's rights, is really outdated. It has 
been built up over years and centuries by now outdated statutes and outdated concepts, and without being 
critical of the judiciary as they only seek to interpret those laws embedded by precedent in their decisions. 
We are looking here at a revolution, if you will, in thinking of the position of a woman in marriage and the 
position of her in terms of economic status in case of a 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2905 

marriage breakup. We are not going to cure it with the simple passage of an amendment either to The 
Married Women's Property Act or by a simple passage of a motion on Private Members before this House. I 
think this deserves very careful consideration by all the Members of this Legislature and all the people of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that may I repeat again my own personal view that I support the basic thrust of the Hon. 
Member's resolution, the basic concept of economic partnership. I should like to see the law reflect that. I 
believe that my Department officials, in concert with the Law Reform Commission and others, sooner or 
later will be able to draft meaningful laws to bring about this objective. In the meantime I think the best 
course for all of us to take is as indicated in this proposed amendment which I will now move, Mr. Speaker, 
seconded by the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek): 
 

That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 

 
Commends the Government of Saskatchewan for referring the question of married women's 
property rights to the Saskatchewan Law Reform Commission with a view towards 
introducing legislation to recognize the concept of equal partnership in marriage as soon as 
possible. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment concurrently. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, we are a little surprised at the Government having had months 
to consider this matter and still doesn't have a formal resolution or an amendment prepared. We saw an 
example of what happens when the Attorney General tries to throw something together at the last minute, it 
makes it very difficult for the Speaker. 
 
I don't know how much more study the Attorney General wants on this very pressing problem. He has 
referred to the Ontario Law Reform Commission and the Canadian Law Reform Commission and the 
Saskatchewan Law Reform Commission and the Bill that he tabled in the Legislature for debate the other 
day. All that the Attorney General wants to do on this Bill and his amendment proves that he wants to study 
this problem and he does not want to act on the problem. He has had months to act, he has had months to 
assess, the Premier says 'years'. I should like to refer the Premier to the Royal Commission on the Status of 
Women and that was not all that long ago, the Premier may recall, that the suggestion came in and the words 
of the amendment by the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) who referred to the Royal Commission on the 
Status of Women. It is very interesting that the Attorney General's approach indicates a complete and utter 
lack of confidence in the Royal Commission on the Status of Women and that is what he is asking the 
Members of the House to do. He is asking us to insult the Royal Commission on the Status of Women who 
did study the problem already and have made this very strong, very sincere and, I think, very wise 
recommendation. This particular resolution was taken from the recommendations of the Royal Commission 
on the Status of Women. The study has already been done. It is merely an 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2906 

avoidance of the issue and that is what the Government opposite is guilty of by having another study and 
having a White Paper for discussion. 
 
Again, with the amendment that the Attorney General has proposed, we are in fact insulting the competence 
of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women. We are saying that they are incompetent and I urge the 
Members of this House to vote in favor of the Motion and against the amendment and urge action on the part 
of the Government and not to postpone the issue by further study. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a short comment. I am not a 
lawyer and I don't want to enter into the competition. 
 
I want to draw to the attention of the House that there is nothing in the Act to cover total catastrophe. In the 
case where you have an accident where the family is completely wiped out, it is deemed that the wife, if she 
is younger, died last and, therefore, everything that is inherited goes to the descendant of the wife's relations, 
which is totally unfair. Lawyers are drawing up wills and leaving that out and not even mentioning it, 
therefore, I think the Act should start clearing some of these things up. It would be very important when the 
Law Reform Commission is making their study that they look into that aspect of the situation. We have total 
catastrophes every now and then with aeroplane crashes and our automobile accidents and I don't think it is 
fair for one side of the family to inherit and the other side be denied. If there is no will and even if there is a 
will, if the total catastrophe area is not covered in the will you are faced with the same problem. 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Kinistino may not 
be a lawyer but he certainly zeroed in on a point rather clearly. His point is exactly and precisely well taken. 
We run into that problem frequently in insurance. What happens is, if a husband buys $50,000 worth of 
insurance and makes it all payable to his wife and later the two of them are killed in an automobile accident, 
she lives for five minutes after he lives, and you can prove it, it all goes to her and passes from her to her 
family entirely. And his family which may well have spent a lot of money putting him through university 
does not get one cent. So this whole area, quite frankly, needs a lot of examination and of course it needs 
attention from the lawyers. 
 
Speaking to the Resolution itself, the problem we have is that in our zeal to bring equality and equity to the 
ladies in our society we may well be doing men a definite and serious injustice. I believe the debate has two 
parts. The first part is that the law should recognize the contribution of women to the marriage, it may be a 
large contribution, it may be a small contribution, but the law should recognize it. That does not necessarily 
mean that there will be an equal distribution. It may mean that the wife should get more than half. In some 
cases the wife should get less than half. If you look at the contribution of the two parties to the marriage, 
during the marriage and judge it fairly, then I think justice will be done. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2907 

But we cannot do that without having some recognition of all the various possibilities. 
 
For example, are we going to eliminate alimony? That is, are women going to be entitled to receive half the 
property and complete property rights and still have rights to alimony and support. Are women going to have 
full and complete property rights and still have homestead rights? As you all know women have homestead 
rights, men do not. Now in the provinces like Manitoba The Dower Act, acts equally for both the husband 
and the wife. But that is not the case in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan, it is a completely one-sided affair, 
the wife has homestead rights and the husband does not. If we are to give the wife complete equality as to 
property rights and if this resolution were carried out, it would amount virtually to community of property. If 
we were to do that and leave with women all the alimony, homestead and other rights that they now have, it 
does seem to me we might well have tilted the pendulum too far in the other direction. More than that, 
however, I don't think it will want to go to community of property in place of alimony rights. Let's suppose 
you have a couple married, say 20 year olds. The husband is at university and the wife is working. So she 
puts him through university and at age 25 or 28 he become a lawyer — I had better pick a better example, 
somebody that makes money — let's suppose he becomes a teacher or a doctor, so at age 27 you have the 
husband, who has graduated from university, he has been put through university by the wife, but they have 
no property at all. But then he has a tremendous income making potential. If they were suddenly to separate 
or become divorced, community of property and sharing of property is of no value to her. Surely women 
don't want to give up some of the traditional legal rights they do have. I agree that this matter is a very 
complicated one. 
 
I support the spirit of the motion by the Hon. Member for Lakeview. I am not sure that the amendment isn't 
out of order, having regard to the fact there is virtually an identical one already on the Order Paper. For that 
reason I was a little disappointed to see the Bill come in, because it is too narrow, it has to be examined by 
the Law Reform Commission because it is a very broad field. I support the intention of the Hon. Member for 
Lakeview. I am a little reluctant to congratulate the Government. Therefore, I will perhaps vote for the 
amendment with some regret. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I'll be very brief. I should like to repeat some of 
the things I said earlier when I moved this Resolution. I believe at that time I acknowledged that the problem 
was one that would take a good deal of work to solve. A review of my remarks I think will indicate to the 
Attorney General that I acknowledged there was a great deal of difficultly, that we were talking about such 
fields of law as alimony, dependents' relief applications, land holding, Homestead Acts and so on. Really the 
purpose of bringing in the Resolution was to indicate to the Government that we were dissatisfied that they 
had done nothing in view of the Rathwell and Murdoch cases. I think the resolution may have been effective 
in that it has moved the Government to take some steps at least to review the law so far as it respects to 
women's rights. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2908 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment brought in by the Attorney General, I believe yesterday, to The 
Married Women's Property Act in my view does not begin to come to grips with the problem. It is certainly 
not broad enough, in fact it does not incorporate the basic principles that were contained in my resolution 
which, as you are aware, is in the same wording as the recommendations by the Royal Commission on the 
Status of Women. With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am pleased to see that the Government 
is going to take some steps between now and the next session to bring about the proper legislation to cure 
this injustice. I am afraid I could not vote for the amendment, because I don't think the Government can be 
commended at this stage for doing anything. They have obviously been embarrassed into moving, as a result 
of this resolution. I trust that the Law Reform Commission and the Attorney General's Department will get to 
work immediately and that at the next session we'll have proper legislation before us to be considered and to 
be voted on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

FIRST REPORT OF THE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND PRINTING 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. McIsaac that: The First Report 
of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be now received. 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I made a few remarks with respect 
to the problems in Northern Saskatchewan, the fact that the Government of Saskatchewan had seen fit to 
give a friendly contract to a company, a consortium of three companies with a total capitalization of $7 for 
the three corporations, and the mess that that brought to the northern people, the number of people in 
northern Saskatchewan who are going to suffer injury and financial loss through the manipulations of the 
Government. The fact that the Government had indicated a total aloofness from this Delta Holdings 
operation because they were to have no money involved in it at all and they were to come into the picture 
after the two apartments and the 30 houses were constructed and rent them for the Government. Then we 
discover later on that the Government's commitment is in excess of $800,000. We reviewed the facts that 
there were buckets of money, some half million dollars sitting around in baskets and boxes without properly 
being handled. We observe that there was a Task Force of some 14 people who had to descend on the North 
to try to straighten that matter out. We also observe that in one sub-office alone it appears that some 
$100,000 may be overpaid in social assistance and welfare payments. Today I should like to deal with one 
other aspect of the Public Accounts Committee and that is what is really happening in the Land Bank. 
 
I have two or three comments to make. The first is that 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2909 

the Land Bank is not at all responsive to the needs of the people and does, in fact, carry out the intention of 
the Land Bank as expressed by the Opposition far better than the statements of the Government. I think if 
you look at the transcripts commencing with that of March 28th you will discover that the Land Bank is out 
to buy land. It is not intended to buy land at fair prices, for the Commission Chairman admitted that the same 
quality of land identically in one area may receive a higher price than the same quality of land in some other 
area, despite the fact that they are identical, the difference being based entirely upon the difference in 
neighborhood prices. So if the prices in area No. 1 are higher, the Land Bank is prepared to pay more money 
for land in that area. If area number 2 has prices at recent sales of lower value, then the Land Bank drops 
down to the lower value. In each case the Land Bank officers in the Land Bank match the local prices or 
outbid local farmers. Just in case there is any question about that I refer to the statement of the Chairman of 
the Commission on page 221, in the transcript. It says: 
 

We still base our price on local sales, that is, the average of the local sales. Now if the next 
door neighbor wants to pay the top of those local sales we'll outbid him naturally. 

 
Now what is happening is that the Land Bank then isn't attempting to provide a place to sell and, if there are 
no other sales available which is what we were told when this was presented to us. They are an authority that 
wants to buy land and if it has to do so, it will outbid local farmers in accordance with the testimony of the 
Chairman before the Public Accounts committee. So that I think puts the lie to some of the remarks made in 
this House by those who so strongly support the Land Bank for the social good and economic good it is to do 
to the farmers. 
 
In fact there are cases that have been brought to the attention of the MLAs where the Land Bank has outbid 
local farmers and have, therefore, done no good for that local area. 
 
Secondly, the Land Bank is not responsive for what happens in the area. What happens is that they have 
shown that they do not consider other departments nor do they make any effort to determine if a farmer can 
sell to someone else. They admitted that their counselling service is not intended to help the farmer at all. 
The counselling service is a service to the Commission and not to the vendor. On page 22, Mr. Moxley, the 
vice-chairman said this; that it is not intended to show the farmer can get the most money for his land, not at 
all, that counselling service is intended to show the farmers how they can deal with the Commission. I quote 
Mr. Moxley on page 222. There are three questions. 
 

Mr. MacLeod: Well the counselling service intends to show the farmer how they can deal 
with the Commission. Is that correct? It is not a service intended to obtain the maximum 
price for the farmer? 

 
Mr. Moxley: You mean how to dispose of his land for the maximum prices? Is that what you 
are suggesting? 

 
Mr. MacLeod: Yes. 

 
Mr. Moxley: No, it isn't. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2910 

It isn't intended, according to Mr. Moxley, to show the farmer how he can dispose of his land for the 
maximum price. It is solely intended to show how the farmer can sell to the Commission. It is not intended, 
however, as a service to the farmer as it would be if the farmer were able to get a better price as a result of 
these counselling services. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, I regret to say that the Land Bank Commission has not served the people of 
Saskatchewan in the way the speeches in this House would have us believe, unless you listen to the speeches 
of the Opposition. We said and we say again, it is a scheme and I don't like the word "scheme", it is a 
program by the Government of Saskatchewan to go forth and purchase land. They will pay more in one area 
if they have to outbid the local farmers for that land, they will pay less in another area regardless of the value 
of the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on at some length on this aspect. I don't propose to do so. I cannot help but remark, 
however, on how totally the Land Bank isolates itself and its files from reality. 
 
On Page 227 it became obvious to us how totally incurious the Land Bank seemed to be with respect to local 
sales. They deliberately kept off their files any records that did not reflect properly on the Land Bank. I might 
also say that they denied us information with respect to sales. A resolution was put before the Committee 
asking that the third and every 40th file thereafter be presented to the Committee for examination of their 
procedures. That was outvoted. The Government Members refused to accept that. They turned us down and 
we were unable to get that information. 
 
It also became apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the records that the Annual Report of the Land Bank Commission 
of which the Hon. Minister is so proud, are inaccurate. They acknowledged that the number of new units 
shown in the Report couldn't possibly reflect any accuracy at all, because whether land was taken, bought 
from a farmer, and added to someone else's holdings, thereby not creating a new farmer it nevertheless 
showed up on the Land Bank records as a new unit. Well, it may be a new person and a new lease, with 
whom the Land Bank Commission is dealing, but it isn't a new farming unit. The fact of the matter is, a 
careful examination of the transcript will cast considerable doubt on whether there is one single new unit in 
Saskatchewan. It is very possible that the effect of the Land Bank has not increased the number of farmers, 
by one. 
 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, while I have grave doubts about some of the workings of the Public Accounts 
Committee due to the denial of information from the Government Members, nonetheless I think it has served 
this purpose. It allows us to examine the officers of the departments directly. We frequently get more candid 
answers when we are asking the Minister, quite apart from asking the people who do the work and therefore 
usually know more about. It. So it has served that purpose. I think we have received a lot of information 
from the Public Accounts Committee that we would not have got in the House in questioning the Ministers. 
 
Secondly, it shows how foolish are some of the remarks made by Members of the House. The Hon. Member 
for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway), I am sure with great conscientiousness said 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2911 

that his Welfare Committee went to the North and found absolutely nothing wrong. Now that is the kind of 
remark that we got when he was speaking on that Welfare Committee. They went to the North of 
Saskatchewan and found nothing wrong. The fact of the matter is, that when you have $500,000 in money 
tucked in boxes and in Buffalo Narrows alone you have overpayments of welfare by more than $100,000, 
you wonder if the Members are just closing their eyes or if they actually believe totally what the Ministers 
tell them. Even the Ministers, I am sure, don't know for certain. I am not suggesting in any way that the Hon. 
Member for Hanley lied in the House, not in the least. I am suggesting that you wander all around northern 
Saskatchewan unless you have the right to inspect the documents, unless you have the right to examine 
people, fully, freely, without fetters you are not going to find anything wrong. You may have a great deal of 
suspicion, but unless you have the right to examine fully you aren't going to find anything. Listening to 
people submit briefs to a committee is not the way to examine into the operations of the Department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these brief words, I want to suggest that I have enjoyed sitting on this Committee; I have 
enjoyed the work of all other Members of the Committee and I have enjoyed the little battles I had with the 
Minister and others. Particularly I cannot help, as I say, complimenting the hon. vice-chairman for the 
contribution he continuously makes and the chairman to the workings of the Committee. For the reasons 
indicated by the hon. Chairman of the committee, because the recommendations were so watered down by 
the Government majority, they barely gave a slap on the wrist to the Government, and because it makes a 
mockery of the recommendation procedure, consequently, I support the Resolution that the report be 
received. I could not, of course, support any Resolution that it be concurred in. 
 
HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, in my comments on 
receiving the Report from the Committee on Public Accounts and Printing, I wish to echo the comments of 
the chairman when he presented the Report and support him in the suggestion that the auditor, the 
comptroller, departmental people and staffs be given a vote of thanks by the Public Accounts and Printing 
Committee for their co-operation while working with the Committee and appearing before the Committee. 
 
I think it is worth noting at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the time consumed by the Public Accounts and 
Printing Committee seems to be extending itself with each passing year. In 1972 there were six meetings; in 
1973 where were 10 meetings; in 1974 you will recall the chairman reported there were 18 meetings. My 
recognition of this particular fact is to indicate that Members of the Committee have taken the general 
attitude that as much time should be used by the Public Accounts Committee as is adequate to carry out their 
investigations. 
 
It should be noted in passing, that the Government majority on the Committee in no way attempted to restrict 
the time that was consumed by the Committee nor was there any serious indication at any time that it was 
their intent to compress the amount of time allowed to the Opposition Members on the Committee. 
 
I note that the Public Accounts for 1972-73 were laid on 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2912 

the table December 19, 1973, and the first meeting of the Committee was on March 8, 1974. 
 
During the meetings the members of the Committee availed themselves of the opportunity to ask dozens 
upon dozens of questions about Agriculture, Land Bank, Department of Northern Saskatchewan, Public 
Services Commission, Executive Council, Continuing Education and the Department of Public Health, as 
well as extensive questioning of the auditor, the comptroller and their staff. 
 
A check of the verbatim reports seems to indicate that 17 official motions for information were considered 
by the Committee. Of those, 13 were approved and four were rejected. I know, Mr. Speaker, this is contrary 
to the comments of the Hon. Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) who suggested, quote: 
 

Time after time resolutions were defeated. 
 
The opinion of the Member for Albert Park that time after time resolutions were defeated is false. I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Members of this House are becoming accustomed to the exaggerated comments of the 
Member for Albert Park and consequently are beginning to treat him accordingly. 
 
I invite the Members of the House, Mr. Speaker, to examine the verbatim report and satisfy themselves. This 
is the verbatim report here — that questions were asked and answered, that motions were presented, 
answered and passed and that the general conduct of the Committee was such as to carry out its 
responsibilities to the people of Saskatchewan and his Chamber. Mr. Speaker, later I will have more to say 
about some of the distortions attempted by the Member for Albert Park. 
 
It is fair to say, and I agree with the chairman, when he presented his report, that the Committee members 
were able to reach consensus on the report as presented by him on points one to eight and eleven to thirteen 
inclusive. The Committee's opinion on points number nine and ten was divided. 
 
Members of the House will recall, point number nine dealt with commitments made in excess of new 
unexpended appropriations and point number ten dealt with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I might say that the lack of unanimity became most apparent when the Committee began to deal with item 
number thirteen in the Provincial Auditor's report, wherein a table set out the commitments made by the 
departments and agencies of the Government in excess of net unexpended appropriations for the year under 
review. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that Members of the Opposition on the Public Accounts and Printing 
Committee treated that item in the auditor's report as an astounding new revelation which they thought 
should be treated accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the context of the verbatim report will show clearly, that the Opposition Members on the 
Public Accounts and Printing Committee intended to exploit the item politically to the fullest extent 
possible. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2913 

MR. BROCKELBANK: — You weren't there. I will say that the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 
was not there, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to put this in its proper perspective. In the first place, I agree the 
provincial auditor has every right, yes, a responsibility to bring to the attention of the Public Accounts 
Committee the facts that commitments in excess of appropriations were being made and to suggest 
corrective action be taken. 
 
With regard to the historical context. I have here reports of the provincial auditor for the last six years for the 
Province of Saskatchewan. These reports, Mr. Speaker, span two different governments, two different 
auditors and numerous Public Accounts Committees. Permit me to deal with them, Mr. Speaker, in 
ascending order as regards commitments in excess of net unexpended appropriations. 
 
In 1967-68 under the previous administration, there were commitments in excess of appropriations of 
$2,661,491. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Ohhhh! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — The greatest offender, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Don't talk about the past. Talk about DNS. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Milestone, it should be noted in the record, wants 
to change the subject. I don't blame the Member wanting to change the subject. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I said, Mr. Speaker, and I repeat, in 1967-68 under the previous administration 
there were commitments in excess of appropriations of $2.6 million. The greatest offender was the 
Department of Highways and Transportation with commitments in excess of appropriations of $2.2 million. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Ohhhhhh! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — The largest offender, again, was the Department of Highways and 
Transportation with commitments in excess of appropriations of $2 million. This was not reported in the 
provincial auditor's report. 
 
In 1969-70, under the previous Liberal administration there were commitments in excess of appropriations 
of $187,000. The largest offender was the Department of Welfare, at $129,669. This was not included in the 
auditor's report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the fiscal period 1970-71, the provincial auditor retired and an acting auditor was appointed. In the 
1970-71 period under the previous administration, Mr. Speaker, commitments in excess of appropriations 
were $99,486. The biggest offender was the Department of Telephones at $53,893. This was not reported in 
the auditor's report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1971, I think I should remind the House at this point 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2914 

there was a change in government in Saskatchewan. In the fiscal period '71-72, the acting auditor was 
appointed permanent auditor. In 1971-1972 commitments in excess of appropriations amounted to $192,000. 
The largest offender being the Department of Highways and Transportation at $85,919. This was not 
reported in the auditor's report. 
 
In 1972-73 commitments in excess of appropriations were $827,190, the largest offender as everyone knows 
was the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, at $666,630. This was reported in the auditor's report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be a useless and a needless exercise to speculate as to why two different auditors over 
a period of five of the six years I have enumerated did not report commitments in excess of appropriations by 
the provincial auditor is the result of more active pursuit of the duties and responsibilities which fall to the 
auditor. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — It is clear to anyone who wishes to observe, Mr. Speaker, that about $6,435,000 
of commitments in excess of net unexpended appropriations have been made over the last six years. 
However, less than 13 per cent of that amount occurred in the year under review. Just so that the Members 
will have that suitably impressed upon their minds, I will repeat it, Mr. Speaker. In those six years, 
$6,435,000 commitments in excess of net unexpended appropriations were made and less than 13 per cent 
occurred in the year under review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be the first one to agree that this practice should be curbed and, in fact, every attempt 
made to eliminate the practice. In reality the previous Minister of Finance had directed the comptroller to act 
on the situation and subsequently corrective changes have been initiated before the auditor's report was laid 
on the table, Mr. Speaker. However, the facts are clearly before us. Commitments in excess of appropriations 
is a practice that has existed for some time and is not something that occurred in the year under review for 
the first time, as the Members of the Opposition would like the public to think. 
 
I note that the chairman . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I'll get to that, if you can just hold your nervous tension for a while, I will get 
there. I note that the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee in his opening remarks to this Chamber on 
April 30th, described me as, quote: 
 

. . . not too concerned . . . 
 
Another phrase was: 
 

His actions in trying to water down and dilute the final recommendations . . . 
 
The third phrase, quote: 
 

A deliberate attempt of his to shield the Government . . . 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2915 

I believe that the chairman's remarks arose as a result of amendments I offered to point number ten in the 
report that he eventually presented to this House. I am sure that the Members of the House will be interested 
to know that the rough draft presented to the Public Accounts and Printing Committee for discussion by the 
chairman was highly political. It can be demonstrated that the first draft intended to color the evidence and 
information which was obtained by the Committee in its hearings. I ask all Members to carefully look at 
point number ten, in the chairman's report which was presented to the House, which is practically word for 
word, the amendment I offered to the Committee which in turn was accepted by the Committee. Comment 
number ten in the report dealt with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan wherein the Committee noted, 
quote: 
 

1. The establishment of bank accounts without Treasury Board approval. 
 

2. The incurring of large bank overdrafts. 
 

3. Extended delays in payments of supplier accounts. 
 

4. Delayed deposit and recording of revenue obtained by DNS. 
 

5. The substantial overpayment of benefits to social service recipients. 
 
Which, Mr. Speaker, was followed by a comment and a recommendation as follows: 
 

Your Committee regrets that the Department did not correct the lax administrative 
procedures in the year under review. Your Committee recommends more thorough scrutiny 
of all new departments and agencies by the comptroller. If necessary new staff and methods 
should be employed to prevent a recurrence of the lax administrative procedures which 
existed in DNS in the year under review. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, does that indicate to you that I am not concerned about the responsibilities and the 
importance of the Public Accounts and Printing Committee holds in this system? I think you will agree with 
me, Mr. Speaker, that to suggest that point number ten represents a shielding of the Government by me is 
laughable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will then recall that the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee quoted extensively 
from a letter sent to Mr. Bowerman, Minister of Northern Saskatchewan from the provincial auditor, dated 
December 12, 1973. I note that the quotes were given reasonably dispassionately up to page seven, where the 
chairman quoted the following paragraph: 
 

A thorough investigation in one suboffice was under way at the date of this report. In view of 
the results documented in a preliminary report, it was estimated that overpayments could 
total close to $100,000 for a period of 12 to 18 months, when the study was completed. 

 
By the nature of this comments it became quite clear that the chairman of the Committee in his report 
allowed his political bias to assert itself by suggesting that the item I have just quoted illustrated his point 
that overpayments in one suboffice 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2916 

were confirmed as being $100,00 in the year under review. Previous to this time, Mr. Speaker, the chairman 
in Committee had made that same misrepresentation in his rough draft to the Committee. You will note, Mr. 
Speaker, that the chairman expanded his remarks beyond the auditor's quotation and neglected to observe 
two rather important points. 
 
The auditor stated that the $100,000 overpayment was an estimate and he further suggested that it could span 
a period of 12 to 18 months. Members, therefore, can appreciate that a period of 12 to 18 months cannot 
conceivably all fall in the year under review. 
 
It might be well, Mr. Speaker, to look at the verbatim report of the discussion regarding the estimated 
$100,000 overpayment. Page 350 in the verbatim report has the following comment: 
 

Mr. Carter: Yes. I indicated that the audit in this area is not a final one at this point in time, 
but the amount that would appear to be a close figure would be in the neighborhood of 
$100,000. This has been determined on a progressive basis on audits over the last four 
months. Those amounts that were identified as overpayments on various files have been 
acted on, whereas the cost of recoveries are being made at a level we feel would not 
adversely affect the recipients at all. 

 
On page 351 of the verbatim report, as follows: 
 

Mr. MacLeod: I take it the identification of overpayments is an ongoing thing and that in the 
past four months you have identified some $100,000? 

 
Mr. Carter, who I might say is an official of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Carter: If you are saying that we have identified $100,000 that has occurred in the last 
four months, that is not correct. 

 
Mr. MacLeod: I understood your answer to be in the last four months you identified 
$100,000 in overpayments which had occurred in the period under review? 

 
Mr. Carter immediately responded by saying: 
 

And before. (Meaning in the period under review and before). 
 
Mr. Carter continued: 
 

The audit has gone back in some cases into 1971 and 1970. It has been over quite a long 
period of time. As a matter of fact before we came into the picture, as you know, we took 
over the social services component in October of 1972 and these audits go back prior to that 
period of time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, page 364 in the verbatim report contains a comment by Mr. Lutz, the provincial auditor, 
wherein he discusses the present good relationship with the administrative people in Northern Saskatchewan. 
Dealing with the $100,000 the auditor 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2917 

said in part: 
 

Yes, you are right Bob (referring to Mr. Carter). It is probably beyond March 1973, simply 
because this was the time span that came up with this number. But really how accurate it is in 
the time span, is difficult to tell. It could go back to say January 1973 to now, or it could go 
back — it's hard to say. The problem is with these cases, once you start looking at some of 
the back steps, one step will lead to another step and pretty soon you are back three years in 
an extreme case. Really you have no way of knowing where it is going to stop. 

 
Therefore, I am sure you can see, Mr. Speaker, why my amendment to point 10 sub (5) in the report, sought 
to delete references to $100,000. 
 
Although it was preferred by the chairman, upon examination of the record, it proved to be: First an estimate, 
and secondly, a time span which could not definitely be determined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to deal with point 10 (4) in the chairman's report. The verbatim report will show that 
the chairman's rough draft of point 10(4) reads as follows: 
 

(iv) The mishandling of revenue funds by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The series of events dealing with this particular aspect of the examination of DNS was as follows: First, the 
chairman presented his rough draft; secondly, I presented my amendment which read as follows: 
 

Delayed deposit and recording of revenue obtained by the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
It was my feeling, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment was required since, in my view, the phrase 'mishandling 
of revenue' had a far wider scope of meaning than the facts would support. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, money 
and cheques were handled in this instance, in the amount of $526,100, of which $525,000 was in cheques. 
The verbatim report shows on page 564, after a discussion of the use of the phrase 'mishandling of revenue' 
as opposed to 'delayed deposit and recording of revenue,' Mr. Lutz the provincial auditor stated: 
 

I don't believe mishandling is the correct word in this instance. 
 
Thereupon, Mr. Speaker, the vote was taken in Committee and my proposed amendment was accepted. The 
verbatim report . . . 
 
MR. McISAAC: — On a Point of Order. The Hon. Member's reporting of the statement of the auditor is not 
a correct report of it. I think he is well aware of it. The auditor has corrected that statement that it was 
incorrectly transcribed. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, I quoted the page in the verbatim report and if the Member wants 
to deal with it, he may deal with it. And I quoted it exactly. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2918 

MR. McISAAC: — It was incorrectly transcribed in the unedited version that you are quoting from. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Well those are debating points, they aren't Points of Order, they are debating 
points. 
 
MR. McISAAC: — No, it's very much a debating point, Mr. Speaker. He is reading a statement attributing it 
to the auditor, that was later corrected by the auditor. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Those are debating points. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I am referring to the verbatim report, Mr. Speaker, which is available to all 
Members of the House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Will the Member for Lakeview take his own seat if he wishes to make 
comments. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I would say, Mr. Speaker, I was saying, that thereupon the vote was taken in 
the Committee and my proposed amendment was accepted. The verbatim report on page 566 shows that the 
debate continued after the amendment was accepted by the Committee. It should be noted that Mr. Carlson, 
after a comment by the auditor, regarding deposits in the year under review, was in the process of offering a 
further amendment in part as follows: 
 

Mr. Carlson: Okay, I had earlier said that I would be prepared to change those words. If you 
want to say 'lack of deposit in the year under review', or the fact that it wasn't deposited, 
anything that you say naturally in the terms of depositing or recording, I am prepared to 
support, but to say 'mishandling', as far as I am concerned I will leave it like this but if 
somebody wants to suggest saying . . . 

 
It can be noted then, Mr. Speaker, in the verbatim report, that the chairman of the Committee cut off Mr. 
Carlson in mid sentence and moved the discussion to point 10 (5). 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to deal with the Land Bank Commission and the chairman's comments with 
regard to the Land Bank Commission. The chairman of the Committee, in presenting his report to this 
Chamber, made reference to the Land Bank Commission in point 11. The chairman then took the 
opportunity to expand unfairly on the point, to the extent of suggesting that some devious manoeuvring was 
going on in the Land Bank Commission because the fiscal year-end of that agency was established by a 
Board Minute. It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the fiscal year of the agency was established by a Board Minute 
and that the Committee noted that with an appropriate recommendation to which I agreed. 
 
However, there is nothing to suggest that anything more serious than that which is noted in point 11 
happened in the year under review with regard to the Land Bank. On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy 
of the Land Bank Report for 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2919 

the year ending March 31st, 1973, wherein there is a page entitled "The Saskatchewan Land Bank 
Commission." 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD: — What page number? 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — There is no number. It's right there, buff color. We already dealt with that in the 
Committee. 
 
Financial statement for the period July 1, 1972 to March 31st, 1973. Office of the Provincial Auditor, 
Regina, Saskatchewan. Overleaf on that particular page, Mr. Speaker, the auditor's comment in part is as 
follows: 
 

In my opinion these financial statements read in conjunction with a note appended to the 
statement of revenues and expenditures present fairly the financial position of the 
Saskatchewan Land Bank fund as at March 31st, 1973, the results of its operations for the 
period July 1, 1972 to March 31st, 1973, the cash transactions of the Administration Account 
for the same period and funds in this account on hand at March 31st, 1973, in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles. 
Signed: W.G. Lutz, C.A., Provincial Auditor. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I said that I would take an opportunity to make a few more remarks about the comments of the 
Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) when he spoke first in this debate on April 30th. 
 
At the beginning of my remarks, I believe I effectively dealt with the suggestion that he was denied 
information by the Committee. The record is clear. Of the 17 Motions placed in the Committee, 14 were 
placed by the Hon. Member for Albert Park. Mr. Speaker, no member of the Public Accounts Committee 
asked more questions and received more answers than the Hon. Member for Albert Park. 
 
I should now, Mr. Speaker, like to deal with a much more serious charge, made by the Member for Albert 
Park, when he spoke in debate on April 30th. He said, and I quote him directly: 
 

I have no doubt that there will be an effort by this Government to muzzle the provincial 
auditor. 

 
Mr. Speaker, don't rely on my word — let's rely on the record for information about who responds to the 
requests of the provincial auditor and who responds to the recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee. First the provincial auditor: 
 

During the seven years of the last Liberal regime, six positions were requested over a period 
of six budget reviews. 

 
Were six positions granted to the provincial auditor, Mr. Speaker? No, one position was approved. 
 
MR. STEUART: — They weren't working hard enough anyway. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — The Leader of the Opposition says they weren't working 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2920 

hard enough anyway. Well, I intend to get around to the recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee and I'll invite him to venture the same comment then, because obviously there were 
recommendations being made that weren't being carried out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven years of Liberal regime, six positions requested, one position approved. However, to be 
perfectly fair, Mr. Speaker, in May and August of 1970 the final year of the Liberals in office, well after the 
1970-71 Budget was approved, three additional positions were finally approved for the provincial auditor. 
They could see the writing on the wall and they wanted to have a strong auditor's staff in place. 
 
What about the New Democratic Party Government's record? I'll tell you, and I said, don't rely on me, check 
the record. In 1972-73 no positions requested by the provincial auditor. In 1973-74, four positions requested 
by the auditor. Mr. Speaker, I'll give you a guess, how many were approved? 
 
MR. STEUART: — Five. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Four approved. Four asked for, four approved. In 1974-75, no positions 
requested by the provincial auditor. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, after three Budget reviews, under a New 
Democratic Government, four positions requested, four positions approved. Is that muzzling the provincial 
auditor, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. Speaker, that's open government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I might add, Mr. Speaker, at this Session, now on your desk, is legislation that 
is being introduced by the Government, to increase the provincial auditor's salary by approximately 20 per 
cent from $22,400 to $26,598, effective October 1, 1973. Mr. Speaker, that's not muzzling the auditor. 
There's no hint of muzzling the auditor whatsoever — more staff, as much as requested by the auditor, and 
an increase in salary for the provincial auditor. 
 
I want to stress at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the unusual administrative problems that were encountered in 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan have in no way been hidden from the provincial auditor. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposite is true. All Members of the committee will recall a letter dated December 12, 
1973, to the Hon. G.R. Bowerman, Minister of Northern Saskatchewan wherein Mr. Lutz, the auditor, makes 
reference to the Task Force Report, of which he received a copy. It is a fact, that when the Government 
became aware of the serious administrative problems in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan the 
Government immediately appointed a senior official of the Department of Finance to lead up a Task Force 
with specific instructions to identify the problems, put an immediate halt to the bad practices which were 
being allowed, and to suggest remedial action. 
 
Let me stress that the Task Force Report referred to in the provincial auditor's letter, was an internal 
document of the Department of Finance and need not have been released to anyone. However, with a view to 
isolating the problems and identifying the bad practices, the Department of Finance did make a copy of the 
Internal Task Force Report available to the 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2921 

provincial auditor. Mr. Speaker, I say to you, this is not muzzling the auditor, this is open Government. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is within my knowledge that the Minister in charge of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan was fully committed to the view that the problems should be solved and the 
situation rectified. Mr. Speaker, given the size of the task to be done in northern Saskatchewan and given the 
many problems which will beset the person in charge, I must say that I am proud to support and be 
associated with the Hon. Ted Bowerman. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — I believe it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that he is solving some of the problems 
in northern Saskatchewan that the people to your left, Mr. Speaker, shirked while they were in office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some more time dealing with the ridiculous 
statement made by the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) that this Government intends to muzzle the 
auditor. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, my previous statement showed that the Liberal Government never, at any time, 
intended to muzzle the auditor. Their method was strangulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me leave aside this subtle form of an intimidation used against previous provincial auditors 
by the previous Liberal administration and deal for a moment with the Treasury Board regulations. 
 
The 1967 Report of the Select Standing committee on Public Accounts and Printing, endorsed the 
recommendation of the provincial auditor, which read as follows: 
 

I would recommend that the existing Treasury Board Regulations be reviewed and 
consolidated in order that they may be issued to the various departments for their guidance. I 
would further recommend that in those instances where legislation implies that Treasury 
Board Regulations be issued for guidance of the department either in the procedures to be 
followed or the accounting records to be kept, steps be taken to ensure that the regulations 
are issued. 

 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, identified in 1967 under the previous administration was not resolved until the 
fiscal year 1972-73 when a revised edition of Treasury Board Regulations was printed in November of 1972. 
 
Section 6 of the 1973 report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts acknowledged that the 
job had been done. It can be noted, Mr. Speaker, that a continuous updating of the Treasury Board 
Regulations has been carried on by the comptroller's office since 1972 when the regulations were revised and 
consolidated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to trust accounts. The 1970 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2922 

Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing stated in Section 6: 
 

In the perusal of Public Accounts in the Auditor's Departmental Report your committee noted 
a wide variation in the financial reporting of the various trust accounts. Your committee 
would recommend more detail and uniformity in the reporting of trust accounts under the 
control of Government departments. 

 
It should be noted that although this item had not been acted on in 1971 it was completed in the year ending 
March 31st, 1973. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the matter of gross budgeting was commented on in Section 8 of the 1970 Report of the Select 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing as follows: 
 

The Province of Saskatchewan has for many years followed the practice of budgeting and 
accounting on a net basis. That is, certain revenues are estimated and recorded as reductions 
of expenditures rather than items of revenue. In the opinion of the committee this makes the 
estimates and accounts difficult to interpret. Your committee recommends consideration be 
given to budgeting and accounting on a gross basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the implementation of gross budgeting in 1973-74 fiscal year by a New Democratic 
Government clearly illustrates that the previous Liberal administration did not have the political courage to 
implement gross budgeting, whereas the New Democratic Party has responded to the call for a more open 
government. Mr. Speaker, I have cited these examples to illustrate clearly and without doubt to this 
Legislative Chamber that this New Democratic Government has demonstrated that it has courage to move 
ahead. It has the courage to practise open government and it has the desire to respond to any reasonable 
request of the Public Accounts Committee and the provincial auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the balance of the comments from the Member for Albert Park today. 
After sifting the chaff from the wheat I came up with what appeared to be a couple of kernels and I don't 
necessarily regard them as truths. The Member reiterated the charge that he was denied information in the 
Committee. If there is one Member who should not mention that charge in this House it is the Member for 
Albert Park. As I illustrated he asked more questions and got more answers than anybody else on the 
Committee. I am not saying that is wrong, that is perfectly right. But he says that in the Land Bank 
Commission that they should have received the third file and every fortieth file thereafter. I ask you and I ask 
the House, would the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, SEDCO give its files for everyone 
to look at? I don't think SEDCO would, Mr. Speaker. Those files were compiled on the basis that the person 
giving the information felt that his information was going to be treated in a confidential manner. The 
confidentiality of those files is being maintained and I believe will continue to be maintained, Mr. Speaker. 
So I deny the charge made by the Member for Albert Park that information was denied to him. He asks 
questions which we are not going to answer as conscientious Members and guardians of that confidential 
information that has been presented to us in Land Bank or in SEDCO or in any other area that is sensitive to 
that extent. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2923 

The Member reiterates his remark that the records of the Land Bank are inaccurate. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 
only refer, again, to the Land Bank Commission Report which states clearly, it has the auditor's seal on it, as 
being accurate and fairly presented. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the charges of the Member for Albert Park fall 
on deaf ears in this Chamber when he suggests that there is something wrong with the Saskatchewan Land 
Bank. 
 
During his remarks he said nothing abut the financial operation of the Land Bank, he talked about policy. 
There are other areas where the policy of the Land Bank can be discussed and I am sure the Member will 
take the opportunity to raise those comments at that time in the proper place. However, I do not accept his 
charge that information was denied in the committee and I think I have successfully set aside that particular 
charge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I am just as disappointed in the speech that 
the Minister has just made as I was disappointed at many of the actions that he took during the Public 
Accounts Committee. I think the very speech that he has made today has proved the point made in this 
House by the chairman of this Committee and the Member for Albert Park that this Minister is nothing more 
than an apologist for the Government. He was put on that Committee to try and gloss things over, to try to 
protect the Government. Not once in his speech today did he refer to the gross irregularities that were 
pointed out by both the auditor and which were subsequently discovered through questioning by members of 
the Committee. 
 
The Minister even on one point stooped to misquoting the provincial auditor, he deliberately quoted from a 
passage that he knew was incorrect in the transcriptions of our Committee. He absolutely and deliberately 
used this. If he had even read the rest of the paragraph he would see that the statement that he gave would be 
completely out of context. It was wrong, he knew what was said by the auditor and yet he used this to try and 
prove his argument. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — There is no question that the only reason that the Minister was on that Committee 
was to subvert the other Members. 
 
The Minister said that the time of the Public Accounts seems to be extending itself. Well, this is a fact and it 
will undoubtedly extend itself further and further and further. With well-run departments it is quite 
reasonable to suspect that we could bring a department in and in three or four hours of questioning could 
look into that department and satisfy ourselves. This is not so with departments such as DNS. It is going to 
take six or eight meetings to discover anything and to pry any information out of them. 
 
He talked about motions and what were turned down and what were not turned down. The Committee 
required members to put all their requests for information in the form of motions. Then members of the 
Government would say, notice of motion. To give you an example of what was required. We asked for a 
copy of a 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2924 

CUPE agreement, a very simple request for information, just a copy of a CUPE agreement from 1972, a very 
reasonable request. We had to make a written motion and then the Members opposite called 'notice of 
motion'. This is the type of thing that was required by us. They tried to slow down the Committee, tried to 
get us off the train of thought. They used every tactic that they could. There were motions turned down, they 
said that only four motions were defeated. I would suggest, that if you look at the four motions, 25 per cent 
of the motions almost were turned down by the Minister's words. I think that you would find that every 
major request was denied by the Members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — There is absolutely no question and the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) 
tabled in that Committee information which showed without any doubt at all that there were tremendous 
irregularities in the Land Bank. After having tabled that showing that there were some discrepancies, 
showing that there were some problems, then the motion was put and it was defeated. That was a very, very 
legitimate request. There were irregularities, we knew it, and yet we weren't allowed to get into the files. 
 
We asked for information regarding the Community Clinic. No one could deny that there has been some 
irregularities and so on in the Community Clinic. The motion was turned down completely, we were refused 
any information by Members of the Government. Not members of the Department of Health, but Members 
of the Government. We were not allowed to look into the contracts of the Government and so on between 
the Community Clinics and the Government. 
 
The Minister went on to talk about commitments in excess of appropriations and that this somehow had 
gone on for years and years and I would like to point out that there is considerable difference, for example, 
one is the Department of Attorney General and they had commitments in excess of appropriations of 
$22,000. This is on a total budget of $11 million. This is the type of thing that has gone on in the past, there 
is no question and no one is denying that, it has gone on for six or seven years. $22,000 in excess of a total 
budget of $11 million. But let's look at DNS. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has in excess of 
appropriations two-thirds of a million dollars on a budget of $2 million. Just a little bit of difference. 
 
I would like to read to this House what Mr. Schneider said. Mr. Schneider is the Government comptroller. I'd 
like to say what he said to the Committee in this regard. I am quoting from page 73 and he is talking about 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and I quote: 
 

When the program started they sent a qualified accountant in charge of that side and in the 
course of events the administrative procedures didn't go as planned so they had to change the 
situation and bring in new people to revise it. But this occurred after the year-end, not in time 
for the examiner to pick up any specific problem. In other words, I am saying that there were 
many administrative problems because of it and this kind of overexpenditure did occur. It 
would not normally occur 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2925 

in departments but in this case, because they had serious problems this happened. 
 
And that is the point that we are trying to make, it was not the normal type of thing that happens, which may 
not be excusable but which does happen, it is not normal as the comptroller has admitted to our Committee. 
 
The Minister also made statements about the auditor's staff and with the kind of goings-on that is happening 
in this Government I can assure this House that the auditor's staff is going to have to increase and increase 
and increase to even try to keep up in any semblance of order in the Government opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I want to read a couple of statements from the Public Accounts record and these are 
the type of things that Members opposite apparently are not going to address themselves to. They are going 
to try and quickly cloud the issue and they are not going to talk about the issue. It is interesting to note that 
the Minister of DNS does not deny any of these things. He has to admit them, they are facts. There is nothing 
he can do about it. The same Minister of DNS, when he was criticized by the DNS employees in the North, 
he discredited them. The same Minister when "Next Year Country" criticized him he immediately 
discredited "Next Year Country." He discredited the New Breed for any criticism. He discredited the Metis 
Society for any criticism. He tried to discredit the Liberal Opposition whenever they have criticized. He has 
tried to discredit the Press generally for any criticism that they have. But he is caught on this one. The 
Minister of DNS cannot discredit the auditor. The auditor is acting on facts and facts that he cannot deny. It 
is finally time that the Minister is going to have to own up to this time. 
 
I have to be very amused when the Minister of Government Services in this House today congratulated the 
Minister (Mr. Bowerman). You know when the Member for Albert Park spoke both in Public Accounts and 
then in this debate again, he suggested that when writing the Report the word 'deplore' was used and that 
really this was a rather moderate word, the proper word should have been 'condemn', he chose to be more 
moderate and use the word 'deplore'. The Minister of Government then changed and amended it to read 
'regret'. And when he did the Member for Albert Park made notice at that time that in the whole scheme of 
things, taking in order the different verbs that could be used, that 'condemns' would be the worst, 'deplores' is 
a little better than condemns and regrets is much better and in fact it almost borders on congratulations. And 
yet the Minister comes in here today and, indeed, has changed it from 'regret' and has congratulated the 
Minister. Congratulated the Minister with this kind of evidence. It is absolutely impossible. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I should like to read some of the statements of Mr. Lutz's that are on record, page 
564, and I quote: 
 

I think, Mr. Chairman, the reason there was never any mention of this regard of theft or sort 
of related 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2926 

activity was simply because the situation was so terrible when this group of 14 went up there, 
they really had no way of establishing (a) what had been received; (b) what should have been 
received; (c) how much was still there. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Absolutely impossible, by the auditor's own words to determine whether there is 
theft or not. But go on down further and Mr. Lutz was speaking: 
 

My comment was that one has regard for the rules and regulations that have been laid down 
for the handling and accounting of Government revenue and if one consider the fact that 
there was no handling or accounting of looking after Government's revenue . . . 

 
Then in the words of Mr. Lutz this word 'mishandling' which the Minister of Government Services had 
removed from the report, Mr. Lutz said the word 'mishandling' is not the incorrect word. Mr. Lutz agrees that 
'mishandling' should have been in the record. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, he didn't allow that . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member has risen on a Point of Privilege. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — On a Point of Privilege, I quoted directly from the verbatim report and the 
verbatim reports says, and this is Mr. Lutz: 
 

I don't believe mishandling is the correct word in this instance . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has just made that point. He knows absolutely well that 
this is not the auditor's statement. He knows absolutely well that the auditor did not make that mistake. This 
is a mistake written by a typist, it is a typographical error and the Minister knows it absolutely. And for him 
to use this as the type of tactic to becloud the whole issue. Every Member on the Public Accounts Committee 
knows that that is a typographical error and to use it, to deliberately use it to mislead this House is 
inexcusable. 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: — On a Point of Privilege. Mr. Speaker, the Member says that I know that that's 
an incorrect quotation. I ask the Member to show me where that was corrected in the verbatim report. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — On a Point of Order. I have a suggestion, Mr. Speaker, to clear up this 
thing, that we bring the auditor in this House or ask the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee . . . 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2927 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . to call the Committee together tomorrow, bring the auditor . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the Members are talking about — I think these are debating 
points, they are not points of Order or Privilege. 
 
MR. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw N.): — The Minister is using the good office of the auditor by stooping to 
those tactics. 
 
Mr. Lutz went on to say, on page 565: 
 

We don't know how much money should have been there in the first place when it was 
finally deposited. They didn't issue a receipt, they didn't write it down anywhere, it was just 
kicking all over that office, something in excess of half a million dollars. 

 
These are the words of the auditor. On page 566, the auditor's statement: 
 

Mr. Chairman, may I offer one more suggestion, in the year under review, there was no 
deposits made to cash at DNS. Can you at this point call it delay in depositing? 

 
Mr. Lutz's statements in this regard are made having to do with the amendments that the Minister of 
Government Services was trying to make to water down this report. It is quite obvious from the remarks of 
the auditor, that the auditor wasn't very happy about having a watered down report. 
 
Mr. Lutz goes on, on page 570: 
 

Mr. Chairman, in regard to Northern, I would have to say that their bad practices started the 
first day they got a cash receipt and they never changed. 

 
That is the way it happened. The people that were there, you asked them a question and they just threw up 
their hands, shook their heads and said, "Gee whiz, I don't know." 
 
On page 571 there is a rather revealing bit — the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank is asking a question: 
 

Mr. Lutz, you are suggesting then that no procedures were begun until after April 1, 1973? 
 
Mr. Lutz answered: 
 

Oh no, I am not suggesting that, Mr. Brockelbank, there were procedures up there, they 
opened the mail . . . 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I want to read into this House another rather revealing statement, this is made by 
Mr. Churchman, page 345. 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2928 

Mr. Churchman says: 
 

I would agree with you, I would think it would too. It was a pleasant surprise to find that it 
checked out. 

 
He is talking about the Central Vehicle Agency. A pleasant surprise that it checked out. Continuing, he said: 
 

Why it got a priority, I don't know. There are a number of things that are pretty hard to 
explain during that first period, to put it frankly. 

 
Those are the words of Mr. Churchman. "It is really hard to explain during that first period, to put it frankly." 
The words of the Deputy Minister. 
 
On page 347, Mr. Churchman again, and I quote: 
 

Well, I think I can, Mr. Chairman. No one was more surprised than I when I discovered the 
situation. I felt I had competent staff and that they knew what they were doing. The 
accounting system was well in hand and it was one thing that I — I am not an accountant — 
didn't have to worry about. I asked from time to time for information in respect to the 
situation and I was usually given a satisfactory answer. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the point that I should like to make having quoted from Mr. Lutz and from the Deputy, is that 
there is absolutely no question that the Minister of DNS should resign. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Absolutely no question. The Deputy Minister, Mr. Churchman should be fired 
immediately. You say there is only one reason why he hasn't been fired. A mess went on in DNS for 11 or 12 
months that we know of, because that is the year under review. We don't know what happened after that, we 
will get into that later. But we do know a mess went on for 11 or 12 months. The Deputy Minister admits 
that he is frankly surprised, can't understand, doesn't have any idea, he sits in Regina. The only reason that he 
was not fired is because he is a political hack. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Any other Deputy Minister, if he had not been a political hack, would have been 
fired immediately. Any other manager of any kind of business whatsoever would have been fired by any 
business in Canada, in North America, anywhere for that kind of action. That any one should be hired to 
manage a department or manage a business of any kind and carry on in this manner and not be fired, is 
incomprehensible. It is an impossible situation, there is only one thing that can explain it and that is that the 
man is a political hack brought in and they can't fire him. 
 
I suggest that in a department that administers for less than 25,000 residents and to get into this kind of a 
mess in one year, to be criticized for not only this but for many other things which I think we are going to 
have to accept from the "New Breed" and the things about Delta Systems and their housing 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2929 

and the information that has been brought out by "Next Year Country" and by the Press and by everybody 
else, we are going to have to start putting some credence in that information. The Minister can't be right 
every time in every criticism. There is no question that the Minister should resign, or the Premier should 
replace him if he won't resign, and the Deputy Minister should be fired on the spot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very disappointed that this report from the Committee had to be so watered down. The 
auditor did a good job, the members of the Committee did a good job and to suggest that we have to end up 
with a watered down report, I think, is a disgrace, it is a shameful thing. It just makes a farce out of the 
Public Accounts Committee when they are not allowed to report what they actually find. It is a 
disappointment that this final report is brought into this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a couple of brief 
remarks in regard and respond to and to take exception to some of the accusations that have been made 
particularly by the Member for Moose Jaw North and the Member for Albert Park in regard to the 
Government trying to, as they, quote: 
 

Deliberately misinterpret the auditor's report. 
 
I want to turn specifically to some of the remarks that were made by the Member for Albert Park in regard to 
the policies of the Land Bank Commission. The Member quoted from the Standing Committee's Report, 
page 221, a question that he asked the chairman of the Land Bank Commission and also quoted the answer 
given. I just want, again, to quote that question and answer, Mr. Speaker, and make a comment or two in 
regard to it. On page 221, Mr. MacLeod asked the following question and I quote: 
 

What I am directing my attention to is the fact that we occasionally get complaints with the 
Land Bank, it is competing with the neighbors and outbids the neighbor, and you are saying 
if that happens, it is done so — because you try not to find out what is happening with 
respect to the neighbors. If the neighbor is bidding on it, you don't want to know about it. 

 
MR. WESSON: We never know about it. 

 
MR. MacLEOD: — Never? 

 
MR. WESSON: — It doesn't influence our offer. We still base our price on local sales, that is 
the average of the local sales. Now if the next door neighbor wants to pay the top of those 
local sales we'll outbid him, naturally. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Albert Park knows full well that the policy of the Land Bank is to take the 
average of the sales in the region. He quoted this and said that we were deviating from what our policy was 
in relation to the purchase of the Land Bank, because the chairman had said that we will naturally outbid the 
highest offer made in any particular 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2930 

region. 
 
I talked to Mr. Wesson, the chairman of the Land Bank Commission and he does not recall having said that, 
he said if he did he must have misinterpreted the question, or perhaps it was a typographical error as the 
Member for Moose Jaw North referred to. But what I think is questionable and debatable as to whether, in 
fact, he was legitimately answering the question or not. 
 
But I do want, for the records, Mr. Speaker, to make it perfectly clear that the Member for Albert Park, as do 
other members of the Public Accounts Committee and I suspect the Members of the Opposition, know that 
that is not the policy and this is certainly not the policy that the chairman administers as the chief officer of 
the Land Bank Commission. 
 
If the Member was not trying to take statements out of context in regard to this report — and he says he was 
not — but I say that he was. And if he was a responsible Member and I think a conscientious Member, he 
would have simply related to the previous page where he again was questioning Mr. Wesson. I want to quote 
several of the answers and questions involving Mr. MacLeod and Mr. Wesson. Just probably only 30 
seconds previous to this question where Mr. Wesson says he did not understand the question or was 
misquoted in the verbatim statement. I want to start, Mr. Speaker, on page 219, where Mr. MacLeod 
questioned and I quote: 
 

If the farmer accepts the offer that you make him then you proceed to process the transaction. 
Is that correct? 

 
Mr. Wesson: Yes. 

 
Mr. MacLeod: If he has accepted the offer then discovers that there are sales in the 
neighborhood of a higher amount, would you reconsider the offer? 

 
Mr. Wesson: No. 

 
A direct conflict to what the Member tried to interpret from Mr. Wesson's response on the following page. 
Mr. MacLeod went on to question: 
 

And you never have, is that correct? 
 

Mr. Wesson: Yes. 
 
Meaning never, have we when we made an offer for Land Bank land in a particular region that was based on 
the average price, ever increased that offer because a farmer of this potential seller came to us and said he 
had a higher offer from a private party. 
 
But the questioning goes on. Mr. MacLeod, again, questions and I quote: 
 

Then let me take it the other way. Suppose the farmer rejects the offer, do you then 
reconsider your position? 

 Mr. Wesson: No, not unless he comes back to us in a later year and offers it back to us. 
 

Mr. MacLeod: I have one or two instances drawn to my 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2931 

attention where an offer was made to the Land Bank and rejected and then subsequently an 
offer made of a higher amount. Does the Land Bank (and at the same time the farmer was 
negotiating with a neighbor) is the Land Bank ever aware of these dual negotiations? If you 
become aware that the farmer was also negotiating with a neighbor, what is the position 
taken by the Land Bank Commission? 

 
Mr. Wesson: Our only position is that we are establishing our price fix on local market sales 
and if we can't improve our offer based on that we won't do it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that Mr. Wesson's response to three or four questions of Mr. MacLeod, only 30 seconds 
or so before, where obviously, Mr. Wesson was confused in regard to the question and it was misinterpreted 
indicating that the policy of the Land Bank is clear and that Mr. Wesson administers that policy as it should 
be interpreted and that is that all prices offered for the Land Bank are on the regional average. And at no time 
do we try to compete or dicker to establish a higher price when we get involved with other offers on sales of 
land that have been offered to the Land Bank. I think that the Member for Albert Park should be severely 
chastised, especially as a man of the legal profession, who chooses to take one answer out of the total 
questions and answers that were involved with Mr. Wesson and try to misinterpret the activities of the Land 
Bank Commission. 
 
If anybody has been deliberately trying to misinterpret the report of the Standing Committee it has been the 
Members of the Opposition and primarily, Mr. MacLeod, the Member for Albert Park. I think that is very 
unfortunate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about 
this report and some things that I think should happen as a result of it. 
 
I am going to concentrate my remarks on the situation as it has been uncovered in regard to the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I rose in the House a couple of days ago to ask the Premier if he would consider the situation, in the light of 
what has been brought out by this Committee report and in the light of what has come forward from the 
Auditor. The unprecedented criticism of handling of funds and of the activities of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan's employees from the top officials right through the Department. In the light of that 
would the Premier consider now complying with a request made by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), 
that a judicial inquiry be instituted immediately to look into this whole situation? I still put forward that 
request. 
 
If you look at the history of the DNS the Department was started not too long ago and it was given 
tremendously wide powers. At that time we predicted that they were asking for trouble; the Government was. 
We predicted that the reaction of northern people would not be positive, they would be against it, that they 
would not like it, that they would not want to live under those kinds of conditions, and, of course, subsequent 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2932 

events have proven that we were right. Subsequent events have proven that the situation we predicted at the 
time has come to pass. In fact, it is much worse than we ever imagined that it could be in such a short time. 
 
Let's just take a quick look at the history. After the DNS was formed, complaints began to come in almost 
immediately. The Minister and the Premier at that time and other Members of the Government answered 
these complaints by saying it was natural when you moved in with a new department, breaking new ground, 
bringing in new people, attempting to develop new programs that there would be some growing pains. And 
there would be some complaints. This wasn't too unreasonable. 
 
But the complaints continued. They came in from, first the people themselves, the northern people. A great 
many of them were native people. These complaints were answered in the manner I had mentioned by the 
Government: "Well they are not too serious and they will work themselves out." Complaints began to come 
in then from business people, people who had invested their money up there in retail outlets; people who had 
invested their money in the tourist business; people who were trying to go into the North to develop that part 
of Saskatchewan. They began to complain. Well, their complaints again were brushed off by the 
Government, by the Minister, to the effect that they were either greedy or they weren't prepared to go along 
with the plans or they were trying to exploit the people of the land. And so, their complaints were brushed 
aside. 
 
Then people who were working for the Government, public servants, began to complain. They actually 
began to complain publicly. Even after they were chastised, even after they were threatened, even after they 
were moved around, the complaints continued to come. Some of them were even dismissed. In spite of this 
action taken to harass them, they continued to complain and they continue to complain to this very day. 
 
The Press were taken North by the Government. It was to be a triumphant tour by the Minister of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, the Member for Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman). Instead, it turned into 
a disaster, because instead of talking to the Public Relations Officers or the people who had been set up 
along the way to sing the praises of the Minister and the DNS and the NDP Government, the Press did what 
any good press people would do. They wandered away from the official party and began to talk to other 
people, and when they talked to other people they found discontent, they found unhappiness, they found 
frustration and so they reported it. 
 
We then sent up some people of our own. We sent up some of our MLAs into the North to see at first hand 
what was going on. They talked to employees, they talked to the native people, they talked to long-time 
residents, they talked to people who hadn't been there very long. And they came back and they, again, 
reported publicly that there was a great mess up in northern Saskatchewan. They found, for example, that 
people wouldn't talk to them freely, especially public servants, or people who depend on the Government for 
a living. They were afraid to talk. Our MLAs went into one office; the employee there talked to them about 
welfare and he wouldn't even admit that there were any people of welfare, he didn't know what the criteria 
were. He didn't know how many people, or how much they were paid. They said they pointed out the 
window, as a matter 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2933 

fact, and asked: "Is that sawmill going?" He said, "What sawmill?" He was so frightened that he would 
hardly admit that he worked for the Government or what his own name was. In other words, they found that 
the word from Regina, from the Minister's office, from the NDP Government, had preceded the Liberal 
MLAs North and the word had been sent, 'don't talk to them. In fact, if you do talk to them, probably on pain 
of being dismissed'. So they found silence up there, but they talked to enough people and they saw enough to 
convince them that there was a great deal wrong in northern Saskatchewan and it wasn't just growing pains. 
 
It wasn't just a case of a few little honest mistakes here and there. They found enough to convince them that 
there was a great deal going on up there that should be exposed to the public and that the Government, if it 
was sincere, should act decisively. The Premier should be prepared to recognize that native people are being 
pushed around, that the hopes of the residents, long-time and short-time in northern Saskatchewan are being 
frustrated and that real honest development in northern Saskatchewan has been ground to a halt by the power 
and the bureaucracy and the dictatorial attitude of the people that were given this unprecedented power in 
northern Saskatchewan. In fact, our MLAs found that a great deal was wrong. They came back here and we 
asked the Government to take some action, to expose this. If they had nothing to hide they could set up a 
judicial inquiry immediately to inquire into every aspect of northern Saskatchewan, every aspect of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government refused. Again, and as usual, they ignored the legitimate complaints of the people 
concerned, the people who had chosen to live and make their future in northern Saskatchewan. They 
whitewashed every action from the Minister, the Deputy Minister and all the gang at the top that he 
surrounded himself with to have his own way and literally to be the dictatorial ruler in northern 
Saskatchewan. That's what they were in the old days when they worked with the DNR, that's what they are 
now with even more power behind them with the DNS under the Government. They ridiculed and they 
continue to ridicule. Anybody who dared to criticize the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is held up to 
abuse, to ridicule; and the Government continues to this very day to whitewash, to ridicule, to excuse and to 
cover up. 
 
Now let's take a look as to whether this needed to have happened. You know, when you set up a department 
and you give them several million dollars to spend and they hire a great number of employees, do 
communications have to break down? Does there have to be an unbelievable mishandling of public funds? Is 
it necessary that we find after a short time that $100,000 in just one office is handed out in welfare? God 
knows how much in other offices. Does it have to happen that the auditors walk in and find hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, money and cheques, just tossed around and ignored? Does it have to happen? 
 
Well, I am not going back to our time in government. I'll go back to the setting up of the MCIC and the 
Premier will be aware of this. It happened when he was a Member of the old CCF Government. 
 
When the government of the day decided to set up the Medical Care Insurance Commission they had a 
timetable to meet, they had great public pressures on them, they had a great many 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2934 

people all over this province who were opposed to what they were doing and watching them very closely. 
They set up Mr. Don Tansley, an individual whom I didn't agree with, in his philosophical outlook, but a 
man who had great ability. Well, Don Tansley set up that particular organization. He set it up in such a way 
that there was some criticism about the philosophy of the Medical Care Insurance program, there was some 
criticism about the way it worked. A great deal of criticism. But if you go back and you will find out that 
there has not been much criticism about the way that particular organization was set up. In fact, it's still there 
today, basically, almost unchanged. I want to use this example to show that it is possible, in a very short 
time, for a government to set up an apparatus to set up a department and properly account for the funds and 
properly carry out the will of the Legislature without the mess that we find in DNS. 
 
I point this out to indicate the shallowness and the ridiculousness of the excuses that the Premier and the 
Government use day in and day out to whitewash and to keep a blanket of misinformation, or a blanket of no 
information over the entire DNS and to try to excuse their inept performance — that's too mild a word — 
their disgraceful performance from this Legislative Assembly and from the public. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I again challenge the Premier, if he has nothing to hide, if he has such confidence in the 
Minister and the officials of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, then immediately he set up a judicial 
inquiry and send it into the North and let them come out and tell us what is going on. If there is nothing to 
hide, if the terms of reference are honest and above board, and you picked the right individuals, or the right 
individual and back them up with full terms of reference, let them go into the North. If they come out and 
say, "Yes, all it was was some growing pains, some honest mistakes," fine, then the public will know, we 
will know and that will be the end of it. But your continuous refusal to do this and your continuous refusal 
honestly to look at what is going on in the DNS in spite of everything that has happened, in spite of all the 
criticism and the most serious criticism by the auditor, demands that at least you follow the suggestions of 
the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) and the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) and 
follow through on the suggestion and the request of the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). Replace these 
DNS officials, launch an investigation and clear the air about this whole mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proves, without a shadow of a doubt, that it is a mess. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few things to say in this debate and, 
therefore, I want to go and investigate the auditor's report and, therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON WELFARE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Mostoway (Hanley) that: The 
Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2935 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to speak too long on this particular 
resolution, but I know that other members of the Committee have expressed their opinion and I was out of 
the House on the last two occasions when this item came up. 
 
I do not intend to repeat the discussion of other members of the Committee. I think they have very 
adequately covered the intention of the Government and the intention of the Committee, but I should like to 
make about four or five points that I think have not necessarily been covered by the members of the 
Committee. 
 
The first thing that was very obvious to me, and I am sure to other members of the Committee, is that there is 
a real backlash against welfare in the Province of Saskatchewan and I am sure that this is not only restricted 
to the province of Saskatchewan but it is probably right across the Dominion of Canada. This backlash in 
generated, I think, for two reasons. The first reason for general concern of people about abuses and potential 
abuses in the welfare system is that everyone appears to know someone down the street who is on welfare, 
who is driving a car, who shouldn't be on welfare. There is a fear because they know one or two or three 
individuals who are abusing the system, that this abuse is a general abuse. 
 
The second cause for this backlash, I believe, is the fact that everyone is concerned about those employables 
who are drawing welfare assistance and are making little or no effort to get back to work. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that this backlash in welfare can very often, not only have a rather disastrous impact upon the 
willingness of the Government to respond to the needs of the legitimate persons on welfare and I am 
thinking of senior citizens or chronically ill, or handicapped people, and it very often makes it difficult for 
governments to respond to the growing cost of living, increasing welfare allowances and so forth. 
 
The second thing that I found very obvious wherever we went on the Committee, was there was a general 
concern or a general desire of Saskatchewan citizens to see that those people who were receiving welfare 
payments and were capable of work, would work and that some general policy could be found either to do 
one of two things — to force people to go out and seek a job, even if it meant cutting off welfare allowances; 
and second, by providing a sufficient incentive within the system to see that those people did go to work and 
that any welfare system did not attempt to lock-in the individual within the system for the rest of his time. I 
think that this particular desire to see that the incentive was provided, that people that were of an employable 
nature should be forced to go to work was perhaps the second most important thing that I found in the 
general consensus of the public. 
 
I think there was also a feeling that employables should be separated from other recipients of welfare. In 
other words, that not only should they come under (even if it's necessary to give them assistance at times) 
they should not be classified with those people who are not normally employables, that those people who are 
permanently requiring assistance from the taxpayers, such as handicapped people, whether it be mentally or 
socially, those people who have now reached an age in life where they no longer have an earning capacity 
and at the same time 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2936 

they are forced to come for assistance of some kind. Therefore, I think it would be wise if some system could 
be found or devised whereby employables could be completely separated and that employable people, if they 
did require assistance of some kind, would also have to have employment counselling, job placement and 
that kind of assistance. 
 
The third thing I found, was a genuine concern of professionals within welfare. A genuine concern about the 
fact the tremendous amount of time and of red tape that was required to look after the red tape through the 
processing of applications, the looking after of the normal requirements of the means test, so that very little 
opportunity was given to them or provided to them in order that they might really look after the real purposes 
of their profession. There are so many social workers today who are leaving their profession because of 
frustration and not being able to devote the time and effort to providing real interest in the social concerns of 
the people whom they had hoped to help. 
 
I think it is very, very necessary that we get into a much more simplified form of application of welfare and a 
much more simplified system of checking applications. A large number of strides have been made in this 
direction in the last few years — the permanent caseload has been put on a mailing renewal form each year 
and so forth. 
 
The fourth thing I want to mention is the concept of the guaranteed income and I know it has been discussed 
by the members of the Committee and, therefore, I won't prolong it. In the past I have been very, very 
reluctant to accept the philosophy of a guaranteed income and I have been reluctant to accept it because I 
have been concerned about the danger of not providing an incentive to work and for people to get back to 
making a permanent contribution, or a regular contribution to society. I felt that if you put people on a 
guaranteed income that there would be a tendency to accept that position in life or that status in life and they 
would really become permanent welfare recipients. Experience in other places of the world, particularly in 
New York where statistics have been really put together, shows that there are welfare recipients of the fourth 
and fifth generation. I have been concerned about the guaranteed income in this regard. I am now beginning 
to think that the conglomeration of programs, the tremendous proliferation of red tape and bureaucracy that 
perhaps the guaranteed income has something to attract it to really careful examination. There are 
experiments going on around North America today that seem to indicate that it doesn't really detract from the 
incentive to work and for the first time, I think, I am willing to see the Province of Saskatchewan get into 
some type of an experiment in this regard and with a close scrutiny on whether or not it would have any 
impact on the incentive to work. 
 
I have only one comment to make about the Committee and I think it is important and I think it is for 
committees in general. One concern I had about the Committee direction was not in any personal way in 
relation to any members of the Committee. I think most of the people, when you come to deal with welfare, 
most of the members of the Committee, were very, very sincere in attempting to arrive at the kind of a 
solution that would be beneficial to, first of all, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and to their general 
responsibilities as an MLA. But one thing I did find, and that I am very critical of, is the 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2937 

fact that there seemed to be a complete lack of financial responsibility. On more than one occasion members 
of the Committee requested that in assessing requests from the general public that before the Committee take 
them into consideration and before the Committee made recommendations, that we do a financial assessment 
of the cost implications. On more than one occasion we found that we didn't have the resources really to do a 
thorough investigation. I found that the majority of people who came to the Committee that whatever their 
complaint was, or whatever their request was, automatically became, or almost automatically became, a 
recommendation if there was a need that could be demonstrated. I think most members of the Committee 
would have to agree that really if we looked at the total package of those particular recommendations that we 
would have to say that they would bankrupt the Province of Saskatchewan. We have no way of knowing the 
total dollar value and I think all members of the Committee will recall that we didn't have the resources, we 
didn't have the research staff, nor the research capability to do that kind of an investigation. I think that it 
would be well for this Assembly to remember that if they set up a Legislative Committee, that they should 
always make sure that they do have the capacity to have the back-up staff and resources that are required. 
 
One other thing that I did find, I think that the Welfare committee, probably more than any other committee, 
in the history of Saskatchewan, had public hearings hither and yon. In fact, we spent two or three weeks — I 
wasn't able to attend them all in northern Saskatchewan — but we went from community to community. I am 
not sure if it was not a public relations job of the Committee. Perhaps that was important and I am not going 
to debate that, but I do think that there was perhaps and we could have really simplified our work and have 
been just as productive by a little better organization and some restrictions on public hearings. On more than 
one occasion we went there without any written or prepared briefs being presented to us and it became a 
general discussion. My comment above, I think, is worthy of consideration. But I would suggest two things 
for the committee system: 
 
1. That adequate funds be provided to the chairman and members of the Committee with a strong back-up 
and research staff, so that a real, true and accurate assessment and evaluation of any recommendations that 
are provided in a report be given to the Members of the Legislature and the general public. 
 
2. That a time limit be placed on the Legislative Committee structure — I don't mean a real minimum 
requirement, I think every committee should have the opportunity to carry out their task and function 
adequately. I should like to suggest that I don't think a committee needs to take two years or two and one half 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that all the other points, members of the Committee have discussed very, very 
thoroughly the report and their findings. I want to say once again, I congratulate the chairman and the 
vice-chairman, I think they were sincere and I will be supporting the Report, but I do support also the 
reservations of some of the Members. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2938 

MR. J.K. COMER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say just a few words on the Report of the 
Special Committee on Welfare. I was one of those who served on that Committee. I think, by and large, we 
worked together fairly well. We did have a number of public hearings, we heard from a wide cross section of 
the Saskatchewan population. 
 
There is one area that I should like to spend a little bit of time on, one recommendation. I would like to read 
part of a paragraph from the Report. This is part of a paragraph n work for welfare. 
 

It (the Committee) feels that most people desire to work and will work if given the 
opportunity to do so. The idea is based on a number of observable facts. First, the number of 
persons who are actually employable and receiving welfare amounts to roughly 10 per cent of 
assistance caseload. In other words 90 per cent of the people who receive public assistance 
are doing so because there is no alternative; while 10 per cent are receiving temporary aid 
while seeking employment. 

 
The Committee, and I think every one of us at different times has heard people complain about employable 
people being on welfare, or on some other assistance program. 
 
Myself, my personal feeling is that probably the biggest maybe I could call it, crime of assistance programs, 
is the fact that in our society we, in a sense, encourage or allow at least productive people to sort of be 
thrown onto the scrap heap. The reason they are thrown on the scrap heap is because the economic system 
can't provide them in many cases with an opportunity to produce, with an opportunity to be employed. 
 
You know, some people will say that all this welfare is too much socialism. I think the problem of 
employables on welfare or unemployment insurance isn't a problem of an economic system that can only 
employ a certain number of people eight hours a day, 40 hours a week. It can't employ people who can only 
work two hours a week, because of disabilities, it can't employ people who can only work maybe one day a 
week because of disabilities. It can't employ people who don't have certain skills, it can't employ people to 
do necessary tasks that return nothing, such as cleaning up communities. This is the real problem of 
employables on welfare. It is a problem of society, it is a problem of economics, of the economic system. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Department of Social Services in the last year for beginning a program called 
the Employment Support Program, a program which in some communities has employed people who are on 
assistance to do local necessary projects. In the community I live in they cleaned up lots, they cut grass on 
lots where the grass is never cut, generally it was burnt in the spring. They did this sort of public work that 
never could be done before, the municipality couldn't afford it, there was no program where the Government 
was aiding the municipality in getting the work done. I think the people who have been on assistance 
appreciated the program. The people who were working in the community, the farmers in the district, also 
appreciated it. They felt it was a valuable program. I think we need more of these programs. I think, also, we 
must look at the idea of making it possible for people who can only 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2939 

work two hours a week because of certain disabilities, making it possible for those people at least to be 
productive for those two hours, whether it is doing something at home or doing something in the community. 
In many cases the work would have to be heavily subsidized, but I think everyone or almost everyone wants 
to contribute to society and the crime of our society is that we don't allow those people to contribute. I think 
in the long run this will have to be the real solution to the problem of social assistance. 
 
Now some people say that the reason these people should go to work is because it is so expensive to keep 
them on welfare. I think we must remember that when we put a person to work it is not going to be cheaper 
than putting him on welfare, it's more expensive. These people need tools, they need equipment. Some 
people will need to get paid more in supervisory positions. It is not a way to save money, it is a way to save 
people. 
 
People who get up and talk about the idea that by putting people to work you save money in terms of local 
community projects know that they are just whistling in the air, whistling in the wind and what they are 
saying really has no validity. It's just a political argument, which goes nowhere. This is my prime concern 
about welfare, the fact that we are allowing people in our society — as I said earlier — we are throwing 
people on the scrap heap when we don't need to, that's a crime, a serious crime. I should like to see programs 
like the employment support program making people valued members of their communities, extended and 
expanded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be gladly supporting the Report of the Special Committee on Welfare. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, just a few words at the end of this debate. I want to say 
that I had mentioned before that I probably wouldn't politic, I have changed my mind, I definitely will not. 
 
In answer to some of the comments made, for example, by the Hon. Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald), he talks of a backlash. I agree that there was a certain amount of backlash. I think we would all 
agree to that. Work was a factor that was on the minds of many people, people not receiving assistance and 
people on assistance. I agree that everyone would agree to that. Insofar as the professionals and the red tape 
was concerned, I think this has always been a concern of people and particularly politicians. He mentioned 
something about the financial aspect of it. Well, this Committee really thought that it was not charged with 
crossing every t and dotting every i, they put out some recommendations for discussion points and kept in 
mind that they knew full well that the financial position of a province certainly changes from year to year as 
evidenced in Saskatchewan over the last few years. 
 
The public relations program, I think the Hon. Member said he wasn't sure whether it was a public relations 
program or not. Well, I am not disputing that, but I look at it as a by-product of our various hearings 
throughout the province. I just do want to point out that when we decided to hold public hearings throughout 
the province, it was a unanimous decision. 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2940 

A few other points insofar as the guaranteed annual income is concerned. I just want to read a couple of 
phrases out of the Editorial Page Wednesday, May 1, 1974, from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, "Guaranteed 
Income." They mentioned Health Minister Lalonde's interest in the guaranteed annual income. They say: 
 

Health Minister Lalonde thought of the Guaranteed Annual Income as being a federal 
program which Ottawa would work out and probably control nationally. In early March he 
got his Government to pay out $14 million to finance an experimental GAI program in 
Manitoba. 

 
And I think he has always been partial to the Guaranteed Annual Income. 
 
I am pleased to see that the Member for Milestone — I don't say he favors the Guaranteed Annual Income — 
but he certainly is having second thoughts about it. 
 
I want to mention here, also, that Reuben Baetz, Director of the Canadian Council on Social Development 
(this is in the same editorial) says insofar as the Family Income Plan is concerned: 
 

It is the most remarkable and boldest step taken by a provincial government in decades and 
one which cannot help but have a profound impact on Canadian social policies and the march 
to the objective of a guaranteed annual income. 

 
I just want to mention once again that the politicians in the various Legislatures of the country and in 
particular on the federal scene, all agree that it is financially feasible, administration wise it can be put into 
implementation, but a lot of them feel that it is political suicide. 
 
Insofar as work is concerned, I really do feel there was a bit of unfair criticism directed toward the 
Committee, in that regard because I believe there were numerous recommendations relative to work, I think 
in 14 and 15 we proposed agencies and we have said that people should be offered work for welfare. I take, 
for example, the Committee's recommendation that the "extreme hardship" clause be removed, certainly 
indicates that the Committee thought we should reward people for working if they are on low wages. I am 
glad to see that the Family Income Plan is doing exactly that. I believe somebody had mentioned abuses, 
certainly there are bound to be abuses, but I just want to point out that anyone in this province, whether they 
sit in this House or not, are really obligated to a certain extent to point out abuses and relay them to the 
appropriate agency which would in most cases be the Department of Social Services. We have an obligation 
to do that. 
 
I notice there was some slight difference between some of the Members, I suppose that's a reflection of the 
philosophical differences between our Party and Members opposite; fine, I appreciate that there are 
differences. 
 
I want to say that as far as I was concerned I thought it was a good Committee and I think we have evidence, 
now that I am closing debate, that we certainly didn't politic here. That pretty well sums up the situation 
when we were working together 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2941 

and held public hearings. The Committee worked very well and I want to thank every member, plus various 
people who were involved with it. I want to thank them very much for making it a good workable 
Committee that came out with what I think is a very good Report. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 12:30 p.m. until 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Faris that Bill No. 125 
— An Act to amend The Liquor Licensing Act, (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
MR. L. LARSON (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I listened rather attentively to the Member for Arm River and the 
Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) as they took part in the debate on this motion. I agree that the problem of 
alcohol and drugs is a serious one. The Member for Rosthern is undoubtedly absolutely sincere and 
convinced of the viewpoints he expresses. I respect him for those views. The Member for Arm River (Mr. 
Faris) is undoubtedly equally convinced and concerned and is sincere. 
 
As a person who has never had any problem with the use or control of either drugs or alcohol I am not sure 
that changing the age from 18 to 19 is very important. If we are to effectively do some good I believe we 
must go much further. 
 
I have considered the amendment but I cannot decide whether the age limit should be 18, 19, 25, 40 or 85. 
When I make up my mind I will consider the amendment. 
 
I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to all Members of the 
Assembly 30 adult students from the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Science at St. Pat's Annex in 
Regina North West. They are located in the Speaker's Gallery with their teachers, Mrs. Quiring — I am not 
sure whether the other teachers are with them today — there were three or four other teachers here the other 
day when this group visited the Assembly on Wednesday we had adjourned. We met with them and 
encouraged them to return while the House was in Session. Their presence indicates that they are interested 
in the study of government. We welcome them and wish them every success with their course of studies. I 
hope they find their visit here educational and informative. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2942 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of students 
from the Dr. George Ferguson School, located in my constituency, they are accompanied by their teachers 
Mrs. Savage and Mr. Hill. On behalf of the Members of the Legislature I want to extend to the students a 
warm welcome and I hope that their tour through the Legislative Building and their experience this afternoon 
in watching the Legislature in session will be a worthwhile experience for them and will assist them in their 
Social Studies. Again, I welcome them and hope they have had a good day. I propose to meet with them later 
this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, to you and to the House I should like to introduce 40 
Grades Five and Six students of the Buchanan School in the constituency of Canora. I have a special feeling 
for this school since it is one that I attended during two of my high school years. The young men and women 
are seated in the Speaker's Gallery. Accompanying them are the two teachers, Mrs. Frances Maksymiw and 
Mrs. Betty Popowich and their bus driver, Adam Shabbits. I am informed the students and their teachers 
through various projects raised their own funds to finance this trip to our Capital City and the visit to the 
Legislature. I should like to commend them for their initiative and their keen interest in making this trip. 
 
I should like to extend to them a very warm welcome and the hope that they have a very enjoyable and 
informative day and a safe trip home later this day. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney 
General) that Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Election Act, 1971 be now read a second time. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments to make about this Act. 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . went for seven hours. 
 
MR. MALONE: —- Well, it won't be for seven hours, it might be four or five. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, when this Act was first brought to my attention a few days ago, I read it and my 
initial inclination was to support it. The Attorney General in introducing the Act referred to three principles 
in the Act — disclosure, limitation of expenses and reimbursement. 
 
Probably being the newest Member in the House, I have more familiarity with the expenses of an election 
than the others and I must say that I agree full heartily with the concept that election expenses must be cut. 
However, on the other two 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2943 

principles I am not sure I do agree with them. 
 
While the aims of the Act are admirable, I think that the results of them may not be the same. I say this 
because I feel that what the Act is trying to do is if future elections run on the same basis that the NDP has 
run their past elections, that is, using people rather than advertising. I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and 
to other Members, that I can see nothing wrong with advertising per se and to put a limitation on the 
advertising that a political party or an individual candidate can do at any given election, is in my submission, 
improper in that it interferes with the freedom of the Press and also the freedom of a candidate to 
disseminate his information in any manner in which he sees fit. 
 
I would suggest, as well, Mr. Speaker, that the concept of disclosure as the Act anticipates, is also unfair and 
I am not referring to the large donations by unions and companies and so on. I am thinking of the 100, 200 or 
300 dollar donations. I would submit that there is no reason why people should not be allowed to support a 
political party in any manner in which they see fit. If they wish to support that party by donating money to it 
rather than working in an election, I can see no reason why they should not have that privilege and the 
privilege to do it without their names being published. It is their business as to which party they want to 
support; it is their business the manner in which they want to support it. I do not agree with this provision of 
disclosure at least at the rate of $100. Perhaps if there was a higher amount of money shown as the amount 
that could be donated without disclosure, I could bring myself to support it. 
 
I fear, Mr. Speaker, that the Act also is in complete conflict with the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. I should 
like to refer the Members to the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights and in particular to Section 4. 
 

Every person and every class of person shall under the law enjoy the right of freedom of 
expression through all means of communications, including speech, the Press, the radio and 
the arts. 

 
I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that the provision in the proposed Bill restricting the amount of money that can 
be spent by a candidate or by a political party in any election takes away this freedom of freedom of 
expression as contemplated in Section 4 of the Bill of Rights. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that the proposed Bill is also in conflict with Section 16 of the Bill of 
Rights, which provides: 
 

. . . and expressly provided, nothing in this Act . . . from any right, freedom or liberties which 
any person or class of persons is entitled under the law. 

 
And surely one of the greatest rights we have in this society is to support a political party in any manner in 
which we see fit. And if a person wishes to donate money to that political party and remain anonymous, I 
would suggest that that is his right, at least, under the British heritage that we all have. 
 
I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that for these reasons I feel 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2944 

that the Act should be given further consideration. I must say that in my own mind I have some difficulty in 
bringing myself to support it for the reasons that I have given to you already. If the Act was amended further 
and the amount of money that was allowed to be donated to a political party without disclosure was 
increased, and if there was some other provision in the Act as well to permit further advertising in political 
campaigns, I may bring myself to support it. 
 
These are the remarks that I have to make now, Mr. Speaker, and I regret that I didn't realize that this was 
coming up so quickly because I wish that I could have said a few more things. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the arguments that have been 
advanced by the Members of the Opposition on the other side. I don't know where one draws the line with 
respect to ceilings or where one draws the line as to the limit beyond which a person must reveal and below 
which he does not have to reveal. 
 
In response to the Member for Lakeview, he will know that when we initially moved the Bill about a year or 
so ago, the figure arbitrarily chosen was $50 and under as the non-reporting figure. We have upped this in 
the printed Bill to $100 and perhaps that is still not enough, I don't know. It just seems to me that on balance 
a $100 contribution given by an individual to a political party or to a candidate is a contribution which 
achieves both objectives, high enough to satisfy the arguments advanced by the Member for Lakeview, while 
at the same time, low enough to avoid individual revelation and disclosure, which is the thrust of the Bill. 
 
So, we may be in error as $100 may be too low, but I don't know. But on balance I think that this figure is 
still an acceptable one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a word or two about the questions and other points raised by Members opposite. One of the 
major thrusts of their argument has been that the Government will somehow have an unfair advantage by 
virtue of its position as government, and by virtue of its position by this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I reject that 
particular point of view. I reject that particular point of view because it assumes that those in Government 
somehow get more free publicity by virtue of them being in government than those who are in opposition. 
That is a two-edged sword. 
 
Publicity can be good and it can be bad. And while the government may receive a certain amount of 
publicity in the announcement of policies and programs, the fact of the matter is that those programs and 
policies are also subject to a great degree of criticism, because of the publicity given to them. 
 
I say, with all respect, that the Opposition parties in our province get good publicity attacking the position of 
the Government. They get good publicity by virtue of their status in the Legislature and that the argument 
that we get somehow an unfair advantage, simply does not wash. 
 
Now a second point raised by the Members opposite is the one made by the Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald). It is about the Government, just before an election, pumping in a massive 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2945 

expenditure program for publicity by the Government. But I don't accept that as a reason to argue against this 
Bill. I don't believe that any government in today's society in Saskatchewan would be credible by pumping in 
massive sums of obviously patent political advertising, 30 days before the election campaign, the people of 
Saskatchewan knowing full well what the 30-day provision is. 
 
I don't believe that situation would be tolerated. Parties may try it but I say that it won't work politically. The 
consumer here is the electorate and I believe that he is sensitive any knowledgeable to the provisions of the 
law that apply to him and will be particularly in this case. 
 
I want also to say to the Hon. Member for Milestone that if 1971 proved anything, in my mind, it proved that 
no amount of paid television or radio, purchased by a political party or purchased by a government in power, 
can forestall the judgment of the people. I don't mean that in any general sense and I don't mean that in any 
accusatory sense. I think it is generally accepted that the amount spent during the last provincial general 
election in terms of television and radio publicity, the Liberal Party versus the NDP, was certainly massively 
weighted on the side of the Liberals. 
 
It may have had some impact. I don't think that it forestalled the judgment of the public. My personal view is 
that in these situations publicity cannot do anything that isn't existent already. Publicity might be able to fan 
some flames but it can't spark the flames. The spark of public opinion is lit, I think, by the debates that we 
have here in the Legislature and the reporting which is the consequence of it. 
 
Now a third point raised, Mr. Speaker, is the question of the ceiling for the provincial parties. It is alleged by 
the Opposition that the ceiling is too low. Well, again, I don't know if $125,000 is too low or too high. I just 
personally don't have the knowledge of the extent of campaigning. I say that we partly met the argument by 
increasing it from $75,000 as it appeared in the printed Bill to $125,00, and by the time a general election 
rolls around I am sure that the Government would be receptive to submissions that this is a matter which has 
to be considered again. 
 
In any event it is an increase of $50,000 according to my calculations by the House amendment. Is it too 
low? I don't know, but one thing I do know, is that the ceiling applies to all political parties, Liberals, 
Conservatives or NDP. And that the advantage there will be marginal to any of them. 
 
A fourth point I should like to make, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the role of the media with respect to 
elections. I think that there is one danger with this publicity feature and revelation of campaign funds of the 
Elections Act and vis-a-vis the media and that danger is this. With the low ceilings — and I admit them to be 
low at $125,000 or $100 or whatever the ceiling happens to be — of necessity a greater portion of the issues 
and the decision of the issues and the burden of carrying the debate on the issues, falls on the media in the 
Province of Saskatchewan, because we are limited by ceilings. 
 
I admit that this is a danger. I think that this is one of the difficulties with the Bill because when we put the 
low 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2946 

ceilings on we don't have the full access, as political parties, to put our side on the issue and we are 
dependent upon the reporters and the news media, given their biases, their inadequacies, their own views and 
I don't mean that as any specific accusation. Quite frankly, I have spoken to the media people. I spoke to the 
radio and television people of Saskatchewan and I tried to convey to them that they were, in my judgment, 
the trustees of our airwaves and as such they had a duty to comply with similar provincial provisions as exist 
federally with respect to free time. 
 
I think if we could get the radio and television people to say to political parties, that there will be four hours 
across the province, for example, free time available to you ; that being our responsibility a trustees of the 
airwaves, you can package the messages you want then and we could still live within the ceiling of 
$125,000, plus have the additional radio and television time. 
 
One of the unfortunate things, however, of this whole election process, in my judgment, with the media is 
that they have capitalized on elections as a source of income revenue for them and they have adopted the 
attitude that free time is no responsibility of theirs basically. There are exceptions to this and the result is that 
political parties like us and the Conservatives and others now represented in this House, are frustrated by the 
tremendous expense to get the message across. The danger in this Bill, as I have outlined, is about putting 
too much of our cause in the hands of journalists. That, I think, is a worry in the Bill that certainly I would 
express and I don't think that I am talking out of order when I say that a lot of politicians would feel the 
same. 
 
I tell you that we are not letting the matter rest with the word by the radio and television people, that they 
will consider this at their will. I have written to the chairman of the Canadian Radio Television Commission, 
Mr. Pierre Juneau at Ottawa, asking him for the beginning of negotiations between the Province of 
Saskatchewan and the CRTC with a view to seeing what provisions can apply to radio and television stations 
in our province, to get them to hook onto federal broadcasting provisions which do provide for a certain 
amount of free time. 
 
We will see how the negotiations progress and what success we can get. I think this will help all the political 
parties and help the democratic process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a fifth argument is the question of the degree of control that lies in the hands of the leader and 
the party. It is alleged that this Bill places too much powers in the hands of the leader. It certainly does 
increase the authority of the leader because he has to endorse, as a legitimate candidate, the person who runs 
in the individual riding and without his endorsation, that person is not an official candidate of the party. So 
this criticism is true to a certain extent. I think our Party is as much concerned with individual autonomy and 
independence of Members as any. 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . Mr. Richards. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, John Richards, the Member for Saskatoon University, of course, left 
voluntarily. All I can say is that 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2947 

the tradition certainly of this Party is as good in this area as there is on any party in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. But let's not get into that issue. 
 
The point is, do we need this degree of control? And the answer is, that it is absolutely necessary if we are 
going to introduce limits and revelation. There is no other practical way to audit, to check reimbursements, 
the payments of reimbursements other than by the designation of who the official Liberal candidate happens 
to be in a particular riding. 
 
Once we as politicians decide that we are going to place limits and that there are certain rules to play by, we 
don't want some person running in Milestone and putting the tag Liberal behind his name and wilfully 
flaunting the provisions of the Bill and thereby getting into difficulty with the Leader of the Liberal Party and 
the candidate in Milestone without any knowledge or consent for that action. There has to be some form of 
audit and some form of control. This is the way to do it. 
 
But, again, I say to the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Milestone, that the real practice in this 
case answers any quarrels about the fear of the power of the Leader. I can't imagine, not even in the Liberal 
Party where at a Liberal convention a candidate duly nominated would not be endorsed by the Leader of the 
Party, even if the Leader of the Party found that there was some reason for him not to endorse that particular 
candidate. 
 
I am sure there are people who don't believe that some person should be nominated but the situation will 
dictate the realities. A duly nominated candidate, even if he is a rebel, would be endorsed undoubtedly by the 
Party leader. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another point raised by the Member for Milestone is the question of the role of the 
volunteer. He raised the spectre of the volunteer and he argued that somehow this would be weighted 
towards the Party in power because of volunteers who come from Trade Unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the Member for Milestone that if it is true for Trade Unions and the offering of 
volunteers, and that's a benefit that accrues to us, so too, it is true for the Liberal and any other party, when 
they receive volunteers from corporations, business or any other field of activity. 
 
This is not an argument that can be said is weighted on one side or the other. This is an advantage which 
accrues equally to all. And the success or the lack thereof, of political parties in recruiting volunteer time, 
really lies on the shoulders of the political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question has been raised about civil servants and their role in elections. What is the role of 
civil servants in elections? Should we say that their democratic rights should somehow be impaired or 
denied? I believe that throughout the Liberal argument in the course of this Bill that without saying so 
specifically, that is clearly implied. Let's make it clear, civil servants, like anybody else in our society have a 
full and complete right to political activity. A full range of political activity. 
 
The Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) talked about the Bill 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2948 

of Rights, a full range of political freedom of activity. If he wants to be a scrutineer, if he wants to be a poll 
captain, if he wants to run for the nomination, if he wants to run as a candidate, whether he is working for 
the Government or whether he is working for the school board of Regina, whether he is working for Kramer 
Tractor, whoever he works for. If, for example, the school board of Saskatoon, Saskatoon East, should give a 
leave of absence, to pick a name out of the air, Mr. Glen Penner, to run as a candidate for the political party 
in question, why could it be argued, how could it be argued that somehow that employer should give that 
freedom to the individual employee, but the Government of Saskatchewan which is supposed to set the trend 
and the level can't do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't buy that argument. I don't believe that is the case. I don't want to get into any type of 
unfortunate comments. The Member for Albert Park got into that the other day when he went to the length of 
reciting names. This is a game that we can all lose if you want. We can give you recitation of names . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Harrington! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — That's right. The Leader of the Opposition knows them by rote. People who receive 
leaves of absences the day after the election is called and right back to the day the election is over. In 1967, 
people who received leaves of absence the day that the federal election was called and got back to their jobs 
as Deputy of Co-operatives, right after the federal election was over in 1968. 
 
MR. STEUART: — That was a tragic mistake. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, maybe that was a tragic mistake. I don't know. But these are examples that one 
could go through. I am sorely tempted, sorely tempted to talk about the present Member for Lumsden who is 
not in his seat who was an executive assistant. I am not quarrelling with that. He got the nomination. He 
campaigned for it. The leave of absence came about on May 26, the day after the election in 1971 was called. 
All that I say is that in my judgment this is something which the Hon. Member for Albert Park made a very 
bad mistake in arguing. He errs in this area. He errs because the Liberal Party, if it is a sin, was a much 
sinning in this area as the NDP or any other government that will follow the NDP in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that any civil servant who takes a leave of absence without pay and his services can be so 
surrendered, has every right to take part in the democratic process in the Province of Saskatchewan. That is 
what the Bill of Rights is all about and we are not going to do anything to impair it and I don't think that you 
people will do anything about it either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that I have discussed several matters that have been raised by the Members opposite 
on factual points. I believe that the major concern of the Liberals I have set out here and I hope I have 
answered them. I say to the Liberals opposite, you are being asked to decide when the vote comes in a few 
minutes whether or not in principle you support the concept of limitation of campaign expenses and their 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2949 

revelation with certain exceptions of where campaign funds come from and whether or not you support the 
principle that elections are the business of all the public and the principle of partial reimbursement. 
 
While this Bill is not identical to the Federal Liberal Bill, it is close and similar. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — I wonder. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, it is. And those principles are maintained in the Federal Liberal legislation. 
They are, limitation, revelation and partial reimbursement. The Member for Albert Park says that it doesn't 
come in until July 15. It is true it doesn't come in until July 15, but the fact is that is what your Federal 
Liberal Party counterpart passed. When we studied this Bill we followed it as closely as we could. There are 
some difficulties in this area but the principles remain the way they are. 
 
I urge the Liberals in the Province of Saskatchewan, while they may have misgivings, I have misgivings as to 
what effect this Bill is going to have on our Party. I don't know what effect it is going to have in terms of 
elections. Maybe $125,000 is grossly too low. Maybe the Press will really put us in shackles over these 
concerns I have talked about. We have concerns as well. But the simple fact of the matter is that all of us 
should be able to agree on the principles of limitation, revelation and partial reimbursement which are the 
basic concepts of this Bill. 
 
I say this is positive election reform. I say this is good election law. There are kinks and there are difficulties. 
I believe that every political party in the Province of Saskatchewan can make this Bill work, will make this 
Bill work and all of Saskatchewan will be better for it, including the politicians who sit in this office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: — Would the Hon. Minister permit a question? One of the things that the 
Minister has explained is his concern that he doesn't know whether $125,000 is a reasonable limit or not. 
That is what concerns me. Would he be willing to put in an amendment in the third reading which would set 
up an all-party committee in this House to assess with members of the Press and political parties throughout 
Saskatchewan, what is a reasonable limit to election expenses? Not something pulled out of the sky whether 
it be one television broadcast a day, one a week, one on radio a day, one newspaper ad a day, five people in a 
central office. So that everybody will know what is a reasonable one, and bring in an all-party report on a 
reasonable limitation, as to what a reasonable election campaign would cost? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would answer as follows. I may be just a little lengthy but I want to be 
as full as I can about this. 
 
I believe that an interparty or intersessional committee in this matter certainly has some merit. I am 
concerned, 
 



 
May 3, 1974 
 

 
2950 

however, about the potential for real politics as we have seen from time to time in some of the committees 
we have set up which are less contentious than this one. Politics would be involved over a ceiling that high 
or one that low; Liberals are wealthier than NDP and so forth. Where do you get your money from and the 
like questions that may degenerate into disagreement. 
 
Frankly, if you want a specific answer, my answer to you would be that I should like to consider this for a 
day or two. But my first gut reaction is to say, no. Because I should like to see the Bill passed. I should like 
to see us consider it over the summer months and see where we go from here. 
 
Let me make one other thing clear. We tabled an original Bill a year ago, inviting submissions. We had 
some, we didn't have too many from political parties; neither from our party or your party. I will be very 
frank about that. But we did and we waited to see what it is and this is the result. I think the answer for this 
Session is, no. But I would certainly be prepared to review this matter further with the Leader of the 
Opposition or the Hon. Member over the next few months. 
 
MR. MacLEOD: — I wonder if I might ask a question of the Minister? I wonder if the Minister would 
consider referring the various details of the bill that we consider as contentious to an independent 
commission or to an all-party committee, one or the other? I have no quarrel to either one referring to totally 
independent and free and fair elections in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Let me say again, that I don't believe that there is any way that an independent 
committee can solve this problem. I just don't believe there is. I believe that the House of Commons' route 
and basically our route, is the way to do it. The only difference between the House of Commons' route and 
our route is that they have a very highly structured committee system. It is referred to a committee. Perhaps 
maybe some day we will develop that in the Province of Saskatchewan as well. But to refer it to some 
independent judicial authority, I simply don't think that will work. I think our best approach is to pass the 
bill, put it on the books. We will have a time to take a look at it to see what the possible effects will be. As I 
have said in second reading and as I have said privately and I repeat publicly, we are open to suggestions for 
change. I am not sure . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — After the next election. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Not after the next election. As soon as we can get to this operation. I don't know 
when the next election is going to be. But certainly assuming that we are going the normal routine, certainly 
we will take a look at it. We are not infallible, but we want to take a look at it. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following Recorded Division: 
 

YEAS — 31 
Messieurs 

 
Blakeney Pepper Matsalla 
Dyck Byers Owens 
 
 



 
May 3, 1974 

 

 
2951 

 
Meakes  Thorson Feduniak 
Smishek Whelan Comer 
Messer Kwasnica Rolfes 
Romanow Carlson Lange 
Snyder Engel Hanson 
Thibault Cody Mostoway 
Larson Robbins Oliver 
Baker Tchorzewski Kaeding 
Brockelbank   
 

NAYS — 8 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart Weatherald MacDonald (M. Jaw No) 
Grant MacLeod Malone 
MacDonald (Milestone) Lane  
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 o’clock p.m. 


