



















































Hansard: February 25, 1974


731 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

16th Day 

Monday, February 25, 1974 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before I call Orders of the Day, I should like to inform the Assembly that the 

Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Assistant Chief Electoral Officer a certificate 

of the following Election and Return of Ted Malone, Esquire, as Member for the constituency of Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGES 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Arla Abells and Debbie Mitchell will be Pages 

during the present Session. Two of our previous Pages are here and these are our two new girls. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

CURLING — KINDERSLEY RINK 
 

HON. A. TAYLOR: (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw to the attention of 

the Members that the Larry McGrath rink of Kindersley won the provincial men's final and now go to 

London, Ontario to represent the province in the Canadian Brier. I am sure that the Members join me in 

wishing them best wishes in their upcoming engagement. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

PLANT AT BISHOPRIC 
 

MR. A.W. ENGEL: (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should 

like to direct a question to the Minister in charge of Sask. Minerals (Mr. Snyder). I should like to ask 

him, is there any truth in the rumor that the plant at Bishopric, which was recently opened has been 

closed? If so, why has this plant been shut down? 

 

HON. G. SNYDER: (Minister of Labour): — In reply to the Hon. Member's question I think it would 

be improper to say that the plant has been closed but production has been suspended at the Bishopric 

plant because of a shortage of box cars. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

732 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Ohhhhh! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — The difficulty arises from the fact that there is a limited storage capacity at 

Bishopric and my information is that the operation will be suspended beginning today probably until 

Saturday, hopefully not beyond that. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

SASKATCHEWAN WINTER GAMES 
 

HON. E. KRAMER: (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to distribute the program 

for Saskatchewan Winter Games 1974 calendar of events to be held at North Battleford, up there in the 

better part of Saskatchewan, starting next Monday and going through from the 4th to the 9th. This is 

indeed an honor for northwestern Saskatchewan and The Battlefords, and Cut Knife, at Turtleford and 

Redberry and Biggar and Wilkie, to be part of the area that will be hosting these first Saskatchewan 

Winter Games. There is a full slate of events as you will see on your program when it is put on your 

desk, and there is also the button which I am wearing, which I hope you will proudly wear. I hope that 

all of you will make an effort to attend part, or all of these, or, at least, have some of your family 

present. This is, once again, putting Saskatchewan on the map. It is doing what many of us have said 

should be done for many years, making our winters more attractive, making our winters more enjoyable 

so that young people will have a reason to stay in Saskatchewan all year round, rather than making it just 

a summer place. 

 

MR. LANE: — Call an election. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That's not on the games list. I don't seem to notice it here, but I see there are some 

things like speed skating and fencing and a few others like gymnastics for the Member for Lumsden — 

especially on thin ice. I won't go into that further. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, once again I want to say and I should like the Clerk to distribute the invitations and 

the program so that you can keep informed and possibly make some effort to come to The Battlefords in 

northwestern Saskatchewan during next week. It is a first for Saskatchewan again and I certainly want to 

tender a very cordial invitation to everyone, not only in the House but outside the House who might 

possibly be able to come. 

 

I should like, also, while I am on my feet to draw your attention to this year's official highway map 

which is on your desk. We have tried to give a little more information on this year's map, indicating 

some of the geographic features such as the Great Sand Hills, Wood Mountain, the Big Muddy Valley 

and the various other geographic features in southern as well as northern Saskatchewan. For too long I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, we have been presenting Saskatchewan as a flat place with some lines drawn 

across it, very little interest to anyone who looked at the map. We hope by next year to have some 

topography built into it which would indicate terrain as well as simply identifying with letters or titles on 

a map. We are hoping to make Saskatchewan appear more interesting to those tourists and those others 

and even Saskatchewanians who pick up a Saskatchewan map and say, oh, I've never been there, I never 

knew there was such a thing as the Big Muddy Valley. There are many people who still don t 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

733 

know of this or the Great Sand Hills which is a geographic feature which is worthy of tourist attention. 

So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we can make Saskatchewan more interesting than we have on this year's 

map. You will also notice that for the first time, all of Saskatchewan is on the face of the map and I think 

that too is an indication that we are interested in what is happening in northern Saskatchewan rather than 

sticking it on the back of a map as it has been in the past. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

OIL EXPLORATION 
 

MR. D. G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

should like to direct a question to the Premier. In view of the very serious situation that the oil industry 

finds itself in in this province, with exploration literally ground to a halt, with the situation in Estevan 

and places like Swift Current and to a lesser extent in Weyburn, but especially in Estevan, where 

medium and small Saskatchewan companies are laying people off, are leaving the province or making 

plans to leave the province, can the Premier tell this House and the public when he is prepared to sit 

down with the oil industry and to clear up the uncertainty that now exists in that industry, to publicly lay 

before the industry and the public of this province a program that will, in fact, get the oil industry to 

come back into this province, start looking for oil, and put an end to the uncertainty that now exists? If 

he would check with his Minister about the situation in Estevan he would find that there is a literal 

depression in oil industry in that city and district. I think it is long past due the time when the Premier 

should have made a very clear cut statement. The worst thing that is happening to the industry is the 

uncertainty that exists; they don't know where they are going from day to day. I wonder if he would tell 

us that and would he also tell us, have the plans been set yet for the next meeting between the provinces 

and the Federal Government, the, first ministers, in regard to the national oil situation as it will exist 

after the freeze is lifted on March 1st? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the questions addressed by the 

Leader of the Opposition, to the latter question the answer is No, arrangements have not been finalized 

for a federal-provincial conference. 

 

With respect to the first question concerning discussions between the Government and the oil industry 

concerning future policy, I wish to advise the Leader of the Opposition that those discussions are taking 

place. The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley) has had a number of discussions with the 

industry and doubtless further discussions will be held, out of which I have no doubt that policy changes 

of a modest nature will be forthcoming such as will remove from the minds of the industry any doubts 

which the Leader of the Opposition seems to believe are there. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, obviously what the Premier is saying then is that he is not going to 

take any part in these discussions, is not taking any part in these discussions, and is showing us, I think, 

a very serious lack of interest in an extremely critical situation that now exists in the oil industry. I am 

talking 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

734 

about the small people who have been centred in this province, who have made their living in this 

province and are now being pushed out. Would he allow a supplementary question and tell us what is 

happening to Saskoil and when he is telling us that would he give us the qualifications of the Manager 

beyond being, I believe, a close relative of the former Minister of Mineral Resources. What did this man 

do? What are his qualifications? What is happening with Saskoil, if anything? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the qualifications of the Manager, I .should think 

that is a matter for a written question. I know them in part, I don't know them entirely. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I know . . . 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is apparently of the view that 

he knows the answer and if he does there is really no point in my belaboring the House with the answer. 

So I suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that he follow the appropriate procedure in a question of the 

type asking the qualifications of a particular employee, and put a question on the Order Paper. 

 

With respect to the other question asked by the Leader of the Opposition as to whether I was taking part 

in the discussions I should advise again that in my judgement the way to conduct a government is to 

appoint good ministers and to repose confidence in them and have them carry on the affairs of the 

government. I know that wasn't the style of the previous government, I know that there was in general, a 

view that all matters should be dealt with by the Premier. I say to this House that this is not the way that 

I believe a government ought to be conducted. I have every confidence in the Minister of Mineral 

Resources to conduct appropriate discussions with the oil industry and I have every confidence they will 

yield fruitful results. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

REGULATIONS — NURSE PRACTITIONERS' BURSARIES 
 

MR. J. G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to 

the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Smishek) with respect to regulations which were in the Saskatchewan 

Gazette on February 1st pertaining to nurse practitioners' bursaries. It is not perhaps the most 

earthshaking of questions but nonetheless I think it is of some note. (1) What does the Minister intend to 

do about the blatantly sexist references in the Gazette which constantly refer to 'she' when discussing 

nurse practitioners when I understand the first applicant has been a male. (2) More seriously perhaps is 

the question of Section (9) which seems to violate the provisions of The Labour Standards Act in terms 

of allowing maternity leave and seems to be grossly inhumanitarian in talking about a forfeiture of a 

$2,000 bond for anybody who is ill for more than three weeks. These are contained, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette regulations in February 1st, 1974, pages 77 to 78. I corresponded with the 

Minister via my assistant and we have yet to have a response. I trust that the Minister will be changing 

these blatant sexist and inhumanitarian regulations. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

735 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, we don't propose to give the 'he' a 

maternity leave of absence, but the regulations are being reviewed. I am grateful for the Hon. Member 

bringing this to our attention. As he perhaps knows sometimes these things are done by the officials and 

they are not perhaps properly checked with other statutes. We are reviewing them and I hope that we 

shall be making the necessary amendments. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: — Mr. Speaker, just a supplementary question, would the Minister advise definitely 

that this will not be in violation of the maternity leave provision and that the male candidate who has 

applied for a bursary will be eligible despite the references of 'she' throughout the regulations. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Minister said regulations are being reviewed and the Minister can't answer for 

future policy. Let's get down to the questions. I realize we have had three questions but it is a long time 

since we last sat, so with the indulgence of the House I will permit one or two more. 

 

FEEDLOT OPERATORS 
 

MR. J.C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I thank you very kindly. I should like to direct a 

question to the Government opposite, Mr. Speaker, and in particular to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer). I am sure as the House well knows, and the Minister of Agriculture particularly, if there is one 

sector of prairie agriculture that is taking a real beating financially in recent months, it has been the 

feedlot operator in the province, be he a small or a large operator. And there are many more smaller 

operators than big, large ones. But what has the Minister been doing in this regard? Now, what prompts 

the question is, I heard a press release recently that the Minister came up with the very lame duck and 

irresponsible answer that the solution to the feedlot operators' dilemma was very simple, simply don't 

buy any feeder cattle. Mr. Speaker, I can't even believe that remark, I hope the Minister was misquoted 

but I just don't believe he could make such a silly comment. Surely he must have some better answer to 

the millions of dollars being lost monthly by cattle feeders in this province. Before the 1971 election he 

had lots of answers, lots of promises. What are his answers and what is his solution to the financial loss 

being taken by the feedlot operator in Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER: (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in regard to the reference that the 

Member made to a press release that was purported to have emanated from myself in regard to 

boycotting the purchase of feeder cattle in the Province of Saskatchewan — that was in response to a 

position that was reported to have been or about to be taken by the Canadian Cattlemen's Association — 

my response to that was that I could certainly sympathize with their dilemma, it was not to say that I 

endorsed the boycotting of feeder cattle in the Province of Saskatchewan but I can certainly sympathize 

with the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the cattle feed lot industry, the cattle industry in the Province of 

Saskatchewan was confronting great losses for every animal that was sold or brought to market 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

736 

at this point in time. 

 

In regard to the more general question that the Member asked in regard to what my position is. The 

Department of Agriculture or the position of the Government of Saskatchewan as to what we should like 

to do to stabilize the livestock industry of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that we ask the Federal 

Government to introduce consistent federal policies that co-operate with the provincial policies in regard 

to giving stability to agricultural production. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — We have for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, spoken about a national feed grain 

policy for Canada which would resolve this great disparity and loss of money that the feeder cattle 

industry in the Province of Saskatchewan is now confronted with. We have, Mr. Speaker, for a number 

of months now been attempting to negotiate with the Federal Government for a joint Federal-Provincial 

Stabilization Program for all primary products in the Dominion of Canada. So, Mr. Speaker, this 

Government and this Department of Agriculture has attempted to recommend to the Federal 

Government national policies which it takes to resolve these problems which the Provincial Government 

will contribute directly to by assuming their responsibilities in carrying out stability for agriculture in the 

prairie provinces. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Just a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In short, if I read the Minister correctly he is 

saying he has no provincial policy; he is not concerned about the plight of the feedlot operator in this 

province. He is using the same old NDP howl, cry to Ottawa, they should solve it. He has got no answer, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is the point I want to make. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to that supplementary question if the Hon. Member would 

listen to what his Federal cohorts are saying, he would know that the Federal Government is now 

attempting to have national policies. Whether they will bring them about in time is yet to be seen. But 

for us, on a regional basis or provincial basis to try to plug the inadequacies of the Federal Government 

every time they make mistakes, it is not going to solve the problems for agriculture in Saskatchewan or 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

PEE WEE HOCKEY EASTERN PROVINCIAL CHAMPIONSHIPS 
 

MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY. (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring to the attention of this 

House a series of events of no mean consequence. I refer to this last weekend at Allan, where four Pee 

Wee hockey teams battled it out for the eastern provincial championship in the Class B series for 

communities of five thousand and under. 

 

Four teams participated, Allan, Langenburg, Melfort and Moosomin. The final game saw Langenburg 

pitted against Allan. After Allan gave up to Langenburg a liberal number of goals in the first period, the 

Allan boys, coached by Mr. Don Deibert, 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

737 

decided on a new hockey approach, the NDP approach, a New Deal for Players. Whereupon they played 

with such vigor, dedication and courage that they lost by only one goal to Langenburg, a worthy eastern 

representative. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

GOVAN HIGH SCHOOL CURLING CHAMPIONS 
 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all the Members of 

the House would want to join with me in congratulating the Govan High School curling team who won 

the Saskatchewan High School championship . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — . . . in Moose Jaw this past weekend. Members of the rink are Gordon Larson, 

Kim Puffer, Robert Martin, Don Dabrowski and their spare is Gordon's brother, Glen Larson. The 

coach, a well known community curler Russ Haugen. 

 

The commentary, and it is not surprising when you consider that Govan is in the heart of Last Mountain, 

these curlers won the hearts of the audience that attended the finals with their quietness and their good 

manners. I am sure that we wish them well in the Dominion finals in Ottawa March 10th to the 15th. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, since we have last found ourselves in this House, 

two former Members of the Legislature have passed away and I should like to ask the House to 

recognize their contribution to this House and their respective communities. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing since the adjournment of the 

Legislature of two former Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of 

the contributions 'they made to their community, their constituency and to this province: 

 

CHARLES ARTHUR AYRE, who died on February 1, 1974, was a Member of this Legislature 

for Turtleford from 1929 to 1938. He was born in England on November 24, 1890 and was 

educated at Hymers College and Kingswood School in England. He came to Canada in 1910. He 

was a notary public and a justice of the peace in Saskatchewan. From 1939 to 1944 he worked 

first in the office of the Executive Council and later in the Legislative Library. He was a member 

of the village council for Turtleford from 1916-1926 and also served on the Public School Board 

for Turtleford. He was a member of the Masonic Order and the Orange Lodge. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

738 

WILLIAM JOHN BEREZOWSKY, who died on January 17, 1974, was a Member of this 

Legislature for Cumberland from 1952-1967 and for Prince Albert East-Cumberland from 

1967-1971. He was born in the Ukraine on January 6, 1904 and in 1908 his family travelled to 

western Canada. He received his early schooling at Strathcona School in Winnipeg, and King 

George Collegiate in Prince Albert. He attended Normal School in Prince Albert, obtaining his 

third class certificate in teaching in 1924 and then attended the Normal School in Saskatoon, 

obtaining his second class teaching papers in 1926. He worked for, the railroad and from 

1923-1947 he taught school in Honeymoon, Kalyna and Dana. After working on the family farm, 

he became a prospector in the La Ronge and Churchill regions. He enlisted in the armed forces in 

1942. From 1948-52 he was superintendent of staff training for the Department of Natural 

Resources in Prince Albert. He took a leading part in his community and was 

Secretary-Treasurer of Rural Municipality No. 490 from 1927-1943, President and Secretary of 

the Meath Park Board of Trade, a trustee of the Prince Albert Larger School Unit No. 56, and a 

member of the Canadian Legion. In addition, he was a delegate to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

and for some years was also a partner in the Farmers' Supply Company in Meath Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did not know Mr. Ayre. I fancy that having regard to the fact that he did not serve in this 

House after 1938, there will be few who will have known him personally. It is clear from the 

biographical details that he had a period of about nine years in the House, which is more than average. 

Thereafter he served the Legislature and the Government in various capacities with the Executive 

Council and the Legislative Library. 

 

With respect to William John Berezowsky, Bill Berezowsky. I have known Bill since he entered this 

House in 1952. For those who know Bill Berezowsky it is something of a task to decide just what one 

says about Bill Berezowsky. He was well respected indeed, greatly loved. Above all, he was a man of 

unquenchable spirit. He believed, and he believed passionately, in the causes which he espoused, 

particularly in the cause of the down-trodden whatever form they may take. Those who were, in his 

judgment, insensitive to the needs of the less fortunate were Bill Berezowsky's targets and smote them, 

and he smote them royally, hip and thigh. He was a loyal party man but he didn't hesitate to criticize his 

party or his colleagues, in private or in public, when he felt they were wrong. Supremely he was his own 

man. He had a love of the Ukraine, its traditions and its people. Many will remember his words in this 

House when we honored the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the birth of Taras Shevchenko, the 

great Ukrainian poet and patriot. I remember, well, Bill speaking on that occasion. 

 

Bill lived life to the full. It was a warming experience just to know Bill, to be infected with his 

enthusiasm. There have not been and there will not be many men like Bill Berezowsky. 

 

In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement I ask this Assembly to express their most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

739 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, Charles Ayre came to this country 

from England before the First World War and like so many of his generation, immediately became part 

of the very fabric of our society. He took a very active part in community life in the Turtleford area. He 

served on local governments, served on the School Board and was very active in his lodge work, not just 

in his own area, but in all of northern Saskatchewan. He served in this House for two terms and worked 

for the Government of Saskatchewan for some time after that. I think that like many men of his 

generation he set a wonderful example and left a record that both he and his friends and his family can 

well be proud of. I join with the Premier and other Members of this House in passing on our 

condolences to members of his family. 

 

Bill Berezowsky, as the Premier said was a great individualist. I first became aware of Bill when I got 

involved in politics in Prince Albert — and you couldn't be involved in politics in the Prince Albert area 

without being aware of Bill Berezowsky on one side or the other. I think the first public meeting that I 

ever had Bill was there to ask questions and put me on the spot. And that rivalry, sometimes friendly and 

sometimes not so friendly, continued from about the early 1950s until shortly after he retired from this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I grew to like and respect Bill Berezowsky. I think that my friendship was reciprocated. We would battle 

in the House, and we had some dandies in this Legislative Assembly from both sides of the House, and 

then we would usually meet in the hall after. We would wait for five or ten minutes sometimes to cool 

down a little and then we would meet outside and since we both came from Prince Albert we decided 

that maybe we had a few more things in common than we thought we had when we were debating in the 

House; that really we had one very serious job and that was to instruct the backward Members of the 

Legislative Assembly from other parts of the province on the great future, the joys and the beauties of 

Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I recall some great things about Bill in this House. I remember the time that Allan Guy was speaking. He 

was then in the Opposition, we were the Government. They had made up their mind that they would 

refuse to even acknowledge Mr. Guy at any moment when he was speaking. So we were watching very 

closely. They were all doing very well pretending they weren't listening to Allan but Bill was having the 

most trouble because he was squirming. He wanted to get into the fray, as the Premier said, to come 

back at Allan, hip and thigh as he was wont to do. He was reading a book and there was only one 

problem, he had the book upside down and he stared at it for about 20 minutes and finally he couldn't 

stand it and he slammed it down and he left the Chamber. It was probably a very difficult time for Bill to 

sit in this House, hear someone speaking whom he so violently disagreed with as he did with the 

Member for Athabasca on every occasion and could not really get up and enter into the debate. 

 

People all over Prince Albert and the northern part of this province of all political philosophies who 

knew Bill, respected him. You knew where you stood with him. You knew that he had a passionate 

belief in this province, in this nation, in the uniqueness of his own nationality, and especially in the great 

future of northern Saskatchewan. He was convinced, over the years, that governments, both the 

government that he supported and the 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

740 

government that he opposed, did not pay enough attention to northern Saskatchewan. He never let an 

opportunity go by to publicly say so. I am sorry that Bill Berezowsky has passed on. He left a great mark 

in my community, in our community. He left a great mark in this province and he certainly left a great 

mark as an MLA in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

MR. M. FESCHUK: (Prince Albert East): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the memory of William 

John Berezowsky. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky was known to young and old as Bill Berezowsky, and was a prominent figure in local 

and provincial politics. He was a Member of this Legislature, as was pointed out earlier, for the 

Cumberland constituency from 1952 to 1967 and for Prince Albert-Cumberland from 1967 to 1971. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope you and this House will bear with me as I will try to relate to you very briefly some 

of the hardships that faced Bill Berezowsky as a young man. However because of his experience and his 

convictions I knew him to be a person who had a keen interest in improving our community, our 

province and our country. 

 

I shall always remember him very warmly, as a neighbor, a highly respected gentleman, a gallant man 

and above all an intimate friend. 

 

Bill was the oldest son of Ivan and Julia Berezowsky and was born at Kobylowloky, district of 

Terebowala in the Tarnopol area of the western Ukraine. He was born on January 6, 1904 and came to 

Canada to the city of Winnipeg with his mother in April 1908. Bill received his primary education in 

Winnipeg first learning the English language in kindergarten and later attending the King Edward 

School and Strathcona School until 1914. 

 

In 1914 the Berezowsky family homesteaded in the Honeymoon District a short distance northeast of 

Prince Albert. The poverty and the conditions of the day deprived Bill of the opportunity of school 

attendance for the next four years. However, in 1918 at the age of 14, Bill completed his Grade 8 at the 

King George School at Prince Albert and began his high school education at Prince Albert Collegiate. 

Again poverty of the day forced Bill temporarily to leave school and earn some school expense money 

to further his education. At the age of 16 he was employed on the railway in the interior of British 

Columbia and was a section foreman. 

 

His desire to further his education made him give up his job as a section foreman and to return to Prince 

Albert to complete his high school education. He attended Normal School in Prince Albert obtaining his 

third class certificate in teaching in 1924. After teaching in the Honeymoon district and working on the 

family farm for a year, Bill then attended the Normal School in Saskatoon, obtaining his second class 

certificate in teaching in 1926. His studies at home gave Bill some knowledge of accounting, 

bookkeeping and among other things, geology. In 1927 Bill accepted an offer to become the 

Secretary-Treasurer of the Rural Municipality of Russia, at present the RM of Garden River No. 490. 

 

In 1929 Bill went back to teaching, however, due to the pressures of the community he again accepted 

office in the same RM 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

741 

and in 1933, some years later, he resigned and became a prospector in the La Ronge and Churchill River 

regions. He entered into a general merchant business with his brother and while his brother operated the 

store, Bill carried on prospecting activities in partnership with a friend, Steve Salage and also as an 

employee of Anglo-Barrington Mines Limited. 

 

In 1941, Bill Berezowsky enlisted in the RCAF and a year later was honorably discharged and returned 

to take a leading part in his community. Over the years he had been the Secretary-Treasurer of the rural 

municipality, President of the Meath Park Board of Trade, member of the Canadian Legion, trustee of 

the school unit, a delegate of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a farmer, a justice of the peace and a true 

servant of the Saskatchewan community. In 1948 to 1952 Bill was superintendent of staff training for 

the Department of Natural Resources in Prince Albert. Bill Berezowsky was basically a social democrat. 

His family had been active in politics in the western Ukraine, his uncle was a senator in the 

Austro-Hungarian and later the Polish Governments, for what was known to be a radical or popular 

party. 

 

Bill Berezowsky actively supported political parties that he considered to be progressive and prior to 

1935 Bill believed the Liberal Party to be such a political party. However, about 1935 Bill associated 

himself with the social democratic CCF movement. Having been active over the years in politics he was 

invited and accepted the honor of being a candidate for the CCF in 1952 for the Cumberland 

constituency. He served his constituency well for four consecutive terms. I had known Bill for as far 

back as I can remember, however, it wasn't until he became a Member of this Legislative Assembly that 

our association became closer. I worked with Bill as one of his constituency executive members from 

1953 until he retired. I came to know and appreciate his sincerity, his energy and the purposeful 

determination of his convictions at all times. Bill Berezowsky came to northern Saskatchewan at the age 

of 10, Mr. Speaker. He could well be called a native son of the North, he loved the North and he loved 

its people. 

 

With an inherited background of radicalism Bill became recognized as a spokesman and a fighter for the 

rights and the privileges of the citizens of this province. Bill recognized the needs of his constituency 

and will be remembered by people from all political faiths for his dedication and his love for his people. 

 

William John Berezowsky is remembered as a teacher, a Justice of the Peace and administrator and a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly, more often known as Bill, but always known as a fighter for his 

constituency. His difficulty in completing his own education made him a firm believer in education at 

public cost and so he worked hard to change The School Grants Act. Lack of roads brought men like 

Bill together and in 1954 after the series of hard fought battles in caucus they achieved the market grid 

road system, a program that now 20 years later is the pride of rural Saskatchewan. The records will 

show, Mr. Speaker, that it was Bill Berezowsky who urged a publicly owned pulp mill in Prince Albert 

in the late 1950s. It was Bill who urged the government to transform the fish marketing service, the 

government trading stores into producer-consumer northern co-operatives, against the advice of the 

people in administration of that day. The National Inland Fish Marketing Service is a memorial to his 

hard work and his dedication. You 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

742 

will remember, Mr. Speaker, when Bill prevailed upon the government to build the Hanson Lake Road 

to Creighton and you will remember that it was Bill who led the fight for the human rights of our native 

people. 

 

These are only a few of the many achievements of this former MLA who represented Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland constituency and I could go on to mention his work, his interest and his efforts in 

conservation, in resource development, demanding roads to isolated communities such as were built at 

Cumberland House, Pelican Narrows, the removal of school taxes from real property, and a better and a 

more comprehensive health program. His genuine concern for the working people in our society, the 

working poor, the disabled, the Indian and Métis. These people certainly have to mark him as one of the 

great humanitarians of this province. 

 

Throughout the North, Bill's work is seen all around us, even to planning the town site and naming the 

community of Uranium City. We see the schools, the hospitals, co-operatives that Bill so diligently 

worked for. 

 

Bill experienced some difficulties and very much sadness when his wife Olga became ill and later in 

1968 he lost his good wife. He lost his wife who had encouraged him throughout all the years and in 

1969 he discovered that his own health was threatened and that he would require surgery. 

 

He came to my place one day and asked me to join him fishing on that afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I will 

always remember that particular afternoon, when he related to me many of the things that I have 

mentioned. He talked about the various strides of progress that were made by the CCF Government from 

1944 to 1964. He expressed his concerns; he expressed his fears about the actions taken by the then 

government of the day. It was during this day that he asked me to consider to seek the candidacy in the 

next coming election. He talked about the potential of the North and the necessity of a northern 

department and local government in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was happy to see this Legislature bring in some of the policies that Bill talked to me 

about on that particular day. I was happy to know that Bill was aware before his passing that a 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan was established and a northern highway program was under way 

and that the Government was moving in a general direction that Bill could support. Bill was encouraged 

by the actions of this Legislature and although he was not in the best of health, he received the Federal 

nomination for the New Democratic Party in the Prince Albert Federal constituency. It was during the 

latter part of the federal campaign that it became obvious that his health was failing. However, he 

carried on with determination and unbelievable energy. When the election was over and Bill realized his 

first political defeat, he had no personal bias and considered Mr. Diefenbaker his friend. In 1973, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill recovered his health and remarried, his concern for provincial politics did not diminish; he 

found a challenge in every progressive piece of legislation. On more than one occasion he indicated to 

me that he would seek the nomination in Prince Albert West and challenge his long time friend Dave 

Steuart, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a tragedy when later in 1973 Bill was a 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

743 

victim of a car accident, the car accident that indirectly I believe led to his passing on January 17, 1974. 

William John Berezowsky is survived by his second wife Maria, four sons, one brother and two sisters. I 

believe it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that Prince Albert East as well as Saskatchewan has lost a friend 

and a gallant man. On behalf of myself, my family and my constituents, Mr. Speaker, I should like to 

join with others in extending condolences to his family and his friends. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood): — I rise too to pay tribute to Bill Berezowsky. I had known Bill 

slightly, but it was only when I came to this Legislature in 1956 that I found and got to know Bill as I 

did. In the very short time we had become very personal and fast friends. I found him a man of kind 

nature and a heart as big as a barrel and he fought with that heart. I think that is probably the reason that 

I personally loved him so well. 

 

I too, like the previous speaker, remember going on a fishing trip with Bill Berezowsky in that beloved 

North that he loved so well. I remember the very pleasant morning we got up at 4:00 o'clock in the 

morning, the sun was just breaking. We took a boat, we motored or chugged down the lake, watching 

the wild life, neither one of us basically interested in fishing nearly as much as the wildlife that we saw 

that morning. 

 

I share many treasured memories. It was he and I who moved a resolution in this House in 1958 asking 

the Government to consider giving the native Indian people the vote. He was a person who always 

fought for the rights of minorities. His eloquence that day exceeded his usual direct fluent way when he 

rose to speak to this House. Indeed the Indian people have lost a friend in the death of Bill Berezowsky. 

 

As the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier have said, Bill was a fighter. He never failed to fight 

for the things he believed in. All of us Members will remember how he attacked the enemy, but after the 

battle was over there was no hate and there was no spite. 

 

After Bill was involved in a car accident and was in the hospital in Regina, I visited him twice, the first 

time a few days after the accident. One side of him was pretty well paralyzed, he was moving his 

fingers. The second time I visited him he was showing me how he could swing his legs; his whole side 

was okay again. I remember the fighting spirit in which he said, "They are sending me to the Wascana 

Hospital, for treatment. It won't be very long before I am out and fighting again", and he told us of his 

plans, which the previous speaker mentioned. It has been a great privilege for me to have known Bill 

Berezowsky and to have him as my friend. I want to add my sympathies with the others who have 

spoken here today. Saskatchewan has lost a great citizen. 

 

The other gentleman, Mr. Ayre, I never knew of course, it was long before my time in the House. I want 

to express to that family the thanks of another generation for those early old-timers who came and did 

what they believed was right in making Saskatchewan the good place that it is to live in. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT: (Kinistino): — Members of the Assembly, I should like to join with you to pay 

tribute to Mr. William Berezowsky. He was my seatmate for 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

744 

several sessions and was a senior Member when I came to this Legislature. He also served in the 

neighboring constituency and Bill was one who took time to help the rookies who came to the 

Legislature. Believe you me, you all know how much that is appreciated. 

 

I learned to appreciate Bill for what he was, he had a very deep concern for the aged, the sick and the 

underprivileged. If it was a happy occasion, Bill was there, and if it was a sad occasion, Bill was there 

also. Bill fought hard for the underprivileged and sometimes found himself voting against his own party 

in the Legislature in order to get his point across. I am sure that Bill was never ashamed of the stand that 

he took and as a result, he won the respect of all the Members of the House. 

 

Bill tried to change things that needed changing and he accepted things that he couldn't change. He put 

every effort into doing what was expected of him as a Member of the Legislature. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of all of the people in my constituency who knew Bill so well, I want to pay tribute to Mr. 

William Berezowsky and to express my sincere sympathy to his wife and family. 

 

MR. A. R. GUY: (Athabasca) — I should also like to say a few words in tribute to the memory of Bill 

Berezowsky. I first knew Bill after coming to the Legislature in 1960, where he had been for many years 

before that. We had considerable in common, although as was mentioned, we did have some real good 

debates here on the floor of the House, but he did represent a constituency that bordered on mine and 

had the same economic and social problems and background within that constituency. I don't think there 

was any question that Bill was a staunch supporter of northern Saskatchewan and the people who live 

there, particularly the Indian and Métis people. Bill had spent considerable time in northern 

Saskatchewan as a prospector, he knew the area very well, he knew the people. I can tell this House, as 

it has been said before, that the people of northern Saskatchewan had a great deal of respect for Bill 

Berezowsky. He spoke out regardless of whether he always agreed with his own party or whether he 

didn't. He spoke out for the rights of northerners and what he believed to be right, whether it was being 

done by his particular party at that particular time or not. 

 

We had many disagreements as I say, here on the floor of the House, but we also had many discussions 

outside the House, because I think we were both concerned with the future and the problems of northern 

Saskatchewan and the northern people. We sat down on many occasions and I appreciated his frankness, 

I appreciated his understanding. I am sure that from the talks that we did have on problems of the North 

that I came away from those talks a somewhat wiser man. 

 

I should like to suggest that there has never been a more sincere and dedicated representative of the 

people of his constituency and of the province, as was shown by Bill Berezowsky, both in and outside of 

this Legislature. With his passing the North has certainly lost a true friend. I should like to be associated 

with others in expressing a very sincere sympathy to the bereaved members of his family. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

745 

MR. M. FEDUNIAK: (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, Members of the Assembly I am pleased to have the 

opportunity to say a few words in tribute to the late Mr. Charles Arthur Ayre. Unfortunately I did not 

have the privilege of knowing Mr. Ayre personally, although I am aware of the outstanding contribution 

he had made both in public and community affairs. Mr. Ayre who died on February 1, 1974, was a 

Member of this Legislature for Turtleford from 1929 to 1938. He was born in England on November 24, 

1890 and was educated at Hymers College and Kingswood School in England. He came to Canada in 

1910, he was a notary public and justice of the peace in Saskatchewan. From 1939 to 1944 he worked 

first in the office of the Executive Council and later in the Legislative Library. He was a member of the 

village council for Turtleford from 1916 to 1926 and also served on the public school board for 

Turtleford. He was a member of the Masonic Order and the Orange Lodge. 

 

I should like to extend my sincere sympathies to the members of his family. 

 

MR. H. H. P. BAKER:(Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on behalf 

of Bill Berezowsky, a very fine MLA in this House for a good number of years. I want to make a few 

brief remarks but I should like to echo the sentiments expressed here today in the Legislature. 

 

Yes, Bill was a man of course who did much for his constituency and for the North. Perhaps not 

everything he said in this Legislature was appreciated by all but his contributions to his constituency and 

to this Legislature were many. Bill was a very warm-hearted man. Perhaps we would say, a man with a 

heart of gold, or a heart bigger than himself. He was a tough debater but was sincere in what he said. He 

had those convincing, sterling qualities of a diplomat. While being a farmer and a teacher he was always 

concerned about those who were less fortunate. He did think of the needs of others. It takes people to 

build a better world, people with leadership qualities, seasoned minds and of good report. Bill fitted well 

into these categories. 

 

To the bereaved family I express my deepest sympathy and I am very happy to have had the sincere 

friendship of a man like Bill Berezowsky. He really was a good man and a good MLA. 

 

MR. B. C. WHELAN: (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join the other Members in 

expressing condolences to the bereaved families of the Members who have passed away and in 

particular to the family of Bill Berezowsky. 

 

Bill was a close personal friend. As has been said over and over again he was always direct, he was 

loyal, he was honest. As a Member of this House he was one of the best. His constituents knew it, 

Members of the House knew it and his caucus knew it. Bill Berezowsky was a man of courage. He 

possessed the courage to represent his constituency vigorously whenever he felt the need. He was a 

person of depth. His home was full of books and he read extensively. But above all else he knew people 

and he liked them and they liked him. 

 

With Bill his constituents came first whatever the odds. Over and over again Hansard will tell the story 

of Bill Berezowsky, an honest representative who fought for his people with knowledge, with 

enthusiasm and with courage. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

746 

HON. G. R. BOWERMAN: (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my 

words to the memory of the late Bill Berezowsky. There is no question about the fact that Bill 

Berezowsky was known and understood not only in his own constituency in the northern part of this 

province but throughout Saskatchewan as the people's man. Bill was understood by those who knew him 

and by many of those who heard reports of him to be a counsellor, an advocate of the people, an advisor 

and consultant to his many constituents and to his many friends. He served as a public servant both in 

and out of the government employ and I say a public servant in the greatest respect. Bill loved this 

province and its people. He demonstrated that affection by the long life of dedication and the active 

service which he gave to the province. Bill has been missed in his home constituency. He has been 

missed by many people who knew him throughout the North. Inquiries continually come to me 

regarding Bill's activity from those who knew him as a northerner. He has been missed by many people 

across the forest fringe of this province, the Parkland constituencies, which he related to so well and was 

a spokesman for on many occasions. 

 

I want to extend my sincere sympathies to Mrs. Berezowsky, the family and his many friends. 

 

MR. J. C. McISAAC: (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to associate myself with many of the remarks 

that already have been made with respect to the passing of Bill Berezowsky. It has been said and it is 

very true, Bill was a unique and a colorful kind of fellow, he was certainly the kind of Member that I 

think helped make this House, some of the spirit, some of the flavor, some of the things that are hard to 

define. Bill certainly was the kind of man who contributed to that. He was the kind of man certainly I 

considered a real privilege to have known, a real pleasure to have known Bill, He, as I believe the 

Member for Melfort-Kinistino mentioned always took time to help the rookie Members. I can recall the 

first year as Minister in Crown Corporations, including the bus company. Things were going along well, 

regular routine kind of questions, and all of a sudden Bill jumped up and took a real blast at why the bus 

somewhere way up North wasn't driving into some place. It was only open six weeks in the summer but 

he made some great speeches on it and there was no real good answer except that the bus hadn't gone 

there and wasn't very likely to ever go there. I kind of wondered and just couldn't figure what point Bill 

was really making but when we were finished with the study of the STC in Committee, I left the Room 

267 and Bill was the first person to follow me out. He made it quite plain that he was not really 

expecting the bus to go in there but he certainly did want to draw attention to the fact that there should 

be more and better bus service to the North. By no means was he personally criticizing myself or the 

General Manager and so on. This, I think typifies the kind of approach that Bill had with respect to the 

rookie Members or rookie Ministers as the case may be and I never forgot it. 

 

He played the game hard when he was here in the Legislature, on the playing field here in the Chamber. 

Someone else said he was the very first to fraternize with anyone he liked whether on the government 

side, his own side or opposition, just as soon as he got outside or down in the dining room or any other 

area where Members do have occasion to fraternize. He was certainly an honest, forthright, friendly and 

effervescent man and I certainly 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

747 

wish to convey my sympathy to his family, Mr. Speaker, and to join with other Members here in 

expressing our condolences to them for the loss of a tremendous man, a tremendous Member. It isn't 

difficult to see when you think of him and remember conversations and listening to his speeches, why he 

was such a popular Member and why he was always elected provincially. You can certainly understand 

that from knowing the man. As I say, I join with other Members in expressing condolences and 

sympathy to Bill's family at this time. 

 

MR. J. K. COMER: (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with other Members who here 

today have given their condolences on the passing of Bill Berezowsky. I didn't know Bill for as long a 

period as many of the Members here present but in the short few years that I knew him I considered him 

a friend. Bill was always an honest man, a direct man. As has been mentioned, his major concern was 

always getting the best for his people, the ordinary people across the northern part of this province. 

 

I remember a story that Bill loved to tell about how he was successful before he even got into politics in 

getting a school for Meath Park. He told the story how in late 1944 or 1945 they had a small meeting in 

Meath Park and Lachy Macintosh was there, the Minister of the Crown. Lachy explained to the group 

that there was only so much money the Government could give to the building of a school. It was a poor 

area, a new area, they couldn't possibly raise the remainder of the money to build a school. Most men 

probably would have been dismayed and given up but not Bill. He turned to Lachy and said, "Why can't 

you give us the money", and Lachy said, "Well, that's the law." So Bill said to him, "Who makes those 

laws?" and Lachy said, "The Government." Bill said to him, "And who's the Government?" Lachy said, 

"We are." So Bill said, "Change those laws." And you know they changed those laws and Bill got the 

school. 

 

That was really, I think, the very essence of Bill's whole philosophy in politics. Law wasn't an end, he 

wouldn't have been a very good lawyer, law wasn't sacrosanct at all. Law was a tool and if the tool didn't 

fit Bill wanted you to change the tool. It was a practical philosophy. It was a good philosophy. He kept 

contact with his people. He knew his people. A fellow once told me a story of how he was coming down 

the Hanson Lake Road, driving down and as he was coming down in the middle of the winter, a fellow 

came out on snowshoes. It was Bill Berezowsky. He had been back seeing some trapper, a constituent of 

his who he had got word had a certain problem. Whether it was trappers, businessmen or school 

teachers, municipal secretaries, prospectors, Bill knew their problems. Bill had been in those 

occupations and for that reason Bill was loved by the people in his constituency and in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like to join with those who have gone before me today in extending my regrets to the family of 

Bill Berezowsky. We have lost a great man. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER: (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a few brief words to the 

condolences to my friend, the late Bill Berezowsky. 

 

Bill was elected in 1952 and was a freshman the same year in this House as myself. Our association over 

those years and even before that as I had known Bill since the middle '40s, at 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

748 

Meath Park when I was working in the woods at Candle Lake about 1947-48, and we had struck up a 

very close acquaintance at that time. During one of his first early nominating conventions I referred to 

him, and many people still do, as Battling Bill Berezowsky. That name during that particular speech I 

think stuck with many of his constituents and I don't think that any words describe him better. He wasn't 

a battler in the sense of blood and broken bones, he was a battler with words and persuasion and 

example. I think that everything that has been said on both sides of this House are so true, so intimately 

true of the man, Bill Berezowsky. 

 

There is a passage in the good book that says, "By their fruits shall ye know them." Certainly when you 

go back over Saskatchewan's history in the last 20 years or more, even before, as someone just said, that 

he was a Member, those fruits of Bill's efforts show. Many things that are now institutions in 

Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan were first talked about by our friend, my friend, Bill 

Berezowsky. Things like the prospectors' assistance plan, trying to get northern people interested and 

knowledgeable in prospecting. The first time I ever heard that plan spoken about was by William 

Berezowsky. I think the first time we ever raised the question of improving farm homes, modernization, 

water and sewers; certainly Bill was in the forefront of that fight. 

 

I remember in the late '50s when we brought in the grid road scheme, once again, maybe not the first one 

to suggest that but certainly some of my former colleagues in the House at that time that are not here and 

certainly some that are still here, remember that. Certainly the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) 

remembers Bill's battle for those things that have made Saskatchewan a better place. I could mention 

others. Certainly the present National Fresh Water Fisheries Marketing Corporation grew out of the 

small beginnings of another one of the dreams of Bill Berezowsky and others. The fruit, Mr. Speaker, of 

the ideas of people like Bill. 

 

Bill is gone but as long as people raise their voices in northern Saskatchewan for those things that are 

needed in northern Saskatchewan, he will live. 

 

The fruits of his having been here are many, not to say the least are four sons, Ihor, Boris, Emil, James. 

Ihor, better known as Bill, taught school and was a valued field officer for the Department of Natural 

Resources for a number of years. Boris and Emil are successful pharmacists, Emil in Saskatchewan and 

Boris in Vancouver. James, the last I heard, James was studying law. Certainly the Berezowsky family is 

again leaving its mark wherever they go. A granddaughter is now making her mark, skating in the 

Olympics. Bill was a true son of his early Ukrainian ancestors who made their mark in fighting for the 

rights of the people of the Ukraine in their day. Certainly the name of Berezowsky will go down in 

Saskatchewan history. It has been good for Saskatchewan, good for Canada, to have had a man like 

William Berezowsky. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I haven't very much to add to what other 

Members have said, but I certainly want to join with all Members of the House in expressing 

condolences to the family of Bill Berezowsky. There are only three or four words that describe Bill to 

me. First of all is colorful, how many times have we 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

749 

seen Bill come into this House with a big pile of a written speech and the first heckle from this side of 

the House or the Opposition side of the House and away went the written speech. An hour and fifteen 

minutes later Bill sat down having given us a good roasting and the House enjoyed every minute of his 

time. We have had many colorful people in this Legislative Assembly but I know of none who was more 

colorful than Bill Berezowsky. 

 

The second thing that I will always remember Bill for was his honesty. If there was anything that gave 

this side of the House greater pleasure it was to see Bill turn on his own people. Bill never hesitated to 

criticize his own Ministers, his government or his own party if he felt they were deficient in any area, or 

if they weren't paying attention to the things that he considered a priority. Bill was honest in his 

approach to politics. He was honest in his approach to life and certainly his contribution to northern 

Saskatchewan is very, very much appreciated by everybody there. 

 

The third word is love. There aren't very many people in this House on either side of the House, whom 

we can say that all of us love. Most of us turn around and we have either good words to say about some 

of us and bad words. With Bill Berezowsky there were very few of us who didn't really love him 

because he had that certain degree that naturally drew affection to him because when he left the doors of 

the House, as has been indicated, he was the first to slap you on the back, tell you you did a good job, 

tell you that you made a great speech whether or not it was to criticize the positions that he took or not. 

Bill naturally drew affection to him. 

 

The fourth thing that I often think about Bill Berezowsky is that he was a friend to everybody. If you 

ever needed any help or assistance you could always go to Bill regardless of what side of the House you 

belonged to. You honestly felt that here was one of the Members of the Legislative Assembly who was 

above party politics, above the individual partisanship that is so normal in debates that proceed in the 

House. I think that all of us will long remember Bill Berezowsky and for those Members who did not 

have an opportunity of knowing him, believe me they certainly missed a very unusual, unique and 

colorful individual. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD: (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my feelings and 

sympathy along with those of Members of this Legislature to the family of Charles Arthur Ayre. Mr. 

Ayre was one of those people who came from the Old Country and made a great contribution to 

Saskatchewan and to his community. I had never known him personally but evidence of the trust and 

confidence which the people reposed in him is the fact that not only was he elected to municipal 

government and to the local school board; he was elected and re-elected to this Assembly. It is a 

commentary on political mortality that no one in this House served back 35 years ago when Mr. Ayre 

last served in this Legislature. It is worth noting that he passed away just recently having lived to the 

ripe old age of 84. He was in this Legislature at a time when General Franco was mopping up in Spain 

and Hitler was chewing up the Austrian landscape and making demands at Munich and negotiating with 

Neville Chamberlain. That is the current period of history in which Mr. Ayre served. 

 

I am convinced that if he had passed away earlier many people who knew him better would have had 

much to say about him, 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

750 

so obviously a good citizen. I did work with Mr. Jim Ayre, his son, and Mr. Jim Ayre is now in the 

administration branch of the University of Saskatchewan here in Regina, and of course he and his family 

live in Regina. 

 

I should like to join with other Members of this Legislature in expressing my sympathy to the family at 

the passing of Charles Arthur Ayre. 

 

With respect to Mr. Bill Berezowsky, of course, I as a new Member of the House since 1971 did not 

have the opportunity of serving with him in this Legislature, but I cannot help but reflect that the 

comments today are as nice a thing as I have ever heard and it can be no greater tribute to any individual 

that when you pass and leave this earth people should speak thus of you. Obviously he was a great 

gentleman and one who made a great contribution to this Legislature. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 15 — An Act 

for the provision of certain Dental Services in Saskatchewan. 
 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, today I am proud to move second reading of The Dental Care Act 1974. With 

the introduction of this Act our Government takes another pioneering step in the health field. In 1947 a 

CCF Government gave birth to North America's first comprehensive universal hospital care plan. In 

1962, under the leadership of Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd, we pioneered North America's first 

comprehensive universal medical care. In 1974, through the legislative authority of The Dental Care 

Act, we propose to launch a province-wide dental care program for our children. Another first for 

Canada, another first for North America. 

 

Dental disease is one of the most common and pervasive forms of ill health among our children and 

among our adult population. If anything dental disease seems to be getting worse. In 1961 a Canadian 

Dental Association survey reported that at age 14 the existing backlog of untreated dental decay was on 

the average 3.4 teeth per child. In 1971 a survey of six school units in Saskatchewan revealed that on the 

average each child had four defective permanent teeth at age 11. 

 

The seriousness of the incidence of dental disease was recognized 10 years ago. At that time the Hall 

Commission on Health Services recommended to the Department of National Health and Welfare, that 

we set up a program to provide dental services to children in conjunction with the provinces. The Hall 

Commission recommended that the program employ dental nurses and auxiliaries 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

751 

to assist in providing this service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sad fact is that since those recommendations were put forward a decade ago, the 

Provincial Liberal and Federal Governments have done nothing to bring about such a program. This 

should not surprise us. I know of no new or innovative health program to have ever been introduced by 

any Liberal Government. Liberals do not place a high priority on health services. Liberal governments 

have a remarkable ability for discussing problems, problems like the energy crisis, problems like 

agricultural stabilization and problems like dental disease. They can discuss them for hours and days, 

weeks and months, and, yes, for years. For all we know any particular Liberal government may be 

capable of discussing a problem forever without doing anything about it. That is why the people of 

Saskatchewan elected a New Democratic Party Government. They have had enough of talk, they wanted 

action. That is what this Government is giving the people of Saskatchewan, action in the promises it 

made in the 1971 election campaign. 

 

We made a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to establish a public dental care service initially 

for those under the age of 12. This Bill before you today is another important step in taking action on 

that important commitment. Because of such an important program, because of the need for this 

program is so great, I trust that even the Liberals opposite are going to see fit to give this Bill their 

support. 

 

Today there are simply not enough dentists available in Saskatchewan to provide the services needed. 

There are approximately 208 practising dentists in Saskatchewan. This means that the dentist to 

population ratio is 1 to 4,500. That ratio is the third worst in Canada. The shortage of dentists in 

Saskatchewan is compounded by the geographic distribution of the profession. About one half of the 

dentists practise in Regina and Saskatoon. They serve only 30 per cent of the total provincial population. 

The result of this is that Saskatchewan children, on the average, receive only a fraction of the time they 

need for adequate dental service. 

 

Add to these problems the economic barrier that still exists for some of our citizens and the degree of 

apathy among our population about dental care, and you have some idea of the dimension of the 

problem. According to the Canadian Dental Association report of 1968, 70 per cent of people 18 years 

of age and under in Saskatchewan received approximately one half hour of dental care annually. 

Compare this with the data from the Oxbow project which reveals that each child accepted in the 

program required an initial three hours of treatment, and you can see something of the inadequacies of 

our present dental care service. 

 

Remember, too, that those figures are averages. I am told that only 40 per cent of our children receive 

dental care on a regular basis. In other words, 60 per cent of Saskatchewan children receive little or no 

dental care at all. To provide the necessary dental treatment services for children ages 3 to 12 in 

Saskatchewan, it is estimated that we would require at least a 50 per cent increase in the number of 

practising dentists in this province. 

 

As I said before, the problem of poor dental health isn't new. A shortage of dentists isn't new either. Our 

dentist population has remained virtually static over the last 30 years. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

752 

However, since coming to office our Government has taken a significant step in increasing the supply of 

dentists. We are making it possible for the Dental College to raise its enrolment in first year from the 

approximate 10 students to 20 students. We have done this by approving over $2 million for new 

facilities for teaching purposes. A new capacity to train dentists will be a boon to all of Saskatchewan in 

the years to come. 

 

The breadth of the problem and the lack of adequate personnel to deliver sufficient dental services, led 

us to the conclusion that we had to devise a plan which would make better use of highly skilled, but 

scarce manpower resources we now have. Dental education is very expensive. We estimate that it costs 

the people of Saskatchewan over $14,000 per year for each dental student. After graduation dentists 

continue to be costly. According to the last survey issued by the Canadian Dental Association in 1968, 

Saskatchewan dentists' gross average earnings were over $46,000 per year. Since that time they have 

increased their fees by 20 per cent. 

 

On top of that I am told that the dentist productivity has been increased by technical advances and 

through increased use of auxiliary personnel. This means simply, that dentists can take care of more 

people today. In spite of this there are still not enough dentists to take care of the dental needs of our 

people. It seemed to us that the best method of dealing with the dental health problems of our children 

was to set up a comprehensive program, financed by public funds, using auxiliary personnel to augment 

the services of dentists. 

 

The first dental nurses in the program are to graduate in July of 1974. That class now numbers 35 

students and upon graduation will be the core personnel, along with the dentists and the dental assistants, 

operating our dental children’s program. A further 58 student nurses are presently taking their first-year 

courses. This group will graduate in 1975. 

 

We have, therefore, a total of 93 dental nurses in training at the moment. We believe that the auxiliary 

dental personnel support, or supported by the services of dentists, is the most efficient and rational 

solution to the dental problems. 

 

This, indeed, is confirmed by the results of the Oxbow pilot research project. The project was started by 

our dental health division with financial assistance from the Federal Government. It is now in the fifth 

year of its operation and is now wholly financed by the province. Services are offered to all children 

from the ages of three to -12 years of age. The interesting part is that over 95 per cent of the children in 

that area are participating. Once enrolled in the program the children are eligible for continued care for 

the duration of the project. The project has demonstrated that the use of auxiliary dental personnel can 

cut costs and extend services. 

 

It was also shown that there are marked improvements in the dental health under the regular preventive 

and treatment program directed to children. Some 3,500 children have been in the program over the five 

years that it has been in operation. The average cost per child has been $35 per year. Under the 1972 

Saskatchewan College of Dental Surgeons Fee Schedule equivalent service would cost $69.98, almost 

double that of the Oxbow cost. Not only that, but the average cost per child after the initial period was 

over, drops to just under $29. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

753 

The question of cost is a key one for many people. The simple fact is that many of our people cannot 

afford the price of dental care even if there were enough dentists to go around. 

 

I want to read to you a few excerpts from some letters that I have received in regard to the high cost of 

dental care in this province. Mr. Speaker, one lady from a small Saskatchewan town writes this, and I 

quote: 

 

The Canadian Dental Association is always advertising to see your dentist, but with the prices 

they charge, the average person just cannot afford it. 

 

A lady made this observation: 

 

Today I had the greatest fortune of having a wisdom tooth pulled for an even greater fortune of 

$50. 

 

A gentleman from rural Saskatchewan wrote: 

 

Yesterday my wife had the misfortune of having her impacted teeth removed. Personally I felt 

badly for her because this is quite a painful operation. This feeling was soon overcome by shock, 

as I was informed that the bill came to $70 for the removal of two teeth. 

 

Another letter complained of being charged $104 for work done on two front teeth, the patient being a 

15 year old boy. The father said in his letter: 

 

I feel that we have been grossly overcharged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these letters are not unusual cases. They illustrate the very real problem many people have 

in coping with the cost of dental care. This is why we have to act now, to provide adequate dental care 

for our children. Someone might ask the question: has the quality of work been sacrificed to achieve the 

lower cost reported in the Oxbow project? Mr. Speaker, the answer to that question is an emphatic, no. 

 

Two dentists, Dr. Carl Bolen of Regina and Dr. Wayne Brattley of Assiniboia regularly assess the 

quality of the restorative work done by the dental nurses in the Oxbow project. Their reports show that 

the work that is being done is excellent. That is another reason why I can recommend the Act that is 

before us today, with such confidence. If my confidence in this proposed program needed any extra 

reassurance, Mr. Speaker, I received a further boost when the advisory committee under the able 

chairmanship of Dr. Paynter, indicated its essential agreement with the proposal put forward by our 

Department. 

 

Then just a few days ago, we welcomed a delegation from the Province of Quebec, led by Claude 

Forget, Minister of Social Affairs. Mr. Forget and his colleagues came to visit our Saskatchewan Dental 

Nurses Training Program at the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Science. Mr. Forget was 

accompanied by a number of his technical people. Mr. Forget said that the reports of the early delegation 

have been so good that he had to come and see the program for himself. He said the program is even 

better in reality than it is on paper. He was impressed with the program and with the training our dental 

nurses are receiving. According to a third page story in the February 19 edition of the Regina 

Leader-Post Mr. Forget said he was impressed with the 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

754 

confidence these young girls show in performing a wide range of duties. His reaction to our dental 

program and the training of our Saskatchewan dental nurses reflect the comments other visitors have 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that there has been no essential disagreement with the basic concept of 

using dental nurses to provide the Core staff for this program. The advisory committee agreed with this 

concept, the dental profession in my conversation with them agreed with the concept. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, a word of appreciation to the Regina parents. In order to have an adequate 

dental nurses' training program, we require clinic experience for our dental nurses. Sixty five per cent of 

Regina parents who were asked have agreed that their children may participate in the clinical part of the 

training program. I want to thank the citizens of Regina for their support. Without this co-operation our 

program would not be possible. Thank you on behalf of the parents of Saskatchewan whose children 

will benefit because of the co-operation of the parents of Regina. The dental care plan for children is due 

to commence this year in September. The Saskatchewan Dental Care Act, 1974, is designed to give clear 

cut authority to the Government to enable it to carry out its promise to provide a dental care plan for 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want now to outline for the House some of the salient points of this program. First of all, 

parents will have complete freedom of choice as to whether they enrol their children in the program or 

not. There is no compulsion. It is curious to me that some dentists appear to believe that families who do 

not enrol their children in the plan should still have their private dental bills paid for by the Government. 

I don't fully understand why government should pay bills for families who choose not to participate in 

their preventive dental care program. We believe that the Oxbow project has clearly demonstrated the 

acceptability of such a program to the public. 

 

Let me say a word about the program, how it will be staffed and how it will operate. Children enrolled in 

the plan will be assured of professional attention. Dental teams will consist of qualified dentists, 

Saskatchewan dental nurses and certified dental assistants. The province will be divided into five 

administrative areas for purposes of the plan. These areas will exclude for the time being, the Swift 

Current Health Region, that area under the jurisdiction of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and 

the area covered by the Oxbow project. Public dental programs of one kind or another are already in 

existence in each of the areas and these will likely be continued in 1974. 

 

Each of the administrative areas will be under the direction of an administrator who will look after the 

travel schedule of the dental teams, the operating functions of the regions, the ordering of supplies and 

other day to day business of the plan. This will leave the dental teams free to concentrate on their task of 

looking after the dental health of the children. I am pleased to tell you that four of the five administrators 

have already been hired and a fifth is in the process of being hired. Twenty-five dentists will be directly 

involved in the organization and delivery of the dental service for children under the various dental 

programs. This figure does not include the five dentists at the Wascana Institute where our dental nurses 

are being trained. Fifteen of the 25 dental positions are new positions, 15 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

755 

certified dental assistants will be hired as chair-side aides to the additional dentists. We shall also have 

50 dental nurse teams, each consisting of a dental nurse and two certified dental assistants. So we shall 

have 50 dental nurses and 100 certified dental assistants. This is in the first year in the introduction of 

the program. 

 

Advertising has already taken place for dentists and extra dental nurses who will be needed to staff the 

plan. The response has been most encouraging. Mr. Speaker, the House will be interested in knowing 

that we have had 233 enquiries from dentists from all over the world. This reflects the high level of 

interest that there is in our plan. But perhaps more important than the enquiries is the number of 

applicants we have received until today. We have 101 applications on file from dentists. So we do not 

anticipate any difficulty recruiting the additional 15 dentists that we shall need. I should add that all 

dentists on the Saskatchewan register have been invited to participate and assist us in the plan. I have 

been gratified by their response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We shall be graduating 35 Saskatchewan dental nurses from our training course this coming July. They 

will come on staff with the plan on the first of August in preparation for the start of the program to go 

into effect in September. Children born in the calendar year 1968 will be invited to participate in the 

plan in the first year. It is estimated that there will be approximately 15,000 6-year olds enrolled in the 

first year of the plan. Invitations will be mailed out in May. Each child enrolled in the program will be 

examined by one of our Saskatchewan Dental Plan dentists. The dentist will have each child's teeth 

x-rayed, will diagnose and prescribe treatment, and will direct who will administer the treatment. For 

example, if a child requires only basic instruction in cleaning his teeth, this would be done by the dental 

nurse or the dental assistant. If the child requires a minor filling, this might be directed to the dental 

nurse. If more complex procedures are required, they might be done by the dentist. Or it is possible that 

if the service required could not be handled by one of the dental team staff, but was covered by the plan, 

the child might be referred to a dentist in private practice, with the cost covered by the plan. 

 

The dental plan dentist will decide when the child is to return to him for another examination. In the 

initial stages of the plan this will be at least annually, but may be more often if the dentist feels this is 

necessary. 

 

I want to emphasize the voluntary nature of this plan. Parents may withdraw their child from the plan at 

any time they wish to do so. I should point out, however, that in such a case, the dental plan would no 

longer be responsible for the cost of the dental care for that child. Basically our dental plan will operate 

with the schools. This will make the service most convenient for parents and the children. There will be 

one or more clinic in every school unit. City areas will also be served through clinics based on the 

school system. Initially we anticipate that there will be 214 clinic sites, 25 per cent are now completed, 

90 per cent will be completed by May and 100 per cent by June. So far construction or renovations have 

been approved for 192 of the clinic sites. I am confident that the facilities will be ready to begin their 

program by next fall. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

756 

We will also have two mobile clinics for use in schools, where space is not readily available or where 

there is special need. Our current estimate for the cost of the children’s dental plan for 1974-75 fiscal 

year is $1.8 million in operating costs and $1.7 million in capital and implementation costs. Of the latter 

figure close to $1.5 million will be for the dental equipment necessary for the plan. Needless to say, 

close to half of the first-year cost of the plan will be nonrecurring start-up costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am on the subject of the cost, I want to make mention of a brief submitted by the 

College of Dental Surgeons on Saskatchewan in January to the Government. The College said that one 

of its primary reasons for requesting a meeting with the Government was to discuss the fluoridation of 

communal water supplies. In their brief they said, I quote: 

 

Fluoridation of public water supplies is a proven safe public health measure. It will reduce the 

incidence of tooth decay by 65 per cent. It is extremely economical and a study undertaken by 

the Saskatchewan Advisory Committee on dental care for children estimate an annual saving of 

$800,00 per year to government if all communal water supplies were fluoridated. 

 

The brief had a good deal more to say on the subject of fluoridation. But what I have quoted will 

perhaps make the point. There is no doubt in the minds of our dentists that we could save 40 per cent of 

the cost of dental programs through universal fluoridation of the province’s communal water supply. My 

stand on fluoridation is well known in this House. I have considerable sympathy with the dental 

profession in this matter. Perhaps other Members of this Assembly will keep this point in mind when we 

discuss preventive dental health care and the cost of our dental plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dental profession has urged that coverage under the plan be extended to wider age 

group. This is not feasible at the moment, due to the scarcity of trained manpower. We will have to 

phase in the program,. Starting with six-year olds this year, in 1975 we will extend coverage to five, six 

and seven year-olds. In 1976 we will cover ages four to eight inclusive, in 1977, ages three to ten 

inclusive and in 1978, ages three to twelve inclusive. Experience gained as the program progresses may 

require some variation in this formula but this is our present plan. I hope that if there is sufficient supply 

of personnel and that the enrolment at the schools is as good as it has been and the retention rate is high, 

perhaps we may be able to expedite the program and put it into operation at a quicker rate. 

 

At any rate, after the fifth year of the plan we shall be able to consider expending the program to cover 

all children. Eventually, I should like to see our dental plan cover the total population of Saskatchewan. 

 

Considerable interest has been shown in our approach in dental care from all across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. I have already referred to the most recent visit by a Quebec Minister and his officials. 

Delegations from Newfoundland, from Nova Scotia, Quebec, Ontario and from various dental 

organizations came to Saskatchewan to tour our facilities and to meet with our officials. The provinces 

of British Columbia and Alberta and 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

757 

Manitoba are kept posted on this program through regular meetings of Western health ministers and 

officials. It is interesting to note that the Province of Manitoba has also had a study which has I think 

been almost completed. I think they intend to follow basically our pattern. I notice the Minister of 

Health in British Columbia has established a public committee as well, to study the dental needs in their 

province. I saw him a couple of weeks ago in Ottawa; he has made a request to come to Saskatchewan to 

take a look at our proposal. 

 

These delegations want to know what we are doing and how we are going about it. I have every reason 

to believe that other Provinces will follow our lead. I believe that there will be a national children's 

dental care program within five years, Mr. Speaker. This will be the first province-wide dental care 

scheme in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again to you the words of Mr. Nick Hills of Southam News Services, under 

the heading. "Dental Care another Saskatchewan First." Mr. Hills wrote, let me quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan NDP Government is returning to its pioneering role in the field of state 

medicine with a province-wide dental care program, that by the end of the decade will provide 

treatment for more than 140,000 children. 

 

Our children dental program is a major step in the field of public health. We shall be encouraged I am 

sure by those who are sincerely interested in promoting good dental health. We might even be criticized 

by some vested interests who fear that the new program may undermine their own position. Mr. 

Speaker, the die is cast and we will proceed with this program with the same kind of confidence and 

good faith with which we launched hospitalization and medicare. This is an historical occasion for the 

people of Saskatchewan. I ask the support of this House for the Dental Care Bill 1974, Bill No. 15. I 

move second reading. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, at other times in other debates I have 

expressed some concern for the type of dental care program that is being proposed. 

 

The Minister in speaking to second reading today did not set my fears aside, fears that I have expressed 

before and I will repeat again today. I think it is fair to say that many of the feelings of us in this House 

and all over the province about the desirability of a dental care program are based on the Oxbow project, 

a successful project at Oxbow. I would remind the Minister that it was initiated by the former Liberal 

Government and sponsored by the Federal Liberal Government. This project at Oxbow has been very 

successful and it has been successful for a number of reasons. First of all there is a dentist directly 

involved and is assisted by both qualified and experienced dental nurses and the Oxbow project has had 

the complete co-operation and participation of the parents in that area. This Oxbow project has the 

support of the dental profession and I think the people of Saskatchewan. But let us not make any mistake 

about it, the new dental care program being proposed by the Minister of Health is not the same as the 

Oxbow project and does not deserve the 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

758 

same support. 

 

We on this side of the House support the need for a dental care program. We realize the importance of 

dental care to children, we recognize the need. We support the use of dental nurses; we have expressed 

this at previous times. I would say to the Minister that with the use of dental nurses, we have sufficient 

dental manpower in this province at present. He says we do not have ample manpower in this province 

and without the use of dental nurses, I think he is probably right. But with the use of dental nurses we do 

have the manpower right now. I should like very shortly to outline my concerns. I have had reassurance 

from the Minister to date about these concerns. 

 

First of all as I have said before, I think that the program must incorporate dentists, qualified dentists, in 

the examination making, the diagnosis, and planning the treatment for all children 

 

I think that the second main point is that the actual giving of treatment must be supervised by a dentist, 

and I don't mean this in the same way that the Minister does. I mean by supervision that a dentist must 

be present, not necessarily looking over the shoulder of a dental nurse but he must be available in cases 

of emergency. We are in this Bill giving dental nurses the right to extract teeth, fill teeth, give treatment 

to diseased gums and so on, and in cases of emergency the dental nurses are not trained, qualified 

dentists and they must have the availability, the direct availability, of a dentist. As I say this does not 

mean that he has to stand over their shoulder but he must be available immediately. 

 

A third concern that I have is that a dental program should involve the dentists who are presently in 

private practice in rural Saskatchewan. It is very important for us to maintain dentists who are already in 

rural Saskatchewan. A dental program not utilizing these dentists may help to reduce the number of 

dentists that are already in rural Saskatchewan because the program will erode part of their practice. 

 

One of the other concerns I have is that the program should provide for freedom of choice for the parent 

or for the patient. The dental profession has made proposals to the Minister of Health which were turned 

down. They said that if a patient or a parent wanted the child to have care by a private dentist he should 

be able to receive that care. The dentists have said, "All right, the Government can find out the cost, it 

can be broken down on a fee-for-service basis and that this should be offer to the private dentists." The 

Government will know the cost of the Government program and they should be able to offer this exact 

same fee to the dentists, or they could offer it to the dentists the same way as the chiropractor is being 

offered the fee if he plans to work outside of the chiropractic plan. In other words if the fee was $3 and 

the charge was $6, the parent would only have to put up $3 and the Government would put up $3 The 

Blakeney Government has turned down this proposal, therefore any parent who does not want his child 

enrolled in this plan will have no coverage whatsoever. This certainly cannot be described in any form 

as being a universal dental care program. 

 

I think another factor is that the Minister indicated that 65 per cent, I think he said, of the parents in 

Regina have agree to go along with this plan. I would ask about the other 35 cent who will not be 

covered at all. I would also suggest one other thing that a good many people in Regina and all over the 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

759 

province do not realize that their children will not be getting care by a dentist directly. Most people that I 

talked to still think that this is a dental care program just like the medical care program. When that was 

introduced that you got a doctor. When the hospital plan was introduced, you got a hospital. Now you 

have a dental program and you get a dental nurse, you do not get a dentist. I would think that a great 

many of the 65 per cent are rather confused as to the service that they will obtain. I think the public has 

to be made aware that this is not a dental care program, with care given by dentists. It is a dental care 

program with dental nurses giving the basic dental care. 

 

The Minister indicated that the previous Liberal Government had no high priorities on medical care. But 

I would suggest that the Liberal Party has the priority for giving high quality care and that this is not a 

priority of the NDP Government. The NDP priority is having the appearance of giving care and giving a 

quantity of care but quality seems to be far down the list. 

 

The Minister in his speech today again showed his animosity towards the dental profession as he has 

shown to most every profession in Saskatchewan. The Minister chooses to read four letters, real or 

imaginary, it really doesn't make any difference, but reading those letters in this House were in poor 

taste and a deliberate attempt to belittle the profession. Four cases attempting to show that the dental 

profession is gouging the public, overcharging, simply giving out facts of how much is charged and 

nothing about what work was done whatever, is a deliberate attempt to belittle the profession. Then he 

turns around and shows how great the dental nurses are. The dentists are little, small people who 

overcharge but that these dental, nurses, the greatest thing that happened on the earth, is a deliberate 

attempt to belittle the profession as we have seen over and over again. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should like to take time to review some of the things that the Minister has said 

and I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E.I. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Consumer Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 20 — 

An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say very much on this particular amendment but the 

shortness of the speech does not indicate the significance of the amendment, I assure you. My comments 

at this time are going to deal with the amendment to The Direct Sellers Act which was introduced in the 

fall session. 

 

As Members are aware this Act seeks to govern the sale of goods or services which take place in the 

home of the purchaser, and the amendment before the House is intended to clarify the application of the 

Act in certain situations where the seller is exempt from the licensing requirements of the Act. The 

Direct Sellers Act requires that direct sellers take out bonds for the protection of the consumer and it 

also provides for a four-day rescission clause, meaning that if a direct seller sells an item to a consumer 

in his home that consumer can rescind that contract within four days. At the present time a seller may be 

exempt 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

760 

from the licensing requirements of the Act where he has a recognized retail store and less than 50 per 

cent of the goods and services sold by him are sold by the direct sales method. In such cases the Act is 

unclear as to whether or not the buyer is entitled to the rescission rights under the provisions of the Act. 

The present amendment will clarify the application of the Act by stating that in these cases the buyer is 

entitled to the right to cancel the purchase within the terms of The Direct Sellers Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all persons using the direct sales technique except those already specifically 

exempted will be brought under the scope of The Direct Sellers Act and in this manner the amendment 

to The Direct Sellers Act will enhance the protection of the consumer who is involved with the purchase 

of goods or services via the direct sales route. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. K. R. MacLEOD: (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister seems to have said 

two separate and opposite things. To begin with he has suggested that this simple little amendment is 

intended to clarify the Act and then later in his remarks he indicates that this is intended to change the 

Act to bring all persons who use the direct sales technique under the scope of the Act. This is hardly a 

clarification, Mr. Speaker, because as I understand a clarification it is to make clear what was not 

previously clear. It is something else again to include a group of people who had not previously been 

included in the Act. The reference to those persons in Clause (h), subsection 2 of Section 4 are in fact 

those businessmen who have regular, recognized business establishments in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, those ordinary merchants who have a regular establishment of business, who pay 

ordinary licence fees, who are not Johnnys-come-lately or for that matter people who are the regular, 

legitimate businessmen in Saskatchewan and they are now to be brought under the scope of the Act. 

 

Frankly, this is a substantially different Act than that which was brought before. It now seeks to include 

a huge group of people who had never before been included in the Act or any previous Act. This is to 

our view a further attack upon the business community. The attack is upon our merchants in 

Saskatchewan who have a regular place of business who might accidentally or even for the convenience 

of a client or a customer go out to the house and say, "Here is the refrigerator that you wanted to talk 

about, here is where it will fit in your home, if you want to buy it I will sell it to you". The more 

co-operative this businessman might be to his customer, the more he is subject to The Direct Sellers Act, 

the more likely it is that he will find that his customer has additional rights to those already tremendous 

rights which now exist. Just to give you a simple little list of the people to whom this would apply. Of 

course it would apply to Simpsons and Eatons, the ordinary businessman at the corner, every co-op store 

in Saskatchewan, and all the rest of them. This is the group of businessmen who are now being brought 

under the scope of this Act. We think the Government has been a bit hasty at bringing it in, however, we 

do not propose to adjourn this. I, personally, intend to oppose this without further study and better 

reasons. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

761 

Now, I might well have been persuaded by the Hon. Minister to support this Bill No. 20 had the Minister 

given us one single example of the need for it. But the Minister did not give any examples and I should 

like to suggest to the Ministers when they are presenting Bills for this House and for the approval of the 

House and for the support of the Opposition to give us a little bit better than they have in the past. If they 

tell us that there is a need to change a Bill, a Bill which has been in force now for some time, it would 

help me a great deal in examining the need for the Bill if they, give us one single example of why this 

Bill is needed. If the Hon. Minister could give us one reason why the co-op store downtown has to be 

brought under the scope of this Bill I would be pleased to consider it. In the absence of that kind of 

explanation I have no choice but to consider that he is broadening the Bill far beyond the original 

intention of The Direct Sellers Act and I, therefore oppose the Bill. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite question the Hon. Member for 

Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) when he adjourned debate on the last Bill saying that he had had 

two months to prepare for it. Well one of the reasons that he had to adjourn debate because what is in the 

Bill and what the Minister says are two different things. This particular example is precisely that. This is 

a good example of what the Minister says and what is in the Bill are two different things. This is not a 

minor amendment, this is a substantive amendment to this Bill. The Bill was originally designed to 

control the practice of direct selling in the Province of Saskatchewan and certain stated criteria were set 

out in the Bill. Now what's happened is that the Bill is now going to apply to every businessman in the 

Province of Saskatchewan and that is precisely what the Bill does. 

 

I give the Members opposite some examples. If some co-op store in a small town makes deliveries and 

happens to take an extra order when they are there, they are now under The Direct Sellers Act and the 

people have a four-day rescission. I don't think that was the intention of the Members opposite. Any 

other person who makes a delivery and is really giving a service, a small Saskatchewan businessman 

who is providing a service to the local community, is now covered by this Act and I don't think that was 

the intention of the Members opposite. If it is I think that we are entitled to know. The problems that 

have arisen and the reason the Minister brings in such legislation, we weren't given any of these 

examples. There is no indication from the statements made by the Minister that there is an abuse by 

Saskatchewan businessmen. No indication whatsoever. He should, when he makes a substantive change 

to legislation like this, have letters and complaints that have come to his attention. We had no examples 

of any such abuses. 

 

I don't think, as I have said before, that the Members opposite realize the implications of this piece of 

legislation. We now have The Direct Sellers Act applying to every type of business in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, including Saskatchewan businessmen who have fixed places of operation, fixed stores, 

fixed capital here in the Province of Saskatchewan. Again I don't think it was the intention. I think that 

your potential for abuse in this particular Act is far beyond anything that you have considered and it is 

certainly far beyond anything that the Minister has given this House. For that very reason we oppose this 

Bill. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

762 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, the suggestions that the two Members have 

brought up about the implications of this Bill that we should well have been given opportunity for the 

business community of Saskatchewan to express their approval or disapproval and see if we couldn't get 

it has my agreement. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Consumer Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 21 — An 

Act to amend The Motor Dealers Act, 1966. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the Members opposite have had sufficient time to consider this one 

because this amendment is much more minor than the one prior to this one. 

 

It was also introduced; Mr. Speaker, in December of 1973 and this being February of 1974 I would have 

suspected that it would have been sufficient time to consider all the ramifications involved. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to reduce the amount of time that is required to issue licenses 

under The Motor Dealers Act, 1966, and thereby reducing the license cost to the dealer while at the 

same time allowing for more thorough enforcement of the Act. The existing one-year license term 

results in excessive administrative work in issuing the licenses each year. At the present time all dealers' 

and salesmen's licenses expire December 31st of every year. They must submit new applications for 

licenses each year and these must be checked and processed and licenses issued. This is a time 

consuming process with no resulting gain in consumer protection. During the period of 1972 alone, 

during that licensing year, 1,876 salesmen's licenses and 636 dealers' licenses were issued. The 

amendment will extend the term of the license from one year to five years. This is necessary in order to 

reduce the amount of time spent in issuing licenses and allow more time for ensuring that the provisions 

of the Act are adhered to. This will ultimately result in more effective consumer protection. This 

amendment will reduce the time spent by motor dealers in applying for licenses and will also reduce the 

license cost to the dealer. The license fee at present for dealers ranges from $10 per year to $40 per year 

with no fee payable by salesmen. Under the amended situation the fee structure would remain the same 

but would be payable every five years instead of every year. This amendment is a minor one to Section 

14 of The Motor Dealers Act, but its benefits to motor dealers while retaining the necessary protection 

for the consumer are significant. 

 

The special Legislative Committee on Small Businesses identified the great duplication and the large 

number of forms that must be filled out by business people in Saskatchewan as one of the concerns that 

they have. 

 

This amendment is of benefit to motor dealers by reducing the amount of paper work done by them as 

well by seducing the cost of licenses to dealers and salesmen. At the same time the amendment will 

allow for a continuous review and supervision of licenses to ensure that all holders of such licenses 

comply with the legislation. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

763 

With those words, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister would consider a question. Is it the Government’s 

intention to still have an annual license fee or just a five year license where you pay the fee every five 

years? Do you have an annual license fee in spite of the fact that it only comes up for renewal at the end 

of five years? 

 

Mr. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, under the amendment the renewal every fie years on the date of expiry 

and the fee will also only be paid once every five years, not on annual basis. 

 

MR. K. R. MacLEOD: — (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister 

for is clarity of explanation. We have studied this for the past few months, very carefully, in great depth, 

and we are pleased to say that we support the bill. We particularly want to congratulate the government 

for its efforts to reduce the administration costs in that department. We want to have this day recognized 

as a red letter day in government, because for the first time since June of 1971, an effort has been made 

to streamline and reduce costs of government. 

 

So it is with a great deal of pleasure and I see this come forward and we will support the Bill 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to say very much except that I want to welcome 

the support of the members opposite. I suppose that happens very rarely but we agree that it is very good 

legislation that I think is going to be of some considerable assistance to our motor dealers, who are one 

example of the business community which is, in fact, barraged with many necessary forms and 

applications that must be filled out and we are convinced that this will be of some assistance, even 

though it may be of some small assistance in reducing that burden. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of consumer Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 22 – An Act to 

amend The Sale of Training Courses Act, 1972. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to take a little more time on this one and at the conclusion of my 

remarks I will be moving second reading of this Bill. 

 

This Bill is intended to clarify the definition of training courses by specifying that certain types of 

courses of study or instruction will be included in the definition. 

 

Since 1971 our Government has responded to the growing need for consumer legislation in the positive 

way. This need is in part due to the complexity of the market place and the growing numbers of 

consumers’ goods that are promoted to the consumer by high pressure advertising by some persons – 

and I stress some persons – at times who were not always concerned about the 

 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

764 

interest of the consumer. 

 

In speaking more directly to the legislation, Mr. Speaker, I want to report that The Sale of Training 

Courses Act passed in 1972 has proven to be effective legislation generally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It has provided consumer protection that was needed for some time. The 

scope of regulation was extended by that Act to include all training courses. And prior to its existence 

regulation was limited to courses offered by trade schools. This Act provides for the licensing and the 

bonding of persons providing or selling courses. It provides for suspension or cancellation of licenses in 

certain circumstances, such as when there has been misrepresentation or dishonesty or the school or the 

salesman has demonstrated a lack of competency. 

 

I have indicated that The Sale of Training Courses Act has generally been effective. Unfortunately the 

legislation is not clear in its definition of training courses, and therefore, has led to some problems. The 

Act regulates the activities of those persons providing training courses to the public other than courses 

specifically excluded. 

 

In the existing broad definition of training courses there is some uncertainty as to whether or not certain 

schemes are required to be licensed. This is creating licensing difficulties and delays. 

 

The amendment will result in the specified types of schemes being required to be licensed and bonded 

and with the seller license the consumer receives a good measure of protection, including the fact that he 

is entitled to the rescission rights under the Act. Because of the requirements of a bond the consumer 

will have some protection in the event the course is not delivered by the seller. There have been recent 

incidents in which consumers enrolling in a course and having paid advance fees found that there was no 

course to be had and that their money was gone. There have been incidents such as a dance school in 

Saskatchewan which entered into contracts with over 20 known victims in amounts ranging from $25 to 

$1,700. High pressure sales methods played a significant role in this. That dance school closed without 

notice to anyone, owing thousands of dollars worth of lessons to its customers. 

 

Another example is one where a dance studio left the province leaving 52 students with uncompleted 

lesson contracts to a total value of somewhere between $10,000 and $15,000. 

 

At the present time consumers are not protected against this kind of an operation. This amendment will 

clarify the definition of training courses to include dance instructions, health improvement courses or 

activities, self protection courses or activities and charm schools. Legitimate and sincere training courses 

will benefit by this amendment and consumers will be protected. Consumers will be protected from such 

operators such as I have mentioned and legitimate businesses in the training school field will be 

protected from the bad publicity that shifty operators taint them with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I view this as an important strengthening of a significant piece of consumer legislation. — 

I would commend it to 

 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

765 

the approval of all Members of the House. With these few words it gives me great pleasure to move 

second reading of this Act. 

 

MR. K.R. MacLEOD: (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the Minister on 

giving us precise examples of the reasons why he feels this particular amendment should be brought 

before the House. 

 

I know that Members of the House are unlikely to have had any direct knowledge of the matters 

involved. I have watched the footwork of the Members here and it would certainly be a waste of time to 

have any dancing courses sold to them. I am sure, equally, that self defense, once you have been in this 

House, is superfluous and a charm school would be wasted on the Members, they already having exuded 

a good deal of charm or they wouldn't be in the House in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Minister that I am surprised that he needed to clarify the definition 

because the original definition would seem to have covered it. I would recommend to the Government 

that they consider in future in this type of thing., listing as an appendix all those schools, or those types 

of things, which are in fact included in the definition without of course limiting the generality of the 

definition which is in the Act. With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that I intend to support 

the amendment. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden): — I just have one comment, Mr. Speaker, on the matter of the martial 

arts as they are called in the self-defense schools. I would hope that the Minister in conjunction with the 

Minister of Public Health or whatever operating authority you are going to use as there has been a very 

high incidence of personal injuries, either from the lack of physical ability of the trainees or the lack of 

expertise of the instructors in some of these schools. That problem which is now coming to the fore 

should be watched by the Minister or the Minister of Public Health in this matter. I think it is a growing 

concern and I think it should be watched. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 23 — An Act to 

amend The Housing and Special-care Homes Act. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us at this time is a Bill to amend The Housing and Special-care 

Homes Act. The amendments to this Act are for the most part housekeeping amendments. We should 

like to clarify the provisions as stated in Section 12 (d). The intent of this particular amendment is to 

enable the Government to make grants available to individuals or organizations providing services to the 

aged, blind or infirm person. At the present time we are fairly well restricted to making grants to the 

institution and we should like to be able to make grants directly to individuals. This would be in the 

case, for example, of providing a patient in a special-care home with assistance. 

 

The provisions for regulations governing special-care homes have also been consolidated. However, one 

particular clause, 48 (a), is new. This enables the Minister to make regulations defining the various types 

of care available to guests in 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

766 

special-care homes. An example of this definition for types of care would be Level 1 or type 1 care 

which would mean that the Person is essentially independent but may need some guidance or 

supervision in the activities of daily living. It also allows the Minister to prescribe a maximum number 

of guests who may be accommodated in each level of care. This allows for the orderly distribution of 

beds at the various levels of care throughout me province. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this practice has in fact been continued and used by various 

administrations in the last number of years and we felt it best to include it in the legislation. 

 

Obviously persons require different types of care, while some may require only supervisory care; others 

may need intensive personal or basic nursing care. Section 48 (a) gives the Minister the authority to 

enact regulations establishing the criteria on which levels or types of care are based. I might also say, 

Mr. Speaker, that this too has been the practice in the past. In fact, I think it was the previous 

administration which established the levels of care as being Level 1 in care up to 20 minutes per day 

where personal care was needed, Level II up to 45 minutes of personal care and Level III up to two 

hours. This again regularizes it by bringing it within the scope of the legislation. 

 

In the near future I shall be introducing legislation which will complement the services offered by the 

instituting program in Saskatchewan and which will hopefully allow the 95 per cent of senior citizens 

not presently in special-care homes the opportunity of continuing to live in their community and own 

home as long is possible. This legislation is for the institutional type of care. 

 

I, therefore, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. E.G. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker in rising to speak to this Bill as proposed by 

the Minister, I might say at the outset that I agree that the Bill is more or less of a housekeeping nature 

and I intend to support it. 

 

However I cannot help but think at this time, Mr. Minister, that if the Government spent less time in 

putting on more controls on nursing homes and more time in improving existing nursing home facilities 

and providing for more beds, the people of Saskatchewan would be far better off. 

 

I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, that since being elected to this Legislature in December of last year I 

have had numerous inquiries and complaints by people who have been unable to get into nursing homes 

and there are many, many unfortunate situations because of overcrowding. I hope that the Minister will 

give this his attention in the near future. I would think, Mr. Speaker, with the record revenues that this 

province has been receiving for the past year that there should be some money available for the 

assistance of our older people. 

 

I would ask the Government as well, if they are not prepared, to spend more money in this regard that 

they reconsider their position and allow licenses to private enterprise for them to expand the nursing 

homes. 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

767 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, I agree that the Bill presents amendments that are basically of a housekeeping 

nature and I will support them. 

 

MR. K. R. MacLEOD: (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I have only one or two remarks to 

address to this Bill and I draw the attention of the Minister to the fact that there are three special-care 

homes in the constituency which I represent in this Legislature. The complaints that I receive are that 

people in these homes tend to be juggled about. In one case a gentleman who had lived in one of those 

homes for a long period of time, I think some 10 or 11 years in the same room, and had come to regard it 

as his home, now finds that without any by-your-leave or anything else he is being shuffled away from 

his present location, out of the building, and into an entirely different building. I am very disappointed 

that this type of thing should happen because when these people go to special homes that is their home. 

They don't like the movement about, they like to feel secure, and they are not hotel guests. They are 

living in a home that is their home. I draw this to the attention of the Minister and I hope that there is 

something he can do about it. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to hear that the Members opposite will be supporting this 

Bill. A number of questions were raised. The first related to the number of beds. I am very happy to 

inform the Members opposite that in the past year over 500 additional beds have been opened in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — I am also happy to inform the Members opposite that over 500 more have been 

approved in the coming construction year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — This in spite of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan now has seven beds per 

thousand population, probably the highest in North America and possibly as high as any place in the 

world. 

 

The Members opposite mentioned the cost and the assistance that is needed for the senior citizens of 

this' province. The previous government's record shows that they gave about $3 million in their last year 

in office and we have given $22 million this year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! ' 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — The Members opposite provided nothing for community services. We have 

provided $280,000 this year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, in special-care homes alone the Members opposite provided about 

$60,000 their last year in office, we shall be paying $3 million this year. 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

768 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the one concern that bothered me the most was the question of 

commercial homes. I want to say that this Government is committed to the policy of keeping homes 

under community control. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — We do not believe that profit ought to be made out of sickness in our hospitals and 

we certainly do not believe it should be made out of sickness in nursing homes. Mr. Speaker, we have 

encouraged groups to purchase the present commercial facilities and we intend to continue encouraging 

such groups to buy up the private homes now in existence. 

 

Members opposite should also know that the Minister of Co-ops and responsible for the Housing 

Corporation has just announced a $2.3 million senior citizens’ housing complex in Regina. Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill will enable us to carry out our work in a better way. I therefore move second reading. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 — An Act to 

amend The Corrections Act, 1967. 

 

He said: — Since The Corrections Act was last amended in 1967 there have been many changes in the 

field of corrections throughout Canada and indeed throughout the world. There has been in our own 

province an extensive review of correctional services referred to as the Saskatchewan Correction Study, 

1971, a study conducted by the federal and provincial governments. As a result of recommendations 

from that study and because of recent amendments to the Criminal Code and the Prison and 

Reformatories Act, certain amendments to The Saskatchewan Corrections Act are required. Some are 

minor housekeeping amendments rising out of the appointments of new officials and the designation of 

a new division. I hope the Members have found the explanatory notes adequate. 

 

Since the completion of the correction study a number of recommendations of that study have already 

been implemented. Among these are: the formation of a Corrections Division, headed by a director of 

Corrections; the appointment of a chief probation officer; the appointment of a director of community 

corrections; the appointment of 17 additional probation officers resulting in almost 100 per cent increase 

in staff. I might say, Mr. Speaker, I have been enthusiastic about the way in which our magistrates have 

responded to the appointments of these persons by using them fully. There has also been the addition of 

three community training residences making a total of five currently in operation. The development of a 

work for wages concept at Camp Whitegull is a northern pulp cutting correctional camp. 

 

Although the Correction Study indicated certain advantages of locating certain responsibility for 

correctional services within the Department of the Attorney General, the Government has 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

769 

recently concluded that responsibility for correction should remain at the present time within the 

Department of Social Services. The rationale for this decision is that within Saskatchewan most crime is 

not of the highly sophisticated, professionally organized type, rather it relates to social and economic 

conditions, the solution of which lies within the mandate of the Department of Social Services. 

Consequently the rehabilitation of the offender will for the most part be of a social nature. 

 

Correctional Services offer several programs by which such rehabilitation can be accomplished. These 

programs are established on the philosophy that social rehabilitation can best be achieved through the 

offender's exposure to society rather than his isolation from it. The emphasis will be on rehabilitation 

geared toward social re-entry rather than traditional institutional rehabilitation. I ask the Members to 

remember that inmates sentenced to one of the provincial correctional facilities are sentenced to no more 

than a two year term, that is two years, less a day. It is our belief that the best protection that we can give 

to society in the long run is the protection, not of shutting a man up, but the protection of rehabilitation. 

Because the fact of the matter is that he will be released within two years. The only question we have to 

decide is what the man will be like on his release. Any programs which can improve his rehabilitation 

prospects are surely to be accepted. 

 

The specific changes within the proposed Corrections Act reflect a greater focus on non-institutional 

correctional services. They are designed to provide our Saskatchewan courts with an increased range of 

sentencing alternatives. This is an attempt to design programs to fit the needs of individuals. For 

example, the proposed Act now outlines three types of correctional facilities, rather than simply 

correctional institutions referred to in the present Act. While correctional centres will continue to 

operate, the proposed Act provides for the differential use of controls through correctional camps and 

community training residences. While correctional camps have long been in existence ; in the past they 

were seen as overflow accommodation rather than serving a specific rehabilitative function. However, it 

is now evident that correctional camps may serve as a limited rehabilitative mechanism. They can 

separate the offender from the actual institution and allow him to obtain a working skill, positive 

employment, wages and living experience. Community training residences, as the name implies, are 

residences within the community in which convicted persons may reside under supervision and 

participate in community activities such as employment, academic or vocational training or any other 

appropriate rehabilatational programs. 

 

The work training program outlined in Section 4 of the present Act has been redefined as the community 

training program in this Bill. The change is designed to reflect a shift in emphasis towards training 

individuals to live within the community in an acceptable fashion rather than just simply training 

individuals to perform work. Naturally the learning and practice of sound work skills remains an 

important aspect of the community training program. 

 

Community training residences are an indication of the shift of emphasis away from large cold 

institutions to more personalized and socially oriented centres. Experience of the past merely indicates 

that the larger centres were not doing the job. The prime purpose of the community training residence, 

as with all 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

770 

other correctional programs, is to ensure the security of society through the rehabilitation of the 

offender. Instead of merely being released after a period of incarceration, an offender may, through the 

community training residence program, gain a gradual exposure to society, employment and 

responsibility. It assists the offender to become integrated again into the community and to become 

established. Our officers assist them in finding work, in finding employment and creating their own job 

opportunities. They are encouraged to develop supportive friendships that will carry them through after 

their term is fully expired. In many, many cases it enables the offender to support his own family instead 

of that family having to be supported by the Department of Social Services through the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan. 

 

An amendment designed to end discrimination by sex, is one which provides that men as well as women 

may be granted the privilege of participating in the community training program for the purpose of 

carrying on housekeeping tasks and attending to his or her family needs. 

 

Major changes within the probation section bring our probation services more in line with those outlined 

in the Criminal Code of Canada. One of the major changes is the provision for courts to utilize probation 

for violation of provincial offences where a minimum fine is prescribed. For example, this would 

provide the court with the opportunity of utilizing a probation order where it felt that a fine would have 

no positive impact on a person convicted under The Vehicles Act or The Liquor Act. In such a situation 

one of the conditions of probation might well be that the offender submit himself to alcoholism 

treatment or to a defensive driving course. 

 

Recognizing that offences under provincial statutes are deemed to be less serious than offences under 

the Criminal Code, the maximum length of a probation order for violation of a provincial statute has 

been reduced to six months from two years, which is also in keeping with the maximum sentence. It 

seemed only reasonable that if a sentence could only be given for six months the same should be true of 

the probation order. 

 

Section 9 has also been amended so that if a probation order is violated the report will be made to the 

prosecutor rather than to the judge. The prosecutor will decide on the course of action to follow as he 

would in any other case. 

 

Another change designed to provide an additional sentencing alternative to the court is the provision for 

direct placement of an offender in a community training residence via a probation order. This means that 

many individuals who normally would be incarcerated because of lack of adequate control measures 

within the community could be placed directly into a community training residence where adequate 

supervision, guidance and control can assist him in utilizing community resources in a positive manner. 

 

In addition, the fact that he would remain closely associated with his family and friends, eliminates the 

potential readjustment problems which are usually encountered upon release by incarcerated persons. 

Having a steady job, money in the bank, perhaps continuing to support his dependents, are important 

factors from both the psychological and the practical point of view. 

 

Hopefully, this alternative will also help to reduce the 



 

February 25, 1974 

 

 

771 

apparent overuse of jail facilities. 

 

Another change in the probation section removes the prohibition against making some type of payment 

to a volunteer probation officer. We recognize the very valuable service provided by volunteers and we 

would like to have the flexibility to reimburse them, at least for out-of-pocket expenses, where it is 

deemed appropriate. 

 

A change in the proposed Act now requires that a copy of the probation order be read to and given to the 

convicted person and that the penalties for failing to comply with it be explained to him. This will assist 

in clarifying, for the offender, the exact nature of the probation order and will eliminate the possibility of 

individuals being unaware of the expectations placed upon them by such an order. It will also eliminate 

subsequent penalties for failure to live up to the required expectations. 

 

In summary, the amendments to The Saskatchewan Corrections Act are designed to provide a greater 

range of correctional services. These services will ultimately provide greater protection to society 

through the integration or re-integration of the offender into the community rather than relying 

exclusively on the short-term protection provided by incarceration. We all are convinced I believe by 

now that punishment alone is no answer to crime. Punishment may be necessary from time to time but 

by itself it is not the solution. 

 

Community corrections is a vital key to the future rehabilitation of any offender. Thus, the setting in 

which the contact between the offender and community occurs, is to as large a degree as possible of a 

non-institutional nature. Recognizing that crime is a community problem and that its solution must 

ultimately be found within the community, the proposed Act provides for a much greater community 

involvement in the total corrections process. The development of a correctional advisory board, at both 

the local and provincial level, will greatly assist in achieving that vital link which must be maintained 

with the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to express my appreciation to 

the Minister and the Government for their apparent intention to continue the progressive policies of the 

Liberal Government in prison reform. 

 

I think that the reforms that were instituted under the former Liberal Government were the first in 

Canada and are now being regarded all across the country as being the criteria to be looked to and I do 

believe that this Act as presented, or the amendments as presented by the Minister, will continue this. 

 

I do welcome as well any program through rehabilitation or otherwise which would end or bring down 

the high rate of recidivism that we have in this province. I have, unfortunately, some doubts as to the 

practical effect of the Act, Mr. Speaker, in particular, we already have overloaded court facilities in this 

province particularity in Regina and Saskatoon at the 



 

February 25, 1974 
 

 

772 

magistrates' level. It is conceivable that this Act would overload them even more and make it almost 

unworkable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have a number of other things that I should like to say about this Act at a later date 

and I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:18 o’clock p.m. 

 


