



















































Hansard: May 10, 1974


2995 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

69th Day 

Friday, May 10, 1974. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

INCREASE IN WHOLESALE PRICE OF MEAT IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to direct to the Minister of 

Agriculture. Perhaps I should direct it to the Minister of Consumer Affairs but to my failure to get him to 

move in this particular area, I will direct it to the Minister of Agriculture. To do so for the background, Mr. 

Speaker, I should like to read just a brief little card. The question has to do with increases in wholesale prices 

of meat in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

A night of two ago I was out to a local restaurant here in the city, I had been there about two weeks before, 

but on this night there was a little note that says: 

 

There will be a surcharge on each dinner of 10 per cent until the current meat crisis is over. 

We believe today's meat prices are artificial and temporary. However, to maintain our high 

quality and portion size, in the face of recent cost increases (over $1.00 a pound) we must 

charge an additional 10 per cent per dinner. Thank you for your understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture is aware that this kind of misleading advertising, I say, 

is going on? I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture is aware that his colleague, the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs has done nothing whatever to check into the increases in wholesale meat prices? My question to the 

Minister is: would he investigate this kind of advertising? Surely to goodness an industry in the province 

using a farm product shouldn't be blaming our Saskatchewan farmers for a problem that isn't theirs in the 

first place. I am sure the Minister would be anxious to defend the farmers' rights in this regard. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I'm certainly aware now of the concern that 

the Member for Wilkie has brought to our attention in regard to what I think appears to be not only 

misleading advertising, stating misleading facts, they simply are not factual or true. I think that they are 

relating directly to a retail price, not a wholesale price, certainly not a price which relates to producer prices 

of beef right now. I happen to have right here the wholesale prices for A-1 sides, I do not have the prices for 

loins which I assume this Blade and Barrel Restaurant would be selling. I take note that the Member for 

Wilkie said he thought that the surcharge had taken place within the last two weeks. I am looking at 

wholesale prices for A-1 sides, April 13th, where I see the price of $74.60 ($74.60 a hundred) or .75¢ per 

pound. I have some records going right back to 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

2996 

 

August 4, 1973, and that is the lowest price wholesale cuts have been selling for during that period of time. 

The peak was somewhere around August 25th, when A-1 sides were selling for $92.44 per hundredweight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the information that the Member for Wilkie has is, in fact, accurate and I have no reason to 

believe that it is not, it means that this particular retailer has chosen a time when the wholesale cuts of beef 

have been at an all time low to try to attempt to convince customers that the prices of beef have increased by 

as much as $1.00 per pound. That simply is not true. 

 

I know I am relating to sides rather than loins but even if the price of loins has increased significantly, they 

certainly should not have increased $1.00 per pound as shown by the evidence that I have related to on 

wholesale prices of sides. 

 

I think that there should be some sort of investigation carried out. I don't know whether we have the power in 

the Department of Agriculture, perhaps they are within the realms of the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

But I suspect that this is obviously a deliberate attempt on behalf of a retailer to try and confuse patrons of 

that restaurant in order to gouge excessive profits from them. I certainly do not agree with it. This 

Government certainly does not agree with it and I think that individual should be dealt with most severely. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, just a supplementary. Would the Minister also agree to try 

and put his offices and his Government on record as defending the fact that the farmer needs even further 

increases in the price of beef if he is going to be able to stay in the beef raising business? And I think to put 

the case for the farmer to the public that the Government opposite has the responsibility, and I would hope 

the Minister would agree that he will try and put the case for the farmer at this time. They talked about 

artificial and temporary prices — they still have to go higher. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Yes, I certainly will. We have been promoting for some time some means of 

stabilization, primarily agricultural products, stabilizing the price so that we will not be confronted with the 

dips and dives that we have now. I must say that this certainly isn't the kind of way that we are going to 

return any moneys to the farmer because the price returns at least as far as beef are concerned to the farmer is 

at an all time low. My records indicate that this has affected the wholesale price of beef as well. But we find 

that the end user, the end seller of that product is increasing the price to the highest that it has ever been. I 

think we have to find some alternative means of being able to guarantee that the returns are going to go by 

some more direct means to the farmer. Nothing of this is going to the farmer, that is for certain. 

 

ORGANIZATION OF WESTERN DEVELOPMENT MUSEUM 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to direct to 

the Minister of Culture and Youth. I have given him forewarning of this question, it has to do with the 

organization of 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

2997 

 

the Western Development Museum. There have been representations made to me as I am sure there have 

been to the Minister by Mr. Philps and others that they would like to have established a membership 

structure of the museum, a membership structure which could thereby elect the Board of Directors of the 

museum at least apart thereof as opposed to the museum being run by a government appointed board. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, is: has the Minister any intention to reform the organization of the Western 

Development Museum in order to try and create a membership structure for it? 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, there have been 

representations made to me only by Mr. Philps and none other, making that specific proposal and 

recommendation. We have been looking and will continue to look at reorganizing the structure of the Board 

and will continue to look at reorganizing the structure of the Board in its administrative sense and amending 

the legislation accordingly. Because we do have that particular proposal we of course will be considering 

that as well, but you must understand, Mr. Speaker, and the Member I am sure will, that there are some 

difficulties with saying you are going to have an elected board that is going to be elected by a membership. 

Because the question then is: who is the membership? At this time, I don't see how you resolve that 

particular question. We have not made any decision to do it that way at this time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

FIRST REPORT OF THE SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND PRINTING 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie) that: The 

First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be now received. 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, following the suggestion made by the Attorney General, I shall 

not be too long. 

 

Just a few comments in regard to this Committee and some of the accusations that have been floating back 

and forth in this House regarding who is responsible for the Report being made and the accusation against 

DNS. 

 

I think there is something that the Members have overlooked when they try to say there was some ulterior 

motive by the Auditor in that the mess in DNS was made public. And yet when one looks at the Report of 

the Provincial Auditor, you can find nowhere in that Report where the Provincial Auditor has mentioned 

anything about the abuse of public funds or the gross mismanagement of the Department by the Minister or 

by the Deputy Minister. 

 

This mishandling, mismanagement and abuse was brought into the open by the intensive questioning of the 

Opposition Members of that Committee, Mr. Speaker. It was only by their intensive questioning that this 

entire mess was revealed to the public. 

 

I must point out as well that there was literally no co-operation or concern shown by any of the Government 

Members on that Committee. It appeared that their only purpose on this 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

2998 

 

Committee was to protect the Government. This group as you know was headed by the Member for 

Saskatoon Mayfair and the NDP Members just like sheep followed the directions and the guidelines 

established by Mr. Brockelbank. Their only concern was protect, don't embarrass the Government, don't ask 

any questions. 

 

In my mind, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Members on the Committee did not show any or exercise their 

responsibility to the taxpayers of this province or to their own constituents. Their only concern as I 

mentioned, was to protect the Government and their Party. To protect the NDP Government. 

 

I am just wondering, Mr. Speaker, how much more could have been revealed, if information that the 

Opposition Members or other members of the Committee had asked for had not been voted against and not 

allowed to be revealed. 

 

That was a strange performance by the Government Member's opposite. A motion was presented asking for 

information dealing with how certain funds were spent or allocated. Once this motion was presented, 

immediately the Government Members called Notice of Motion. This gave the Government Members an 

opportunity to wait 24 hours before a vote was taken on that motion. What did they do during that 24-hour 

period? I am sure that they went to check to see the Minister in charge of this particular department, to see if 

the information that was requested would embarrass the Government, Mr. Brockelbank's lead was then that 

they would vote against the motion. If the information granted would not embarrass the Government, of 

course they would vote in favor of that motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Public Accounts Committee is a very vital and a very important aspect of this 

Legislature and of the legislative process. It is vital and important to the taxpayers of this province. I say as 

well that a vast improvement is needed before MLAs in this Legislature can adequately look after their 

constituents and the taxpayers on this Committee as our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is to determine that 

government funds are handled and spent correctly. I should like to make a few suggestions on how I think 

the Public Accounts Committee can be improved and in turn the MLAs of this Assembly can carry out their 

responsibility to the taxpayers and to their constituents. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I should like to see the Public Accounts Committee authorized to meet more often 

than just during the sitting of the Legislature. As was shown in this Report, the Committee met twice as 

often this year, as they have in any other year in the past. We are spending twice as much money now as we 

were just going back three years ago. I think that Members of this Committee need a greater length of time to 

assess and look into each and every department of the Government. 

 

As well, I should like to suggest the Committee be comprised of an equal number of Members from 

Government and Opposition. I might say this that the Committee does not deal with Government policy. 

There is no debate in Committee on Government issues or local issues of the day. There is just questioning 

on how the money is being handled and looked after by each and every department. It is for this reason I 

should like to see an equal number of Government Members as well as Opposition Members on that 

Committee. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

2999 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I should like to see that the Committee be comprised only of MLAs, no members of 

the executive council on that Committee. I think this has been clearly demonstrated if one looks through the 

transcripts of what took place; that the executive member who was on the Committee this year, was the one 

who gave directions to all the other Members on the Government side and they in turn followed his direction 

like sheep. 

 

It was because of this that I have made these three recommendations and I should like also to recommend to 

the Government, to the Premier and to the House Leader, that an intersessional committee be set up to deal 

with rules and proceedings of this Legislature. I think that they are outdated, our budgets have doubled, the 

legislation has increased, and as I mentioned earlier, Public Accounts are becoming more involved. I think it 

is vital that a committee be set up to look into the modernizing and the streamlining of our proceedings, not 

only in the Public Accounts Committee but in this Legislature as well. I think that we have to make ultimate 

use of all MLAs. This has been evidenced during this particular Session and previous sessions that there is a 

considerable amount of time that is wasted by Opposition and Government Members in this Legislature. 

 

It is for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I make these few comments in regard to this Public Accounts 

Committee. I feel that it is an extremely important and vital Committee. I regret that the Government 

Members opposite did not exercise their responsibility to the fullest to the taxpayers or to their constituents 

and I hope that we will see vast improvements in the years ahead. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: : — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief words in closing this debate. 

 

I think perhaps one of the most amazing aspects of the debate has been the non-entry of any of the 

Government front benches into this debate. The Report very clearly indicated mismanagement and 

maladministration of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The recommendations upon which 

Government and Opposition Members differ, the recommendation of the Committee to express disapproval 

or regrets at this kind of mismanagement and recommend a tighter and stricter control by the Comptroller in 

the future, I say is an understatement of what was going on and allowed to go on in that particular 

department. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, the regrettable part of it has been as I say the non-entry of any Government front 

bencher into this debate. This certainly indicates either their complete lack of concern or their cavalier 

attitude toward the throwing away or the lax handling of public funds both on the receiving side and the 

spending side. 

 

The one Minister from Saskatoon who did get into the debate discussed several other issues that were totally 

irrelevant to the issues at hand. He never really zeroed in on the problem and for the crux of his whole 

argument, he quoted from the Verbatim Report an incorrect transcript of the Auditor to try and justify his 

arguments and that, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3000 

 

demonstrates much more clearly than I can say, the weakness of his argument, indeed the nonargument put 

forward by the Minister of Government Services. 

 

The Auditor since corrected that statement which the Hon. Member used in his remarks here, the Hon. 

Government Services Minister. As I say the fact that he quoted a statement from the Auditor that has since 

been demonstrated to be a misquote in the first instance very clearly shows that he had absolutely no 

argument at all to refute the goings-on in that particular department, and to refute the fact that this 

Government has not taken this entire issue seriously enough. I would hope that if the work of this 

Committee, Mr. Speaker, is going to carry on as I am sure, and I hope, it will carry on and I hope that it will 

continue to be, as the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) says, an even more effective Committee. It is now a 

good responsible Committee and I suggest one of the best in the House. We shall see the members of that 

Committee carry on in the future and diligently work at their task — and it is becoming a larger task — with 

more and more Government agencies, with more and more government spending. The budgets are up in 

every department each and every year, so there is more money to check into; there is more money to review 

insofar as spending is concerned. If this Committee is going to retain the stature that it has an has been 

developing through the year, I suggest that the one way that that can happen is for the Government opposite 

to accept that Report seriously and to take some action and do something about it. 

 

I regret that the Premier or the Attorney General or the Minister of Finance did not get into this debate and 

did not tell us, during the course of the debate what plans they had for future rectification of the problems 

that were unearthed in DNS in the course of this Committee's hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other even more amazing thing was the fact that the Minister of the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan himself did not see fit to get into the debate. In the course of the study of the Estimates of his 

department, over the last day or two we did manage to extract some facts from him with respect to this. I 

suggest that we certainly didn't extract all of the facts that need to be explored as yet. I hope that when this 

Committee meets again at the next session of the Legislature that the year 1973-74 will be examined very 

thoroughly and very closely by the Committee on Public Accounts with respect to DNS. At that time an 

indepth exploration will be possible and I am sure that the Committee doesn't need my direction nor my 

suggestion to have that happen. 

 

Again, I regret that the Minister of DNS took such a yellow attitude, and I don't know of a kinder phrase, in 

Committee in defending his inaction and his cover-up attempts in DNS. To me the cover-up is even more 

serious than the poor administration and the maladministration that went on in that department. 

 

Here was a Minister who had problems in his department and we all realize it is a difficult department; it is a 

new one in a tough geographic area of the province, but to me in here and try to tell us that because a 10 x 12 

office is located in La Ronge it is impossible to file in that office or to work in that office as opposed to that 

same office being down here in Regina. It is complete nonsense, Mr. Speaker, but that is the kind of red 

herring that the Minister tried to drag into the 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3001 

 

argument. And when he finally did get into the argument, after going for almost a full year, because it was 

June of 1973 when these problems were unearthed, the Minister said nothing at that time; he said nothing 

then in the course of this House; even when the Member for Athabasca (Mr.Guy) and other Members put 

forward a Motion asking for an inquiry into DNS, the Member for Prince Albert East Cumberland (Mr. 

Feschuk) got up and said that everything was going tremendously in DNS. As we learned when the Minister 

brought in his Estimates it is still not going well in DNS and it won't go well because of the attitude of this 

Minister and his Deputy in the handling of that department. 

 

How in the world is he going to tackle the problems of northern Saskatchewan if he can't tackle the problems 

of his own department in an honest forthright manner and he hasn't done that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — So he is not going to have any success in DNS until such time as he faces up to the 

problems, makes a clean breast of it, which he didn't do. As I say, to me the cover-up is a much more serious 

matter than the administrative problems that did occur in that department. I predict that until that Minister 

and his Deputy are relieved of their responsibilities, this Government will have problems in Northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I regret, very much, Mr. Speaker, it is the first time that I have seen a Government Cabinet Minister, of either 

administration over the last few years, use such a cheap argument to dodge his parliamentary responsibility 

by trying to implant the other night that all of the problems in DNS were due to one civil servant. I have 

never seen such a cheap political trick; such cheap tactics employed by a Minister in my time in this House 

or to my knowledge in any other provincial Assembly. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that to me was the great revelation of this particular debate and I regret that we have 

a Minister sitting opposite, who isn't prepared to accept his responsibilities in true parliamentary fashion. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker . . . If the Member for Nutana South had got up on his feet and made a speech from his 

feet instead of his seat — he had an opportunity to get into this debate! 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in closing may I again say, there were differences between Government and Opposition 

Members as to the severity of the problems in DNS. I suppose to some extent that is natural. I do hope that 

next year this department is examined very thoroughly and very completely because part of the year that we 

were working in — the year stopped in March 1973 — there was a considerable carryover that the 

Committee was unable to delve into. I do hope that next year a more thorough examination is made. 

 

I can say and I can agree with the Member for Morse that this Committee is becoming more and more 

important because of the growth and the expansion and the development of government and the increase in 

government spending. I hope that further 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3002 

 

steps and further considerations are given to facilitating the work of this Committee. Suggestions have been 

made and further suggestions, I am sure, will be examined in the future. 

 

Again, I want to express my appreciation to the vice-chairman, to the staff of the Committee, to the Auditor's 

office, the Comptroller's office, for their excellent help to this Committee in the conduct of its hearings and 

express personally my appreciation to all members on the Committee because I can say, very honestly, Mr. 

Speaker, my job as chairman was an easy one due to the excellent co-operation I had from all members. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

TELEGRAM TO PRIME MINISTER PIERRE TRUDEAU AND 

JUSTICE MINISTER OTTO LANG 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved, seconded by Mr. MacMurchy (Minister of 

Education): 

 

That this Assembly send the following telegram to Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and Justice 

Minister Otto Lang: 

 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan strongly protests the action proposed by your 

Government last evening to deny provincial royalties and mining taxes as deductions in the 

calculation of corporate income taxes. This measure destroys the federal-provincial 

framework in which resource taxation has been set since Confederation. It is a direct 

encroachment on the province's right to determine a fair return for its resources. Furthermore, 

it appears to discriminate in a particular way against the Province of Saskatchewan. The 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan calls upon the Federal Government to withdraw the 

section of the Ways and Means Motion which makes royalties and mining taxes paid to a 

province taxable. 

 

And that this Assembly requests the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to sign this 

telegram on its behalf. 

 

He said:  Mr. Speaker, I should like in moving this Motion to make some comments with respect to the 

proposal which the Federal Government brought down in the Budget — its ill-fated budget one might say — 

the other day on the 6th of May, to lead that Party and all Parties in the House of Commons into an election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposal to deny provincial royalties and mining taxes from being deducted from corporate 

profits in the calculation of corporate tax payable is most unreasonable and ill-conceived as a tax measure. 

 

Secondly, this particular measure is extremely selective and is directed at the people of western Canada. 

Constitutionally there is little question as to the ownership and management of natural resources. This area 

clearly falls within provincial jurisdiction. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3003 

 

Equally clear is the fact that the Federal Government cannot possibly argue that this is a question of national 

interest. It was just one month and ten days ago that the Prime Minister of Canada announced, after meeting 

with the Premiers of all the provinces, that the agreement on the domestic pricing of crude oil was a true 

victory for Confederation. 

 

The proposal put forward by the Federal Minister of Finance is a negation of the spirit of the agreement 

reached between the First Ministers on the question of crude oil pricing and the distribution of the returns 

resulting from the increased prices in the world and domestic markets. 

 

This particular measure is a direct encroachment upon a provincial right, the right of a province to achieve 

for its citizens a fair return for the exploitation of a depleting provincial resource. This proposal destroys the 

federal-provincial framework in which resource taxation has been sent, since almost the time of 

Confederation. 

 

Let us look at the proposal a bit more carefully. What the Federal Minister of Finance is saying is that the 

money which a private firm pays to the government of a province for the right of exploiting a provincial 

asset or resource is not a business expense. That is, we will not recognize the payment to the province for the 

right to exploit a provincial resource as a business expense. 

 

This would be precisely the same as saying to the farmer that he cannot deduct payments to the landowner, 

whether they be in kind or in cash as a rental from his income for tax purposes. Or similarly, the municipal 

taxes which you pay on your farm property are not really costs of doing business and hence you can't deduct 

these amounts paid to a government body as a business expense. 

 

What this legislation says that if you are a mineral producer on Crown land, the money you pay to the Crown 

in the right of a province, is not a business expense, whereas the money you pay to a free-holder is 

deductible. Carrying that to its logical conclusion, then the Federal Government is saying that provinces do 

not really own resources or if they do they can't charge for them. If the Government of Canada were to argue 

that such payments were not tax deductible, since they were paid to a non-taxable agency, the province, then 

this proposition becomes a method for levying federal taxes on a provincial government. 

 

Then the Federal Liberal Government is saying that it is their intent to tax provincial governments. That 

proposal is not only unconstitutional but also it is tremendously discriminatory in that it taxes only those 

provinces which have an abundance of natural resources and ignores all other areas which give rise to 

income. 

 

To do this is just exactly the same as saying that we shall tax the farmer because his income comes from the 

land, but we shall not tax the doctor, the dentist, the lawyer, the manufacturer, the carpenter or anyone else, 

who does not derive his income directly from natural resources such as land. If it is the intention to tax 

governments then the tax base must be broadened to include all sources of income, not just the economic 

rent derived from resource exploitation. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3004 

 

Thus, the Federal Government should be taxing the income tax base of the central provinces, Ontario and 

Quebec, as well as moneys derived from resources. 

 

The amendments to the Corporate Tax Act further infringes upon provincial rights in that it in effect may 

penalize the province which chooses to restrict or protect a provincial resource for use within its own 

borders. The big losers in that circumstance will be the consumers in that province. And to be specific I want 

to take an example — natural gas. 

 

In this province we have for years required that natural gas produced in Saskatchewan be sold to the Power 

Corporation for distribution to Saskatchewan consumers. Accordingly, we have been capable of holding 

down the price of natural gas to Saskatchewan consumers by this method to some extent. As this federal 

legislation is presently being proposed this will no longer be possible or we shall not be able to pass on the 

full benefit to Saskatchewan consumers, since a corporate tax equal to 30 per cent of the difference has been 

the price that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation pays for Saskatchewan produced gas and the price we 

must pay to Trans Canada Pipe Lines. 

 

For example, if gas from Trans Canada Pipe Lines is 60 per cent per mcf and if the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation pays 17 cents per mcf for gas produced in Saskatchewan, then the Federal Government could, 

under its legislation, value Saskatchewan gas at 60 cents per mcf and deem the 43 cents to be a royalty to the 

province, which would result in an additional 12 cents in federal corporate income tax becoming payable to 

the Federal Government. They would deem the 43 cents which the company had not received as being a 

royalty, in kind, having been paid to the province by the virtue of having sold the natural gas to the province 

at 17 cents versus the 60 cents, which would be deemed to be the fair market value. 

 

Given the public utility basis of this production, this can only mean an increase to Saskatchewan consumers 

of 12 cents per mcf on gas produced in Saskatchewan or a reduction in Saskatchewan natural gas production. 

 

In the Budget Address the Hon. John Turner, Federal Minister of Finance, stated, "A provincial resource is a 

national resource and the Federal Government has the responsibility to see that a reasonable portions of this 

gain is shared by all Canadians." 

 

When one considers crude oil as an example, we must certainly ask: just what does the Federal Government 

want? What does it think is a fair distribution between Canada and the provinces? 

 

The international price of crude oil is over $10.70 a barrel; the domestic price is $6.50 a barrel, leaving a 

difference of $4.20 a barrel. Let's now cast this into a different light. For each barrel of oil produced in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta Ottawa gets $4.20 for the benefit of all Canadians — and this goes in two forms; 

$4.20 by the export charge and $4.20 is the lower price that other consumers in Canada are paying. Thus, 

$4.20 to the Federal Government, one way or another, which they choose to pass on in two ways; $3.40 to 

the province in royalties and $3.10 to the producer. 

 

In global terms then what Mr. Turner is saying, is that of the $8.56 billion, at present international prices, in 

the value 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3005 

 

of oil produced in Canada, the Government of Canada should be receiving more than $3.4 billion, which it is 

already receiving. Almost half a billion dollars more. To maintain the present operating circumstances this 

means that the provinces or the operators will have to receive that much less. 

 

This, I would suggest, is unreasonable. Almost inconceivable in view of the fact that just slightly over one 

month ago the First Ministers agreed to the distribution of the additional funds to be derived from the 

increased prices of oil. This must be considered as a breach of the spirit of the agreement and contrary to the 

concept of co-operative federalism. 

 

We, in this province, would not have opposed an excess profits tax. Indeed, we felt there should be one. 

However, we feel that such a tax should apply to excess earnings derived by all corporate taxpayers. Any 

reasonable returns being realized by the resource sector because the owners of the resources were not 

charging enough for their resources could be taxed for the benefit of all Canadians. Similarly extraordinary 

returns of other producers could be assessed on a fair basis. 

 

The Government of Canada, obviously, chose not to follow this route. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I move this particular motion I want to make one other comment. 

 

I was interested in reading in the Finance Minister's speech where he was talking about getting new revenues 

and he was saying that he was going to go where it was the easiest to get the revenues. Obviously the Federal 

Liberal Government knew there was an election coming. If they are any kind of politicians at all they should 

see that coming with the kind of Budget that they brought down. He was looking for the easiest place 

possible, he said, to find tax revenues. 

 

Look at what he did in the corporate sector. Most of the manufacturing in Canada is in eastern Canada. He 

put on a 10 per cent surtax on corporate profits, but they excluded manufacturing. But when it came to a 

resource, which was solely located — almost solely — in western Canada, indeed to a great extent in two 

provinces. That's where they put the bite on in terms of taxes. 

 

I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that what the Finance Minister was talking about where it was easiest to find 

them, I think he was talking about where it was least politically difficult to live with them perhaps. Mr. 

Speaker, I so move the Motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, let me state very clearly that we will not 

join in sending that telegram and we're quite prepared to have the NDP Government join in agreeing with the 

telegram we sent. We've already sent it. But let's take a look at this whole situation and see who is really 

attacking the spirit of federal-provincial fiscal arrangements or the Federal Fiscal Agreements Act of 1972. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3006 

 

You know, the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley) talks about the Federal Government, how much 

does the Federal Government want from the oil resource, and he talks abut them getting $4 and some cents a 

barrel. Well, let's make it very clear, they do get that on all the oil we export which is about 40 million 

barrels. They get little or nothing except the corporation tax, their share of the corporation tax on the other 

half of the oil that we sell for consumption within Canada. 

 

Now, again I say as I said before let's look at the whole picture here. The Minister paints a picture of what's 

happening in oil, but he doesn't talk and he failed again today to mention what they are doing to potash and 

what they intend to do to uranium and probably every other mineral resource that comes into a viable market 

position in this province. Certainly they've done it to oil and they intend to do it to potash, that's very clear. 

 

Let's start with the oil. The NDP are attempting to claim, are claiming that the Federal Government have 

moved in to place a new tax on what has up to this point been a provincial area of taxation, that is, the 

resource minerals, oil, potash and so on. In this regard they are right. Last September when the Federal 

Government put the 40 per cent export tax on oil, this was an invasion of what had up to this point in time 

been clearly a field of taxation left to the provinces. Now whether they had the legal right to put the export 

tax on or not, I don't know. The NDP Government opposite doesn't know either and they don't seem to be 

about to find out. I said then and I say now, that when Premier Blakeney agreed with the Federal 

Government's move to put an export tax on, he then at that moment in time, sold out the rights of the people 

of Saskatchewan. That's when he should have moved in, right then, when it was 40 cents and placed his 

royalty, increased his royalty or moved in and had the confrontation with Ottawa at that time. Instead, what 

he said was, we agree as long as we get the money. He didn't even disagree in October or November when 

the tax was raised subsequently to 90 cents, then to $1.90. He didn't even disagree when it went up over $2 

and even up to as high as $6. 

 

He then went to Ottawa and in effect he agreed with the Federal Government's action when he made the deal 

at the first energy conference and was given half of the export tax and allowed to charge one extra dollar if 

he could collect it. Again he sold out and I said it then and I say it again, he sold out the rights of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

What should he have done? I say he should have advanced right then and taken this thing through to the 

Supreme Court which most people in this nation expected him to do. He went down to Ottawa, he went to 

Quebec, he went to the Maritimes and he talked tough. He came into that conference and the first morning he 

still talked tough. He was a nine-day wonder around there until noon of the second day. The Premier of 

Alberta who had 85 per cent of the oil was doing none of the talking, Premier Blakeney who had 11 per cent 

of the oil was doing 100 per cent of the talking. But after the noon conference, and he came back out of that 

conference, it was obvious for everyone in Canada to see, that the Premier had sold out, he had caved in, he 

had given in. 

 

Okay, then we come to the next conference and again we had tough talk here in the Legislative Assembly. 

As soon as the Premier got back home in his own back yard, backed by his own 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3007 

 

followers on that side of the House, he again mounted a very tough campaign. He was going to go right to 

the limit, he was going to have a confrontation with Ottawa, he was going to find out once and for all who 

had the right, first right of taxation on the minerals of this nation. And his argument, and I agree with it, was 

that it was the provincial government. But again he went down East and again he made another deal. 

 

Now, the question of how much money the Federal Government is getting out of the export tax is not 

relevant to the problem we now face. There are two problems here. One is that the export tax is a very 

obvious invasion by the Federal Government of what up to this point has been a provincial right. And in that, 

we on this side of the House, take a strong stand and we would be prepared and we will be prepared if it's 

still in vogue when we are the government to take it as high as we have to go to get it settled, to the Supreme 

Court if necessary. We will not back down like the Premier did and the NDP opposite. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — That's all you know about it! 

 

MR. STEUART: — But now, that's all I know about it? No, at least I'd have the nerve to try it. At least I'd 

have the nerve to try it, which is more than you people obviously have. If you think you're wrong say so, 

don't get up in this House and whine about provincial rights, about the BNA Act, about the rights that you 

have as a province if you're not prepared to put your actions where you mouth is. 

 

Okay, we have another problem now. Because of the actions of the NDP in increasing their royalty from 

roughly 16 per cent to now where it stands at 54 per cent, and because of the action they intend to take and 

have publicly stated they intend to take the potash industry, raising again their royalty from $16 million to 

$17 million to as high as $55 or $60 million, this NDP Government have clearly indicated that they intend to 

move in on the field of mineral resources and push the Federal Government totally out of this field of 

taxation. So the Federal Government has decided in the Budget they brought down to disallow royalties, 

provincial royalties on mineral resources, to disallow it, as an expense and exemption for corporation tax. 

Now, let me make it very clear, this is not by itself an invasion by the Federal Government of the rights of 

the province to royalties from resources. It is not by itself, it is merely and extension of the corporation tax to 

which they have a very clear and a very established right. I don't agree with them, I don't agree with what the 

Federal Government is doing, because by the greedy and irresponsible action of the Provincial Government 

we have already driven the oil industry to the wall. We've caused serious unemployment, we have pushed 

out oil industries so that there is no exploration at all going on in this province now, we've broken, 

bankrupted a great many small Saskatchewan based companies and within the next few months, by the 

actions primarily of the Provincial Government, secondary now, the threat of the Federal Government will 

complete the job. 

 

Okay, where does that change announced in the Budget by Mr. Turner now stand? Well, of course, it's 

inoperable. The Government has been defeated, the Government is going to the people and that tax isn't, or 

that exemption or that change in the corporate tax is not now in effect. Okay, what should this Government 

be doing instead of sending politically motivated 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3008 

 

telegrams? They should be preparing their case to go down on July 9th or 10th and sit down with the new 

majority Federal Liberal Government and discuss this whole thing sensibly. I think the Federal Government 

is wrong, but I think their actions were brought on again by the irresponsible actions, shortsighted action, 

stupid actions of the Government opposite. 

 

We've got a mineral industry in this nation, we've got an oil industry, potash industry and a growing uranium 

industry in this province. Surely no one argues that both levels of government have a clear right to collect 

taxes for the people they represent, from these resources. It has always been that way, the provincial 

government, the first right in the form of royalties and corporation tax and the federal government in the 

field of corporation tax. But if one government, either one, moves in to squeeze the other out, then you've 

got a real problem. 

 

But who is going to be the real loser in this fight that is going on, this head-on confrontation that is now 

going to exist between the government in Regina and the government in Ottawa? First the industry. Well, 

you may say we're not going to shed any crocodile tears for these large corporations, mining or oil companies 

or mining corporations. However, let's take a look at what happens when you push them out, when they take 

their money, their skills and their facilities and move them out. Who gets hurt? The people who depend on 

those industries for their jobs, the small industries, mostly Saskatchewan or mostly Canadian who service 

these mines and these oil wells. These are the people who get hurt and in the final analysis it's the people 

themselves, all the people that suffer. 

 

Now, what is happening here is, we have already effectively set the oil industry in the Province of 

Saskatchewan back 40 or 50 years. You're now playing a dangerous game with the potash industry. The 

Federal Government is playing a dangerous game. I don't know why anyone would come into this nation and 

invest any money in the development of mineral resources. But if they did by some chance come into 

Canada, I can be sure, or we can be sure that the actions taken now by the NDP Government and 

contemplated and planned by the NDP Government they'll draw a ring around this province and they'll avoid 

it like the plague. We are right back, we're worse off then we were back under the old CCF. At least when 

Tommy Douglas gave his word, he kept it. But that can't be said for Premier Blakeney, that can't be said for 

the present NDP Government. They are known from one end of this nation to the other and now they are 

becoming known internationally as a government that has no regard for a contract, as a government that has 

no regard for its given word, as a government that will do anything and everything to exploit for their own 

greedy ends, anybody who comes into this province and invests their time, their money, their skills. 

 

So I won't join in sending this telegram, because it's the wrong action. All it is, is politically motivated. But I 

would join in if this Government was prepared to say they would sit down with the Federal Government as 

soon as the election is over, and there will then be time and sensibly plan not only with the Federal 

Government or the Provincial Government, but with the industries involved, with the oil industry, the potash 

industry and the mining industry, and decide how much money should be taken from our resources for the 

people of Canada. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3009 

 

How much money should we take? Well, of course, we have to be competitive with other parts of the world 

if we are going to get mining capital. If we don't need it, if we can generate it here, either through 

government action or private action, then we don't have to be competitive. But in some areas that will work 

and in some areas it won't work. But however, how much we decide to take, and surely that's not that 

difficult to calculate, then the split between the provinces and the Federal Government again shouldn't be 

that difficult to calculate. At the same time, let's have some consideration, let's have some consideration for 

the industry, consult them in a meaningful way so they've got a reasonable profit, a reasonable profit, pay 

their expenses, to repay their capital investment and to continue to search and to continue to explore and to 

continue to develop the oil and the other mineral resources of this province and of this nation. If we don't 

they'll move out as they've done in the oil industry. If we're prepared to replace that capital and that 

knowhow with government money, government industries and government corporations, I wouldn't agree 

with it, but at least we would be doing something. 

 

But up to this point in oil and in potash all we've got is something on paper. We've got a politically sad joke, 

Saskoil and I don't think the one talked about by the Federal Government is much better. And so until we can 

replace them with something else, it's ridiculous to push these other people out, the private oil industry, the 

only ones that have found any oil up to this point, the private people who are the only ones who came into 

this province and risked their money in search for potash and developed it and until such time as you find a 

better system, I say you are playing a dangerous game with our double taxation, your greedy taxation. You 

are going to force them to the wall and force them out of the province. 

 

So we won't join in with this telegram, it's the wrong action at the wrong time. We would join with you if 

you were prepared to make a statement to this House and to the public, that as soon as the federal election is 

settled you would sit down and have a meaningful conference, not only on energy, but on all mineral 

resource development in this nation and come up between the provincial governments and the Federal 

Government with the industry involved with a responsible and a sensible taxation program. There is need of 

a program with the demand for our mineral commodities in the world, there's room for everybody. There is 

no need for the provincial government to have the greed that they have, there is no need for the Federal 

Government to take the action that they contemplated in the Budget they brought down and were defeated 

on, absolutely no need. There is room and plenty of room for everyone. We're acting like dogs in a manager, 

we're acting like banana republics and it's no wonder that the reputation of this province is in the gutter, in 

tatters, as far as the investment capital and sensible people are concerned, not just in this province or in this 

country, but outside our boundaries as well. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there's one thing that's in the gutter and in tatters in this province 

it's the Liberal Party sitting opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3010 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I won't take very long to reply to that tired old record over there. The 

Leader of the Opposition suggested that we should sit down and have meaningful consultation with the 

Federal Government. Well, we did that in January, and February and March and we reached an agreement 

and they're the ones who are now changing the rules of the game again. The Leader of the Opposition, he 

looked into his backwards crystal ball and said, you know, boy you should have thought about that export tax 

way back when. In December the Leader of the Opposition was saying, don't hurry with this Bill, we don't 

need it right away, there is no rush, take time, take months. The Leader of the Opposition is a man of 

contradictions. You know, he is so busy straddling that fence that one of these days he's going to fall with 

one leg on either side. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition spoke about the potash industry. Well, all I want to tell the Leader of the 

Opposition is the Federal Government's proposals in terms of changing the corporate income tax structure 

would likely result in a reduction of the tax payable under the new proposal for the potash industry. I think 

the Member opposite would agree that a federal government that had both of its eyes open and was looking 

anywhere was designing a new tax and trying to get more money from resources in the case of western 

Canada, shouldn't have been raising them on the petroleum industry and lowering them on the potash 

industry. Indeed, one could suggest that perhaps the other way around would have been a more reasonable 

approach. That's the kind of policy which this telegram is directed, towards asking the Federal Government 

to state now — the Federal Liberal Party, not after the campaign is over, but to state now — that it made a 

mistake and that it wouldn't proceed in the unlikely event that only half a dozen people turn out to vote in 

each constituency and the Liberals may get re-elected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 32 

Messieurs 

Meakes Michayluk Matsalla 

Smishek Byers Owens 

Romanow Thorson Gross 

Messer Whelan Feduniak 

Snyder Kwasnica Comer 

Bowerman Carlson Rolfes 

Kramer Cody Hanson 

Thibault Robbins Oliver 

Larson Tchorzewski Kaeding 

MacMurchy Cowley Richards 

Pepper Taylor  

 

NAYS — 12 

Messieurs 

Steuart Grant MacLeod 

Loken MacDonald (Milestone) MacDonald (Moose Jaw N.) 

Guy Gardner  Wiebe 

Boldt Weatherald Malone 

   



 

May 10, 1974 

3011 

 

ADDITIONAL HOUSE SITTING 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, not to encourage anyone but just 

simply as insurance: 

 

That on Friday, May 10, 1974 and on each Friday until the end of the Session, Rule 3(3) be 

suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 o’clock p.m. until 

9:30 o’clock p.m.; and 

 

That notwithstanding Rule 3(4) on Saturday, May 11, 1974 and each Saturday until the end 

of the Session, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 o’clock a.m. until 5:30 p.m.; that there shall 

be a recess of one and one-half hours at 12:30 o’clock p.m.; and that the Order of the 

Business shall be the same as on Thursday. 

 

I so move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Health). 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

THIRD READING 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved that Bill No. 129 — An Act to amend The 

Mineral Taxation Act be now read a third time. 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to repeat once more our 

objections to this Bill. I think it is dangerous. I think it is ill-advised what they are doing to the potash 

industry. I think it is going to bring great harm to that very important industry in the years ahead, harm which 

this Government over there cannot foresee. I think it is a mistake, I think it is going to do our reputation, 

again, a great deal of harm. I think that when they get into the very competitive potash business as they 

obviously will, if they are in power long enough, it will be both a disaster from the point of view of the 

people of Saskatchewan directly as it involves them in that industry and also for the potash industry itself, 

upon which so many people depend for their livelihood. That is why we object and object most strenuously 

to this particular Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could introduce for the MLA for 

Swift Current, the Hon. E.I. Wood, 43 Grade Five students from the James O. Begg school in Swift Current. 

I believe they are sitting right opposite us. The teachers are Linda Arons and Harvey Lane — I hope I have 

pronounced those names correctly. If I haven't my apologies to you. I am sorry the Minister is not in his seat 

but we welcome you to the Legislature and hope that you enjoy the proceedings. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3012 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino): — I should like to introduce a fine group of students from the 

town of Melfort this morning, Grade Five students. They are led here by parents, Mrs. Arlene Blair, Mrs. N. 

Michalycha and Mrs. Alice Lavrans. Their school teacher, Mrs. Elizabeth Byggdin is also with them. 

 

I want to tell the House that the town of Melfort is the largest town in the province. It is a very nice town to 

visit, right in the heart of the Carrot River Valley. It is one of the most productive areas in the province. 

 

We have a fine group of students here this morning and I am sure you will join with me in welcoming them 

here. They are touring the city and I hope that today's experience will be a very educational one. 

 

I am sorry I have to leave this afternoon as I would like to keep them company a little more but I am sure that 

you will make this day for them a very educational one. I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to introduce to you and 

other Members of the House and welcome to the Assembly 26 Grade Three students from Assiniboine 

School. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Anderson, and four parents, Mrs. Grey, Mrs. Berstein, 

Mrs. Berek and Mrs. Perron. I hope they will find our deliberations enjoyable and educational this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I understand there is a group of young people here 

from Whitewood accompanied by Mrs. Santo, Mr. White and Mr. Metzler. I haven't had a chance to meet 

them yet but I will when they leave the gallery. They made the arrangements some time ago and weren't sure 

if the Session would still be on when they came but fortunately they are getting a chance to see the 

Legislature in operation and I hope they have a pleasant day and good trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 29 — FEED GRAINS PLEBISCITE 

 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin) moved, seconded by Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): 

 

That this Assembly regrets the action of the Minister of Agriculture in not consulting with 

the farmers in provincial agricultural policies and further regrets that the ballot to be used in 

the forthcoming feed grains plebiscite is slanted to favor one side of the issue. 

 

He said:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure everyone is aware of the reason for this Resolution. I might say at the outset 

that we have 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3013 

 

advocated plebiscites on agricultural issues at various times as everyone in the Chamber is aware, and we 

certainly are not going to object now to the idea of a plebiscite. 

 

We asked the Department if you will recall for a plebiscite or a vote on hog marketing and we became 

convinced at that time that the NDP Government just didn't believe in plebiscites or votes on these issues. 

There have been a number of non-agricultural issues such as the ward system where there just wasn't a vote 

allowed. 

 

We asked the Minister to consult with farmers on various other agricultural policies such as foreign 

ownership of land, on the Land Bank and other issues of a strictly provincial nature. And I want to note the 

difference in the type of issues that many provincial issues have been bypassed where there hasn't been a 

vote and it does seem rather odd to us that the Minister would not call a vote on an issue that affects the 

people of the province but is certainly largely beyond the jurisdiction of this Provincial Government. 

 

The Minister apparently didn't believe in plebiscites at that time. But in this issue that is beyond the control 

of the province the Government quite suddenly becomes democratic. I believe it is perfectly obvious to 

everyone that the reason for the vote at this time on the feed grains situation is strictly for political reasons. I 

don't think we need to try and kid each other back and forth about that. There is no doubt that the timing of 

vote, the calling of the vote is strictly for political reasons. 

 

We have had a feed grains issue with us for months, even years. I recall, I have here my note some place, a 

resolution that was passed in 1970, by Mr. Kowalchuk and Mr. Bowerman, where they advocated the 

movement of feed grains freely in the West. We know we've talked about these issues for years. It is not 

something new. But if the Government really wanted an expression, a vote to give them an expression of 

farmer opinion on the feed grains that is fine. But in this case of course it is fairly obvious that is not the 

reason for having the vote. 

 

We first have to look at the timing of the vote and we note that it is very carefully timed. There is a federal 

election coming. When the vote was called it was almost sure the federal election would be July 8th, this is 

now confirmed. So the Minister immediately sends out ballots which he asked to have back by the 24th of 

May. This is extremely short notice of course for a ballot. It is an unreasonably short time, but if the Minister 

is going to have time to tabulate the results of this and then if he is able to get results that favor his position, 

to use these effectively in the Federal campaign, then he has only time to allow the people of this province 

about two weeks to get their ballots back in. 

 

Now, in spite of the fact that this is an extremely busy time of the year, that farmers are going to be rushed in 

getting their crops in, all of the other times it would be possible to have a vote, he didn't of course choose, he 

chose this time strictly to get involved in the federal election. He wants to use the results to interfere in the 

federal election and there is no other reason for him having the vote at this time and I am sure this is 

perfectly obvious to everyone. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3014 

 

If the results are as the Minister would like to have them, then he has time to tabulate them and use them in 

the campaign. If this is his purpose and obviously it is, we have to look at how he does attempt to get the 

results that he favors and he does this in two ways. 

 

First of all he does it by having a ballot this is entirely and completely misleading and slanted and biased in a 

very blatant manner. And it is designed to be confusing to the people who are voting. It is a ridiculous type 

of ballot and the Minister knows it. It was purposely designed this way so that anyone marking his ballot 

really wouldn't know what he was doing. 

 

Of course, the second method by which he hopes to get the results that he wants is by restricting the time, so 

that the farmer who is now very busy, at a busy time of the year, just isn't going to have the time to delve into 

all of the aspects of the vote. He gets this thing in the mail, he is busy with his seeding, he either throws it in 

the waste paper basket or he marks an X some place and throws it back in the mail, his time is short and this 

is what the Minister wanted. He doesn't want the farmer to have time very carefully to sit down and 

scrutinize the ballot as the farmers had all kinds of time in the last four or five months to do exactly that, but 

the Minister very carefully didn't give them the ballot in January or February or March. He waits until that 

farmer is out on the tractor seeding, sends this out hoping that this will contribute to getting the type of 

results that he wants. 

 

We can see, Mr. Speaker, that the whole idea of a ballot, a plebiscite at this time is a complete waste of 

$30,000 because the result will be absolutely meaningless. The ballot doesn't give the farmer an opportunity 

to express his true intentions. I don't know what the results will be, but whatever the results are they are 

absolutely meaningless as far as giving any direction to the Provincial Government or the Federal 

Government because of the short time and the fact that the ballot is so blatantly biased to favor one position. 

It means that it is just an exercise in futility. I believe also, Mr. Speaker, that farmers generally are getting 

fed up with being used by the NDP for political purposes and this is the most obvious example of this that 

you could possibly get. Ballots sent out at this particular time, the time to coincide with the federal election. 

Very obviously the Minister is hoping to use the farmers of this province, just use them as a political tool. 

 

I think the farmers are going to resent this. They don't want to just have the Minister be able to use them at 

his whim for a special political idea. They remember very well how the NDP scuttled and destroyed the 

Federal Stabilization Bill. I am not going into the details of this because we have talked about this before. 

This was basically a very excellent concept where the farmer put in 2 per cent of this gross sales and the 

Federal Government put in 4 per cent. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, by now this would have resulted in a federal contribution of over $200 million to 

the farmers of this province, $200 million in federal money deposited to the account of western farmers. This 

would be $2,000 at least for every farmer in Saskatchewan. But of course, the question is: has the farmer got 

it? We have to say, No. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP very proudly took credit for scuttling and destroying this 

Stabilization Bill and 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3015 

 

I think they are still doing this. I would hope they keep saying that they did destroy the Stabilization Bill. 

 

I have a clipping here back from October 1971 when this was an issue and it is from the October 4th issue of 

the Leader-Post and it says: 

 

The New Democratic Party instigated the court action against Federal Minister E.J.Benson, 

said one of the farmers who signed the application for a writ of mandamus. The application is 

supported by the Saskatchewan Attorney General. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

That Roy Ames, a farmer in the Milestone district said Friday, that he was approached two or 

three days ago by Les Benjamin, NDP Member for Parliament for Regina Lake Centre. The 

59-year old farmer said he believed that Mr. Benjamin had approached several others seeking 

relators for the application. 

 

It goes on to talk about who the other people are and this farmer said: 

 

We are acting as individuals but it is through the efforts of the NDP that we are acting, said 

Mr. Ames. 

 

Mr. Ames said all four farmers are members of the NDP and participated in the September 

18th nominating convention for the Assiniboia Federal by-election scheduled for November 

8. 

 

It is obvious that the NDP scuttled the stabilization plan, and also took credit for it. The reason they did it of 

course was for political reasons, political reasons only. 

 

I should like to ask you, Mr. Speaker, how any NDP politician whether he is federal or provincial can now 

go around to the farmers of Saskatchewan, drive into their yard and say, "I am an NDP politician, I am the 

guy who destroyed the Stabilization Plan, I'm the person who is responsible for you losing $200 million." 

This is exactly what happened, they took credit for it, everybody in Saskatchewan knows it. I would be 

surprised when the federal campaign is on if some of these federal politicians, Benjamin, Gleave, Burton and 

so on that took responsibility for assisting in this how they can go out to rural Saskatchewan and say look, 

"We are the people who lost you $200 million. Three years have gone by, you haven't got a stabilization plan 

yet because of the actions of us, the NDP." 

 

This is exactly what happened before. Here again we have another example of an attempt to bring partisan 

politics into a very important agricultural issue. 

 

I don't know whether Benjamin, Gleave and Burton are behind this one again. I suspect they are. I doubt 

whether the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan dreamed this up on his own, but I see the find hand of 

some of his federal colleagues in this particular attempt to bring politics into something that is very serious, 

very important to the people of this province. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3016 

 

Feed grains, as we all know are now selling at a good price in Saskatchewan. After having had a very severe 

winter and problems with moving the grain, it is now moving very well and statistics indicate this. 

 

Farmers generally throughout the province are very happy with getting $2.50 for their barley, $1.50 for their 

oats and a good price also — $3.50 initial price for their wheat, with a possibility of a good final payment. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers of this province don't want this destroyed as the stabilization 

plan was destroyed by the actions of the NDP for political reasons. They don't want to lose their $2.50 

barley, just because the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan wants to make a political issue out of 

something that is very important to them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — You know, farmers get very nervous in this province now when they see the NDP 

interfering politically in an issue that affects them as did the Stabilization Plan and now the Feed Grains 

issue. They are very suspicious and they are suspicious with very good reason. 

 

The Minister's action in using taxpayers' money to promote one side of an issue is unfair to people who are 

perhaps supporting the other side of some issue. I would remind you in this regard of the rape seed vote 

where the people of Saskatchewan — the taxpayers were forced to spend thousands of dollars promoting 

something that the farmers themselves rejected, subsequently by a democratic vote. 

 

The Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture sent out approximately 80,000 bulletins to farmers indicating 

that they should vote one way in the rape seed issue. They put ads in the paper — it cost the taxpayers, the 

farmers themselves thousands and thousands of dollars to do this. It promoted one side, the farmers later said 

look, we don't want that at all, we favor the other side. I think it is unfortunate that the farmers would have to 

have their own money used against them to vote one side of an issue, an issue that they indicated they simply 

didn't support. 

 

I should like to also say a word or two, Mr. Speaker, about some of the ridiculous statements that have come 

out of the NDP supporters and some of the groups who are supporting them indicating that some individual 

or some group is out to destroy or undermine the Wheat Board. I don't think anybody takes this seriously any 

more. It is complete nonsense, everybody here knows it and particularly if they are referring to the Hon. Otto 

Lang, who has done more to preserve the Wheat Board to move grain, to get the Wheat Board acting 

properly and responsibly than anybody else has ever done. And for someone to get up now and say, oh, they 

are trying to destroy the Wheat Board, you might have got away with scaring farmers with scare tactics years 

ago, farmers generally are too smart, I believe, to believe that type of thing today. 

 

There are those people, Mr. Speaker, who believe that farmers should have some greater freedom of choice 

in marketing their grain than is presently provided through the Canadian 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3017 

 

Wheat Board. Whether they are right or wrong, this is their feeling. 

 

The plan proposed, as I understand it by the Federal Government is to give farmers a choice, not to tell them 

they have to use any particular method but to give them a little more flexibility, a little more freedom of 

choice and apparently this is the part of it that is being objected to very strenuously by the Minister of 

Agriculture and the NDP. 

 

Many individuals and many organizations feel that this flexibility would be a long-term benefit to the 

producer of feed grains. Those who take this position, Mr. Speaker, do not have a democratic opportunity to 

express their views on the ballot that is sent out by the Minister of Agriculture. It is a very purposely 

misleading type of ballot. Anyone who looks at it can see that it is a joke. The people who really want to 

express their views don't get a chance to do this. They are really insulting the farmer by sending out this type 

of thing, 'Do you wish your oats and so on marketed through the Canadian Wheat Board system of orderly 

marketing,' or do you favor one of these other terrible things, of course they don't say anything about orderly 

marketing or in connection with that. It doesn't say anything about barley that goes to Japan or barley that is 

used in eastern Canada or British Columbia, it's an indication there, number 1, the key question and it is 

completely absolutely meaningless. It doesn't say anything about the domestic market, the export market or 

anything else. It is purposely made misleading so the Minister will hopefully get the type of results that he 

expects and of course the results are going to be meaningless when he does get them. 

 

There are of course many organizations which are concerned by what the Minister is doing and I am not 

going to quote from the article in last night's Leader-Post, "Feed Grain Pool meets with Mixed Reaction." I 

am sure the Minister knows there are people who come out on all sides of an issue, I am certainly not going 

to debate the issue. There are one or two points in the federal plan that I think require some modification and 

one of these in particular would be anybody who markets feed grain by any method should probably have the 

advantage of a quota system. I would hope that any plan that is suggested by any changes that are made 

would include a quota system however the grain is sold. I don't think there is anybody advocating that as any 

restriction or lessening of the Wheat Board. I certainly wouldn't. I can't see that anybody else is doing this. 

We all know the importance of the feed industry in Saskatchewan, we don't have to go over this again. We 

all know the importance of preserving markets for our grain both in Canada and abroad. Our first concern, 

primary concern, has to be for the producer of this feed grain in Saskatchewan because he is the person who 

is right here, who is most involved and he would require our number one concern. 

 

We also have to be concerned abut the consumer or the feeder of feed grain both in Saskatchewan and 

elsewhere. If you are in business of any kind, you must show some interest in your customers. I think this is 

one of the requirements of any business for no other reason than simply to keep them as customers. We 

realize the dilemma at the present time, how to get a good price for feed grain for the producer, and still 

make grain available to cattle feeders at a price that will allow 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3018 

 

them not only to survive but to make a margin of profit so they can stay in the business. Everyone realizes 

this problem. To get up and say that feed grain prices should be higher, then you are immediately making it 

tougher for the feeder. If you say they should be lower, then you are perhaps not giving sufficient margin to 

the producer who suffered for 30 years of too low prices for his feed grain. 

 

In this Session I believe the NDP have demonstrated time and time again that they really have no concept of 

business or the operation of business, and I think the feed grains issue is certainly another indication. It is not 

surprising that they approached the feed grains issue in the same manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other people who I am sure would like to make a comment on the feed grains 

situation and perhaps look at it from a little different point of view. I will move the resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. L. LARSON (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, again the Member for Moosomin has gone and done it. I could 

hardly believe my eyes when I saw the kind of resolution on the Order Paper. His remarks and his 

accusations are of course just as ridiculous today as they have been throughout the whole session. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARSON: — He and the Liberal Party have been talking ever since the election about consultations 

about plebiscites and about votes and about all the kinds of things that we have been doing wrong. Now 

when we do choose to have a plebiscite on the issue that is as important as the preservation of the Wheat 

Board in Canada, then of course we are committing another cardinal sin. I say to him that you can't have it 

both ways. You can't seem to make up your mind. He gets up and makes the accusation that it is being done 

for political purposes. I couldn't think of anything more political than in the dying moments of this Session 

to put a resolution of this kind on the Order Paper. Certainly this must be the most desperate move that they 

have made since 1971. 

 

He talks about the quality and the questions and the bias in the plebiscite. I want to remind him of the 

plebiscite in the rapeseed vote. I want to remind him of the vote that we were called on to choose, and how 

this was conducted. Absolutely loaded. Any farmer who hadn't produced rapeseed for the last three years 

didn't have a vote. I produced rapeseed for a great number of years, but I wasn't allowed to vote in that 

plebiscite. Certainly if there ever was a loaded and biased plebiscite, it came from the famous Otto Lang in 

his rapeseed vote. The Member for Cannington is worrying about by brains. If he wants to talk about brains, 

I think probably he ought to keep quiet and not enter this debate at all. I think he would then probably 

display a better amount of brains than probably some of utterances that he is going to make. 

 

I say again, Mr. Speaker, that what is at stake in this province of ours at this time is the preservation of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3019 

 

MR. LARSON: — The Members opposite are, of course, opposed, diametrically opposed to the principle of 

orderly marketing. They have shown this on several occasions. It took Otto Lang to have the guts and the 

courage to come out and say where they stood. Now they are trying to laud him. I want to remind the 

Member for Moosomin of the struggle that has been going on for the last very great number of months since 

this whole change in the feed grains situation was announced. I want to remind him of the stand of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and their concern. I want to remind him of the stand of the Federation of 

Agriculture and their concern. I want to remind him of the stand of the Saskatchewan Farmers' Union, their 

plea to meet the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa and he refused to do so. All of these organizations have 

been very concerned and have shown continuous concern, almost despair at the spectacle come August 1st 

that we are going back on to the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange for pricing of our grain, bypassing the 

Wheat Board, bypassing any semblance of orderly marketing. 

 

I have said in this House before and I want to repeat today that the principle behind this whole move is to 

supply eastern Canada and the eastern Canadian feeders with an unlimited supply of cheap feed grain. This is 

what is behind the whole thing. There was absolutely no concern expressed when farmers in Saskatchewan 

were selling feed grains at a cent a pound and bootlegging it through the feed mills, no concern at all. All 

that was worried about then was that the feeders had cheap feed. Pressure on the Wheat Board to open the 

boundaries, to let the grain go. Now that we at last have a fair market for grain, then it must be stymied. 

Surely if there ever was a case of the Liberal Party being finally flushed out into the open it has been during 

the last few months. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — On the eighth of July they are going to get flushed. 

 

MR. LARSON: — Yes, on the eighth they will get flushed down! 

 

The Member for Moosomin worries about the timing of the plebiscite. I ask him if there could be any better 

timing? Does he realize that on August 1st this whole deal comes into effect. 

 

Yes, the farmer from Lumsden, he probably will be flushed down the Qu'Appelle River one of these days! 

 

Come August 1st we are going to be faced with the realities of this situation. Then it is going to be too late, 

the farmers are now being given an opportunity to speak and to speak in a plebiscite that has some meaning 

to it. Every farmer who holds a permit book is going to have a voice, not just a few who are selected by Otto 

Lang and cohorts or by the Member for Moosomin . . . This is the difference between the kind of plebiscite 

that is being organized in Saskatchewan and the one organized . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Doesn't the Member for Lumsden realize that he cannot talk from another seat. He is 

not only interrupting but talking from a different seat! I am asking for order. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3020 

 

MR. LARSON: — Mr. Speaker, coming from him and the mental capacity that he has displayed in this 

House, you couldn't expect any better. Thanks for reminding him of a few of the very simple and most 

fundamental rules. You couldn't expect him to know that. He has displayed that kind of ignorance all 

through the Session. 

 

Then the Member for Moosomin gets snarled up on the Stabilization Bill, just as if that hasn't been debated 

enough in Saskatchewan, just as if the farmers haven't expressed themselves a number of time what they 

thought about this Stabilization Bill. Certainly his argument is totally irrelevant . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Will the Member put that pipe out! 

 

MR. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Pardon, Mr. Speaker! 

 

MR. LARSON: — A truly regrettable performance by the Liberal Party. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the results 

of the plebiscite will strengthen the hands of the farm organizations that are in the forefront fighting this 

battle. It will strengthen the hand of the Provincial Government, knowing that steps we have got to take in 

order to protect us against the chaos that is going to exist after August 1st. Certainly the wording of the 

resolution is meaningless, it is absolutely a political gimmick, a political shenanigan that someone along the 

line in the Liberal Party hopes is going to get them some votes in the federal election. Certainly it is not 

conducive to any help in the problem and in the fight that is taking place in Saskatchewan at this time. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this Resolution and I urge all Members of the House to turn 

it down flat. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on this matter. I want 

to mention a couple of things that the Member for Pelly brought up. First of all he wonders why the 

resolution came in at this late date in the Session. Well, it is only two days ago since the Minister announced 

the plebiscite, so we could hardly put in a Resolution before he made the announcement. That may be too 

hard for the Member for Pelly to understand, most people can understand that. 

 

The second thing is the old bogey man that the NDP drag out about eastern Canada. I want to remind the 

people of Saskatchewan that there are more cattle fed, fattened and slaughtered in the province of Alberta 

than there is in any other province in Canada and has been for some time. I should give them all a copy of 

the 1974 statistics for every month of the year. There is not one single month that the Province of Alberta 

didn't lead Canada in slaughtering of fat cattle. I might add that the feed grains policy that was enunciated, 

while there are two or three things which I personally disagree with, which I will be glad to mention later 

that the Government of Alberta backed that policy 100 per cent. So the NDP in their narrow parochial 

political views bring out the old bogey man of east against west. I remind them and the people of 

Saskatchewan that western Canada now slaughters more cattle and has more interest in feed grains than does 

eastern Canada. So I hope that that point will be kept in mind. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3021 

 

MR. MEAKES: — There are more voters down there. 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Well the Province of Alberta is quite happy with the feed grains policy. I don't 

know what that has to do with voters. They are very interested in their economy. If you are talking about 

cheap grain for eastern Canada, Alberta doesn't think so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about this Resolution. I do believe that it is extremely unfortunate that the 

debate is necessary. I want to say that the debate is necessary simply because of the meddlesome nature of 

the Minister of Agriculture, the NDP is not interested in a fair and rational vote on this subject at all. 

 

The Member for Moosomin very well put forward the political position that the NDP is attempting to take 

on this crucial matter as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned. The only thing that this NDP 

Government and the Minister of Agriculture are interested in is political propaganda at government expense 

that may be to the benefit of the NDP politicians 

 

The feed grains issue has been under discussion for at least nine months when the original proposals for 

discussion were made. It is interesting to note that any time during that nine-month period we could have 

taken the vote that has now been suggested. We didn't take a vote. I would suggest to the Minister of 

Agriculture that if he really wanted to find out what the farmers thought, he should have taken the vote 

before he announced the Saskatchewan Grain Marketing Commission which he announced last fall. He 

didn't have a vote before he announced it. I am really surprised that he didn't bother taking a vote before he 

announced the grain commission, in fact we have a lot of money appropriated for the Saskatchewan Grain 

Marketing Commission here in this Budget. We didn't have any vote. In fact he announced it last November 

and just started the whole thing in the ash can himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan then began his political manoeuvre with the Feed 

Marketing Commission which never got off the ground, and he quickly abandoned it. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you against the Wheat Board Tom? 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — No, I am not against the Wheat Board, I'm 100 per cent for the Wheat Board. 

But I am getting tired of this garbage peddled by the NDP that think that they are the only people in 

Saskatchewan for the Wheat Board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear, I would have no objection to a fairly 

presented ballot on the feed grains issue. I mean a fair ballot in which both sides of the issue are presented. 

This in no way is a fair ballot, it is a loaded ballot on which the Blakeney Government intends to get an 

answer favorable to its own political position, so it can be announced in the middle of the federal election 

campaign. It is obvious 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3022 

 

that that's why it was announced when it was, it is obvious that's why the date of May 24th is on the ballot 

for its return. This, Mr. Speaker, is a disservice to the agriculture industry and the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

No farmer in this province will be fooled by such a crass political move by the Blakeney Government at the 

expense of our taxpayers of our province. 

 

Let's look at the record of this Minister of Agriculture. We had such nonsensical things as The Family Farm 

Protection Act brought in that put the bad debts part of it right on the back of a credit union and the small 

implement dealer. We had a Foreign Ownership Bill brought in here, Mr. Speaker, that the Government 

quickly abandoned, a foreign ownership bill saying non-resident Canadian owners were foreigners, then 

saying it wasn't a Bill, although it said Bill right on the front, certainly it wasn't a White Paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then we had the successful attempt to sabotage the Grain Stabilization Bill that cost the people 

of Saskatchewan millions of dollars because the Federal Government would have put up $4 for every $2 that 

the farmers of Saskatchewan did. This was largely done because of the Assiniboia by-election to be able to 

help the NDP politicians to try and get elected. Then the Minister of Agriculture interfered in the rapeseed 

vote which was a fair vote in which the people that carried it out presented both sides of the case and 

certainly in all respects the information was good provided both sides and the vote was in a very fair and 

rational manner. 

 

MR. LARSON: — How come I didn't get a vote? 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Well, I think you are likely retired anyway, so you shouldn't! I doubt very much 

if you are an active farmer any more. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we had the final act of all, when we had the promise of The Natural Products Marketing 

Act which had provided for farmers in this country to have a vote, to have a marketing commission and the 

Government, of course, the NDP, took that vote away and instituted the Hog Marketing Commission at their 

own will. 

 

The record of this Government is one of bungling and inconsistency in agriculture. It is also guilty of 

political involvement at every conceivable opportunity. 

 

Farmers in Saskatchewan, I honestly believe, Mr. Speaker, are sick and tired of the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Messer) and the Blakeney Government's attempt to interject NDP politics into every conceivable 

discussion on agricultural policy that takes place in agriculture. The farmers of Saskatchewan, I honestly 

believe, Mr. Speaker, deserve a much better fate. 

 

What is the intention of this loaded ballot paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan but an attempt for the 

aggrandizement of the NDP candidates? Firstly, Mr. Speaker, there is no attempt to provide a fair and honest 

ballot which we would support. Secondly, there is no attempt to give a fair and honest explanation of the 

issues involved, as there was during the rapeseed vote. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3023 

 

What are the issues involved, Mr. Speaker? Well, I should like to read what issues are involved from the 

Report on Farming, November 24, 1973. I'm not going to read the whole article but I am going to read part 

of it. It is written by the Financial Editor of the Free Press Weekly. I think it would be good for the Members 

opposite to listen to the article, in fact, I'll even give them a few extra copies if they want me to. 

 

The recent decision of the United Grain Growers' delegates favoring an open market set up 

for the marketing and selling of domestic feed grains has driven a sizeable wedge in the 

argument that such a policy runs contrary to the interest of prairie producers. Sam Uskiw and 

Jack Messer, respectively, Ministers of Agriculture for Manitoba and Saskatchewan, totally 

oppose the concept of free marketing and are fighting tooth and nail with the Federal 

Government's Feed Grains Policy, which agriculture industry authorities expect will 

eventually throw domestic feed grains on the open market. 

 

Farm organizations also against the long-term feed grains plan are the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool and its counterparts in Manitoba and Alberta, which generally toe the line, and the 

National Farmers Union which is politically aligned to the philosophy of Mr. Uskiw and Mr. 

Messer. 

 

However, any possibility of major western farm organizations putting up anything vaguely 

resembling a united front to the Feed Grains Policy was completely shattered at the annual 

meeting of the United Grain Growers in Edmonton. Without one single vote of dissent 

delegates in passing a resolution calling on Ottawa to allow prairie producers to sell onboard 

grains anywhere in Canada have in effect been endorsed. If anything in the decision is 

spotlighted once more the inability of Canadian agriculture organizations to come up with a 

system for the marketing and selling of feed grains acceptable to the nation as a whole. They 

are deadlocked as ever over the issue. 

 

Only last December the Canadian Federation of Agriculture the debating arena of farm 

politics and policies, confessed it couldn't arrive at a compromise agreement following a 

lengthy dialogue, which involved farm groups involving every aspect of the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say that on the one hand we have the three prairie Pools, the National 

Farmers Union, along with some few civil servants in the Wheat Board, dead set against any policy that 

looks towards an open market. On the other hand there are those who are supporting an open market of the 

kind that may be introduced — those supporting are: United Grain Growers, Palliser Wheat Growers, 

Canadian Cattlemen's Association and various provincial livestock groups, Unifarm which is the largest 

farm organization in Alberta, and the Alberta Government, which completely rejected the stand of the 

Governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I have read that is to indicate to you, that this issue has many advocates on 

both sides. It's obvious that the line-up for or against the open marketing of domestic feed grain (which I 

might say will involve only 10 per cent of the feed grains produced in our country), is the 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3024 

 

National Farmers Union, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta Pools for the suggestion of the open 

marketing system, for domestic marketing, are the United Grain Growers, Palliser Wheat Growers, Canadian 

Cattlemen's Association, Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, Unifarm Alberta, which is one farm 

organization in that province, and the Alberta Government, which I think is of great significance because 

they are the No. 1 cattle producers in our country. The Alberta Government completely rejects the stand of 

the Governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Undecided, because they were unable to come up with a 

legitimate solution or one that they thought would be satisfactory was the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture. 

 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great deal of support for both sides of the feed grain marketing 

suggestions. It is for this very reason that farmers who belong to all of these organizations will heartily resent 

(and I say that sincerely), they will heartily resent the obvious attempts of the NDP in this province to make 

it a strictly partisan political issue. Those farmers who oppose this intrusion by Mr. Messer and the Blakeney 

Government into their affairs, should, I suggest, destroy their ballots. I call on them to do so, and show once 

and for all that they do not want this constant political intrusion into their affairs. Mr. Speaker, simply by not 

returning their ballots they can illustrate to the NDP politicians that farmers are only interested in a fair and 

honest ballot with honest options when they vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people that don't return their ballots can show that they are interested in a fair and honest ballot, 

with honest information presented for both sides of the question when they vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the feed grain marketing system is important and it deserves, I suggest, a more honest, 

intelligent approach than this Government opposite is apparently willing to give them. I have no doubt 

farmers will protest with great strength by not voting on this plebiscite, which is obviously nothing more 

than a political manoeuvre. 

 

Having said those few words, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I personally, and I know Mr. Lang personally 

supports the Canadian Wheat Board to the fullest extent. I think that the past record is proof enough. I would 

suggest that I feel that the plan that is presently put forward should have a couple of changes made in it and I 

hope that this will be done. I would suggest that the plan presented should, if it went forward . . . 

 

MR. ROLFES: — . . . tell us! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — Oh, I'll tell you if you'll just sit tight. I don't suppose the Member for Saskatoon 

knows a row of radishes from a barley field. 

 

First of all I would suggest that if the present system of open marketing for domestic grain, if it does go 

forward, I say 'if' because it is still under discussion by all farm groups in our province until the date of 

August 1st . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — It is not! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — It is so, it is so. It is under discussion and you know it! 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3025 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — There's no final announcement made and it's still under discussion and he knows 

it! 

 

The point is, what I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that the plan is not yet in effect and that in itself is proof 

enough that it is still under discussion. The plan is not in effect and it won't be for some time. I want to 

suggest two changes that I think should be made if that plan goes into effect. If there is an open market (I 

say, if the plan goes into effect, because I still say that the plan is under some discussion amongst the farm 

organizations) if it goes into effect there should be a quota system applied to the domestic marketing of grain 

— there should be a quota applied to that as my colleague the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) 

suggested. 

 

I want to make a second suggestion. The grain that is traded on the open market which applies only to our 

domestic production, that we must have also a guaranteed minimum floor price which producers will know 

the grain cannot fall below. While the grain to be traded if we had it on the quota system and we also add in 

the guaranteed price which producers will know, the grain cannot fall below that price, I think that that will 

largely overcome most of the objections. I hope that those two suggestions are noted by farm organizations 

in the discussions in the next month and a half because I know that the plan is not final, it is not in operation 

and the plan is still very much under discussion by farm organizations all over the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to make it clear that we have put this on the Order Paper today simply because we couldn't get it 

there any faster, the Minister only announced the plebiscite three days ago. We want to voice our very strong 

objection to the obvious attempt by this Government to make absolutely nothing more than political mileage 

out of an issue that has many supporters on both sides of it and deserves a lot of serious consideration not in 

the political atmosphere of a federal election. 

 

I think that the obvious attempt by the Minister to try and make it a partisan political issue when it deserves 

much more rational discussion is a condemnation of this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this Legislature has been sitting 69 days for 

this Session now, and during all of those days I have not seen or can recall such an attempt to talk about 

unrelated issues as have the Members of the Opposition in regard to the Motion that they have put on the 

Order Paper and the decision of the Province of Saskatchewan to conduct a plebiscite in regard to the orderly 

marketing of feed grains in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I can't help but go back when I see the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) and 

the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) trying to talk about everything but the issue, go back to the 

days of the task force, the Federal Task Force on Agriculture, that task force which was implemented and 

endorsed and promoted by the Federal Government and the 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3026 

 

Minister who is now responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board. That task force recommended fewer 

farmers for Saskatchewan, move them off the farms and move them into urban centres and put them on 

welfare so they can get rid of those people in agriculture. That task force that recommended the open market 

system for grain and the discontinuation of the Canadian Wheat Board, for their orderly marketing system. I 

can't help but remember as a Member of the Opposition sitting where the now Member for Morse is sitting 

(Mr. Wiebe), how the Government of the day, those Members who are now sitting your left, Mr. Speaker, 

who wanted to avoid that issue. Talk about everything but the Federal Task Force on Agriculture, and we see 

them trying to do the same thing now because we know that they, as their Federal counterparts have 

indicated, are for the task force proposals and they are against orderly marketing. They are against the 

continuation of the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Member for Moosomin says it's strange that we would want to conduct a plebiscite at this time and he 

lists a number of reasons why he thinks it's strange. We introduced the Hog Marketing Commission and we 

didn't have a plebiscite. We didn't have a plebiscite, Mr. Speaker, because we had endorsement from a good 

many farm organizations in regard to that Hog Marketing Commission, endorsement from farm 

organizations that don't endorse the Federal Feed Grains Policy, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Wheat 

Board endorsed that Commission, as did the Federation of Agriculture, as did the National Farmers Union, 

and even a large percentage (in fact the majority) of the members of the various commodity groups in 

Saskatchewan including the Saskatchewan Hog Breeders and the Hog Producers Organization in the 

province. 

 

But, okay, they decided that wasn't good enough. We debated it in this Legislature, there was dialogue with 

not only the producers but the organizations in the province as to what that Commission would do and they 

said that wasn't good enough — they in fact implemented a plebiscite of their own by using some of the 

members who had broken away from the Hog Producers Association, they had a plebiscite, they had a 

full-page ad in the back of the Western Producer. The results of that plebiscite, Mr. Speaker, were that about 

2 per cent of the hog producers in the province said they didn't want a commission. That was what the results 

of it were, in fact, we were then acting on the recommendations of most of the producers in the province. 

 

He goes on to say, why don't we have a plebiscite in relation to the Land Bank? Well, governments bring in 

programs and policies at various times during their political careers and there's no legitimate reason why we 

should have plebiscites in regard to such programs as the Land Bank. The Land Bank is purely a voluntary 

program when it relates to either the seller or the lessee of the land and hence no real reason to have a 

plebiscite. Those arguments are totally unrelated to the question that we should be turning our minds to this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the Member for Moosomin said that the feed grains issue is not new. That's about the only thing that I 

can really agree on with him in regard to the remarks that he addressed to the Legislature a few moments 

ago. He says that we have deliberately, that we have deliberately chosen this time to hold the plebiscite in 

regard to the feed grains question. He said we have done it so that the farmers will not be able to 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3027 

 

scrutinize the ballot, they won't have the time to really relate to the questions on the ballot. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest that every farmer in Saskatchewan knows where he stands on that feed grains question. It 

has been debated for a long time and he is most frustrated that the Minister responsible for the Canadian 

Wheat Board in the Federal Government does not listen to his pleas to change that proposed policy and he 

doesn't need a great deal of time to consider what his vote is going to be and what he is going to vote for. He 

goes on to say that we haven't really expressed or taken the time to advocate both sides of the issue. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the ad on the back of the Western Producer is most straightforward. It's analytical, it's 

factual and it has three, I think, very simple and direct questions in regard to the matter. Answering those 

questions, I think, will give a good deal of advice to those people who will ultimately have to be responsible 

for the implementation of this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they made some remarks in regard to the Stabilization Bill — no relevance to this particular 

motion, but I feel that I should reply to the remarks of the Member for Moosomin. 

 

He says he can't envisage, in fact he questions how any NDP politician can go into a farmer's yard and 

advocate the policies of the New Democratic Party and ask for his support, when we stood several years ago 

four-square against the implementation of the Stabilization Plan, the plan that lost $200 million for prairie 

farmers. That's utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker, and he knows it. Utter nonsense. By opposing that plan we hope 

that we have got a better stabilization plan in regard to grains that are produced in Canada. We haven't got 

the mechanics or the details of the plan that was announced a week or so ago, but from the information that 

we could get from the Press it is certainly a much mended and much better plan than was being advocated 

several short years ago. 

 

But I want to ask the Member for Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, and the Members who sit to your left, how can 

they go into a farmer's yard? How can their candidates go into farmers' yards and ask that those farmers 

support them in the forthcoming federal election, when they and their counterparts in Ottawa introduced a 

program called LIFT (Lower Inventories for Tomorrow)? They say that our opposition to the Stabilization 

Plan cost farmers $200 million. I ask them, how much did they cost the farmers of Saskatchewan by forcing 

them not to grow grain because they would not be able to sell it unless they had summerfallow acreage? 

How can the Members of that Party solicit the support from farmers in Saskatchewan when it cost them not 

$200 million, but much, much more than that, Mr. Speaker? The advocates of LIFT, the advocates of the 

Task Force and the advocates of the destruction of orderly marketing of not only grains but all agricultural 

commodities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go into some detail of the feed grains proposal, the long-term plan that is 

expected to be announced in the not too distant future, and I just want for the Member for Cannington's 

information to bring to his attention an article that was in the Leader-Post of Wednesday, May 1st, where 

Mr. Lang has said that he will be announcing the plan prior to August 1st, and I believe the Member for 

Cannington was precise in saying that there would be no announcement before that. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3028 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — I didn't say that. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Yes you did. 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — I said the thing was not finalized, if you were listening. 

 

MR. MESSER: — If the thing is not finalized, Mr. Speaker, then I should like to know why the Federal 

Government is announcing a proposal that is not yet been finalized, it's an impossibility because they are 

certainly going to have some mechanics to put into place. The article in the Leader-Post says, and I want to 

quote: 

 

A new feed grains policy will be announced in a few weeks Otto Lang, Minister responsible 

for the Canadian Wheat Board said in the Commons, Tuesday. He said that in reply to a 

question from one of the Members in the House of Commons. 

 

I advocate, and I say, Mr. Speaker, that Otto Lang has already decided what that feed grains plan is going to 

be. He is not interested in consultation and any consultation that's going to take place is going to fall on deaf 

ears. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that leads us to what is the question that we should be considering here. What really is the 

question? It's much more than this bogus motion that the Members to your left put on the paper, it's much 

more than what the ballots are asking for, those that are on the back page of the Western Producer that they 

make reference to today. It's the question of orderly marketing. And they are trying by every devious means 

that they can to make available to them, to try and convince farmers that they are not against orderly 

marketing, when I know and I am sure the majority of Saskatchewan farmers know that they are. And their 

actions certainly speak for that. 

 

The way they conducted the rapeseed as the Member for Pelly brought to the attention of the Legislature, the 

way they have chosen not to respond to the pleas of not only individual farmers but also major farm 

organization in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could give a good deal of history leading up to the seriousness of the situation today. Mr. 

Lang announced, I believe, on or about August 30, 1973, that there was going to be a new feed grains system 

of marketing for Canada. And there were attempts to have some negotiations and consultation in regard to 

that program. Certainly the Government of Saskatchewan and I, myself, as Minister of Agriculture had on 

some occasions an opportunity to talk to the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister in charge of the 

Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Lang. But at every one of those meetings it was clearly evident, Mr. Speaker, 

that they weren't willing to listen to proposals that we were advocating. 

 

I think that is why in the more recent months, the farm organizations have tried in a most impressive way to 

bring to the attention of the Federal Government their opposition to the feed grains proposal. In fact, in 

November of 1973, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool annual meeting totally, totally, Mr. Speaker, rejected the 

federal proposals and recommended full Wheat Board authority for feed grains marketing. The Federal 

Government, 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3029 

 

Mr. Speaker, chose not to listen to nor to heed that advice. I say, Mr. Speaker, another nail in the coffin of 

the Canadian Wheat Board and orderly marketing. 

 

In December of 1973, the National Farmers Union meeting in Winnipeg, their national meeting, rejected the 

federal proposals and asked for full Wheat Board authority. Again, Mr. Speaker, a major farm organization 

asking and directing the Federal Government to change their attitude in regard to the feed grains proposals, 

again it fell on deaf ears. In January of 1974 at a Western Agricultural Conference composed of the 

Federations of Agriculture in the three prairie province and representing over 90 per cent of the grain 

producers in those provinces rejected again the federal proposals and asked that the Wheat Board marketing 

system be retained and again it fell on deaf ears, and again another nail was added to the coffin of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and orderly marketing. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, on January 30th, the Federal and Provincial Ministers of Agriculture met in 

Ottawa with both the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board. And 

we outlined our provincial positions again, again they fell on deaf ears. 

 

On April 17, 1974, because the time was, I felt too soon approaching when the policy would be announced 

and would come into effect, I held a meeting with representation from the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the National Farmers Union in regard to whether a plebiscite 

would be a course that should be given consideration. From that meeting a decision was made that a 

plebiscite would be an alternative, a means of indicating to the Federal Government once and for all whether 

or not the Saskatchewan farmers were for the proposed federal feed grains proposals. 

 

On April 18th, I sent a Telex to Mr. Lang proposing the plebiscite and asking that a meeting take place so 

that we would be able to convey to him why we wanted a plebiscite and what the questions on that ballot 

should be. Again, on April 22nd, I sent another telegram because I had not received a response from Mr. 

Lang, again on April 26th, I sent another telegram asking for a meeting and giving him the information in 

regard to our feelings in relation to a plebiscite, again I did not receive an answer until April 30th. At that 

time we had agreed to go ahead with the plebiscite because it seemed that the Federal Government and 

especially the Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board was not interested in involving himself or 

with the results of a plebiscite. 

 

I might also, Mr. Speaker, bring to your attention a number of other meetings that clearly indicated that there 

should be some other policy than the present policy brought into effect in regard to feed grains. At the 

Western Economic Opportunities Conference at Calgary, it was expressed by all four provinces that there 

should be a different proposal in regard to the marketing and handling of feed grains in Canada. 

 

It was strange that the Federal Government said that they would consider those proposals, but it was only a 

matter of a few short weeks, ten days after that, that the Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board 

announced the Interim feed grain proposal and said he would be announcing at a later date the long-term 

feed grains proposal, giving further indication, 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3030 

 

Mr. Speaker, that they were not interested in the recommendations that were coming from western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members have tried to insinuate that the ballot is in fact a confusing one. Mr. Speaker, I 

take some exception to that because I think the ballot with the three questions couldn't be simpler. It is 

designed to not only give to them in a condensed form some factual information in regard to what will 

happen if the Wheat Board is no longer responsible for the marketing of Canadian feed grains. And it is 

simply asking that they express their opinion. Those three questions, the first one asking whether they want 

to continue to market their oats and barley and feed wheat through the Canadian Wheat Board, I think could 

not be simpler put. Because it is simply asking them whether or not they want to continue the operation of 

the Canadian Wheat Board as they were prior to the interim feed grains plan. 

 

The second is, if the Federal Government chooses not to follow the orderly marketing system of the 

Canadian Wheat Board, we want to know whether they would be in favor of a provincial agency 

co-operating with what remaining powers the Canadian Wheat Board has to retain orderly marketing in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The third is, if the Federal Government goes ahead and removes the power of quotas and of prices from the 

Canadian Wheat Board, if the domestic market for feed grains is taken away from the Canadian Wheat 

Board, do they want their grains priced on the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are three simple questions which I am sure every grain farmer in Saskatchewan can relate 

to and I am certain that he will exercise his vote in expressing which kind of a system he wants operating in 

Saskatchewan. And I think it is deplorable that the Member for Cannington has the audacity to say in this 

Legislature that he recommends those farmers to destroy their ballots rather than to vote. I think it is a further 

indication, Mr. Speaker, that provincial Members of the Liberal Party are attempting to distort what the 

farmers' feelings are in regard to the orderly marketing system so that they can have their federal counterparts 

remove the orderly marketing system of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few more words in regard especially to the remarks that the Member for Moosomin made. He 

says there are some things wrong with the federal proposal, as does the Member for Cannington and they 

have a great deal of faith in Mr. Lang, changing his mind which he certainly hasn't given any indication of 

doing, at least at this time. And the Member for Moosomin after saying that there were some problems said 

that there was going to be — he would hope that there would be — a quota system attached to the movement 

of feed grains and even though the Canadian Wheat Board is not responsible for that. I don't know who is 

really going to be able to administer a quota system when the Canadian Wheat Board is not there. But I want 

to bring to his attention — I am sorry he is not here in his chair, but at least to the attention of the two 

Members who are to your left, Mr. Speaker, two items out of a document of March 1st, which emanated 

from the Federal Government. No doubt it is only a draft of the domestic feed grains marketing principles 

and operational details. 

 

They are saying at this time and it is a current document, 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3031 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they say and I want to quote two sections from it, under Operational Details: 

 

(d) There will be no quota on feed grain delivered in the Canadian Wheat Board designated 

area for the domestic feed grain market. 

 

They again say under the Operational Details: 

 

(a) Western feed grains sold on a commercial basis for the domestic feed market will not be 

subject to quotas and may be bought and sold freely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, again ample evidence that they would want wherever possible to disrupt the orderly 

marketing system. I don't think I have to tell Members of this Legislature what happens when we don't have 

a quota system in Saskatchewan. It simply means that a good percentage, unfortunately a very large 

percentage of farmers will be cut off from being able to deliver their grain because there will be bottlenecks 

at the elevators where those people who are closest to it have plugged the facilities and in fact a good many 

producers could well be in a situation of not being able to deliver any large quantities of grain at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close on one other issue which relates to why we need to have this plebiscite. 

 

For those Members who are not really well informed in regard to the marketing system that pertains to 

marketing of grain, interprovincially, and intraprovincially, there was an Act passed in 1949 entitled, The 

Saskatchewan Grains Marketing Control Act. Now that Act was passed in order to place feed grain 

marketing under the Canadian Wheat board. That Act in 1949 was passed at the request of not only the 

producer in Saskatchewan but the Federal Government. Both parties requested that the province bring 

forward a Bill that would provide for Saskatchewan grain marketing. It was needed because feed grain 

marketing is under the constitution not only as a provincial jurisdiction or responsibility, but also a federal 

responsibility so that it is a joint federal-provincial responsibility. The Act stipulates and I want to emphasize 

this, Mr. Speaker, stipulates that feed grains may only be sold by a farmer to one of two parties; (1) to 

another farmer, and (2) to the Canadian Wheat Board. Under that Act which was asked for by farmers in 

Saskatchewan and by the Federal Government, there are only two parties whom a farmer can sell to legally. 

One is to another farmer, the other is to the Canadian Wheat Board. The section of that Act that makes it 

very clear is Section 4, which says and I want to quote: 

 

(1) Which prohibits anyone from selling grain to a person other than the Canadian Wheat 

Board and which prevents anyone other than the Canadian Wheat Board from purchasing 

grain; and 

 

(2) Which exempts transactions between farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal proposal, if it is implemented, requires the repeal or amendment of The 

Saskatchewan Grain Marketing Control Act. If it doesn't then farmers who are selling feed grain in the 

commercial channels would be in contravention of the Act as would anyone who is purchasing. So that they 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3032 

 

are now making a proposal without ever consulting the Saskatchewan Government that would not only make 

it illegal for farmers to sell, but also make it illegal for those who are purchasing grain in Saskatchewan if 

they are not resident farmers or if it is not the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is deplorable that the Federal Government would at one time ask us to pass legislation 

which would enhance their operations or at least the operations of an agency which they were directly 

responsible for, and then on the other hand turn around and pass legislation or implement policy without 

giving the provinces an opportunity to consider whether or not the producers which the provinces are 

responsible for really want that kind of situation. 

 

As a result feed grain marketing is then a totally provincial matter, all feed grains that are marketed within 

the province, not only constitutionally but operationally as well. The Provincial Government in my mind and 

I believe in the minds of farmers, Mr. Speaker, has a right to determine what producers want prior to our 

repealing or amending The Grain Marketing Control Act as well as prior to taking any other action on the 

feed grains marketing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that is the most important reason that we, at this time, saw the necessity for a plebiscite. 

Because it is going to be up to us if we want to see that kind of feed grain marketing take place, it is up to us 

whether we want to take action and prosecute not only farmers but purchasers of feed grains or whether we 

are going to amend the Act. Before we can do that, we say that we should have some indication from farmers 

in regard to whether they want the Canadian Wheat Board to continue to do it, or whether they want a 

provincial agency in the absence of the Canadian Wheat Board to be responsible for quotas and for pricing 

and for pooling of feed grains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Members opposite say that they suspect I know what the outcome of that ballot is 

going to be, my answer is, Yes, I believe I do know. I am proud of the fact that I do know, because I have got 

faith in Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Faith that they do stand four square for the Canadian Wheat Board and for the orderly 

marketing system. We have stressed that at every opportunity that we have had. Whenever we talked to a 

Minister of the Federal Government, when the administrative staff in my department talked about the 

proposed feed grains policy with administrators at the federal level, we at every opportunity advocated that 

the point of view of Saskatchewan farmers was that we want the continuation of the orderly marketing 

system. But up to this time, after nearly a year of debate, after nearly a year of confrontation, the Federal 

Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board who as a Saskatchewan Member — hard to believe — 

has chosen not to heed or take the direction of Saskatchewan farmers. He has chosen, Mr. Speaker, to sell 

the farmer short, to destroy the Wheat Board and to destroy orderly marketing of feed grains in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3033 

 

MR. MESSER: — That, Mr. Speaker, is why we've got this ballot. And I make no apologies for it coming 

now. We acted now because it was obvious from the press item I just referred to a few minutes ago that Mr. 

Lang is going to announce and put the policy into effect. And we are saying as a last resort, we are going to 

have a plebiscite in Saskatchewan, so Saskatchewan farmers can tell you, we don't want your feed grains 

plan . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . We want the Canadian Wheat Board to have its powers broadened and to continue to 

be responsible for the selling and the moving and the pooling of our grains in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, say that this is a perfectly legitimate endeavor of the Province 

of Saskatchewan and if it happens to come at a federal election, that is well and fine. And if it happens to be 

a major point of discussion in that election, that is even better because I am . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . certain that when those ballots are counted on July 8th, the Federal Government 

again is going to be told by the farmers of Saskatchewan, we don't like your attitudes in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — We should like to have some recognition and we are sick and tired of you catering to the 

central areas of Canada where the majority of support is for you . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . at the expense of us in western Canada where our population is not as great. Mr. 

Speaker, I simply want to close in saying that I want every Member of this Legislative Assembly to oppose 

the motion that is on the Order Paper now and stand up and be counted whether they are for orderly 

marketing or not. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is good to hear the Minister of Agriculture getting 

wound up and getting warmed up and kicking off the campaign. There is going to be a vote all right. There is 

going to be a vote, I think it is July 8th or 9th. The Minister wants to run a little preamble. He got busy and 

drafted a full page ad, and I presume this appears on a dozen other farm papers, so he is going to get in there 

with his little political gimmick before the actual vote that counts comes along. 

 

It is very interesting to hear this Minister get up now so 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3034 

 

concerned about polling the feed grain producers. Where was he a year ago, where was he went the hog 

producers were faced with a commission being rammed at them, with a compulsory marketing scheme? 

Where was he with his vote then, Mr. Speaker? He made a totally different kind of speech at that time. But 

here all of a sudden an area that is not under his direct jurisdiction he is going to conduct a poll, even though 

the marketing scheme is not under provincial jurisdiction, it's outside of his jurisdiction. Albeit, I know he is 

involved and he should be. But when the ball was right in his own court for him to decide he chose not to 

have a vote. He says some of the producer organizations backed him. A lot of the producers themselves 

didn't and he knows that. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province have a lot more intelligence and are a lot better 

informed that the NDP opposite ever give them credit for. They've watched this Minister and this 

Government opposite in power now for a couple or three years, they know their record in agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. The so-called Family Farm Protection Act, they know it was balderdash then, it has been ever 

since. They know their foreign ownership moves and the phony little Bill that was passed here earlier today, 

with a great deal of fanfare, that it really comes down to nothing when we get at the Bill. They know that this 

was the Minister who closed down the irrigation at Outlook. They know that this is the same Minister who 

over the last 10 or 12 months has expressed no concern publicly whatever for the plight of the livestock 

industry, the cattle industry particularly in this province, so they know the NDP record. Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers of this province know the NDP record of false claims that they've made against Otto Lang and the 

Federal Government, they know that too. 

 

Remember that claim about the two-thirds of the farmers, that that was a Federal Otto Lang policy, what a 

bunch of nonsense. It was a Task Force report something like the dozens of reports this Government has 

prepared for it, something like the programs and the reports they have prepared. It was never implemented, it 

was nonsense in the first place, and the farmers know of course, that the great Task Force speeches were 

nothing but baloney then. 

 

Okay, their Income Stabilization Program, the Income Stabilization Program, introduced a year or two ago 

which the Members opposite, I must say, effectively politically made use of, but the farmers since know 

better, they realized what they would have gained, and realized that what the NDP told them were lies then. 

 

The third little item we've had — the Minister and his staff and his Deputy I think it was, I forget whether it 

was his Deputy or not, his Deputy to begin with walked out, walked out of the Winnipeg meeting to discuss 

and consult on the feed grains issue. There's one kind of consultation that this Government likes to do, Mr. 

Speaker, there's only one kind of consultation and that is . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — On a Point of Privilege. The Member is accusing an individual who does not have the 

right to answer himself in this Legislature. His walking out of a meeting was later by the Press reported to be 

an error by the Deputy Minister of Agriculture of Canada, who said that there was no walking out of any 

meeting and it was the Minister, Otto Lang who was in error in that regard. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3035 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, the people know different, the farmers know different and there's no doubt 

that he walked out of that meeting and there's no doubt that this Government never did try to get together 

with the Federal Government and develop a feed grains policy and they never did try. Consultation as far as 

they are concerned means sit down with us and do exactly what we want you to do, what we tell you to do. 

That's their version of consultation. 

 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, — and farmers will remember — I recall myself, last fall in August or thereabouts, 

this Minister opposite claiming that the new interim feed grains policy, the APB, being a cheap feed grains 

policy. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's right. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Well, just let them talk to any cattlemen or any hog producer who has bought barley all 

winter at $2 and something or $2.40 or $2.50 or whatever it is and yet this Minister tried to say that that was 

going to be a cheap feed grains policy. Well, I'll tell you it wasn't and all he has to do is go out to his area and 

all these other Members have to do is go out and ask some of their farmers and apparently they haven't . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . One scrap of evidence! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Lots of scraps of evidence. You can dig up a pressing clipping, no problem. 

 

They made the charge that this federal policy, the interim policy on the new proposed policy was a policy for 

cheap grain for Quebec and eastern Canada. We've heard them make that charge. Mind you we've seen that 

anti-Quebec, anti-Canadian kind of sentiment and divisive policies express too often, expressed too often, 

from this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers in this province today, they know very well what Otto Lang has done for them over 

the years. They know very well and they trust Otto Lang, they trust Otto Lang, they know very well he's not 

going to harm or jeopardize the Wheat Board. On the contrary any move he makes will strengthen it. They 

know that. And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you that this coming election will prove that the farmers know Jack 

Messer and the NDP and they don't trust them any more, they don't trust them any more. This old approach 

of destroy and wreck and tear down of theirs, isn't going to work, it isn't going to work any longer. The Task 

Force Report wasn't implemented, the Wheat Board has been strengthened and streamlined and vastly 

improved under Otto Lang and it will be even more so and they know that. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, one has to conclude and one has to think David Lewis, who last week forced this 

country into an election, forced this country into a vote, phoned up quickly to Mr. Blakeney and Mr. Messer, 

the Saskatchewan NDP and said, fellows we've got to think of an issue in a hurry. I didn't really mean to get 

back into this corner that I'm in, but it looks as if we're going to have to have an election. And of course, you 

know what happened, Mr. Speaker, David Lewis and the Conservatives, as somebody said, a rather 

ungracious looking team, did go together and are sending the people of this country to the polls for an 

election that nobody wants. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3036 

 

So the NDP in Saskatchewan along with David Lewis and a few of his cohorts here had to think of an issue. 

So what better kind of issue could they dredge up than this old fear of destroying the Wheat Board. We'll tell 

them Otto Lang and the Liberals are going to destroy the Wheat Board. It makes a great story, we've used it 

for thirty years. We'll keep on using it. And also of course, what's not new with the NDP they said, we'll try 

and tear down and destroy Otto Lang. We've had a few trial runs at that before, so that shouldn't be too 

difficult to work on that. And this is what they are trying to do. There are the two moves. 

 

Somebody mentioned the LIFT Program, somebody opposite, I forget who it was, whether it was the 

Minister or the other Member who left. Mr. Speaker, let me tell you and the Members opposite something 

about the LIFT Program. When this campaign is over, it will be the campaign that lifted the NDP right out of 

office across this country. They'll be reduced federally, they'll be reduced in Saskatchewan and there's no 

doubt about that, Mr. Speaker, there's just no doubt about it! 

 

To talk about orderly marketing of feed grains, there is absolutely no doubt that much more orderly 

marketing of feed grains will take place under any new policy, than has been the case over the last 10 or 15 

years in this province. We know the kind of disorderly marketing that's been going on, 25-35 cent wheat a 

few years ago, when you could get 60 cents over in Alberta for it, two miles away, this kind of thing. And 

the Members opposite continue to talk about orderly marketing as though we've had orderly marketing for all 

these years in the feed grains, we haven't and they know. And as I say, any plan, any plan in the future to be 

announced in the next short while, is bound to improve and increase orderly marketing. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, I have to think that Members opposite have no recognition of the fact that television, 

radio and mass media generally have resulted in the farmers today, being much better informed, much more 

knowledgeable than when they hark back to those old '30s speeches and this kind of thing, this fear for the 

Wheat Board. They'll recognize this ballot for the cheap little political trick that it is and the real vote will 

come on July 8. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one point. The Minister got up on a Point of Order 

and talked about his delegation at the Conference. I'd like to quote to him from the Winnipeg Tribune, 

August 17, 1973, which says: 

 

The meeting of western agriculture spokesmen and the Federal Government was little more 

than an hour old when Mr. Uskiw accompanied by the Saskatchewan delegation walked out. 

 

And it goes on to say Mr. McArthur's comments. 

 

Mr. McArthur added, there wasn't much point in pursuing the matter so we left. 

 

Now this indicates again that the Minister just doesn't know what went on at that Conference, his own 

Deputy Minister is 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3037 

 

quoted in quotation marks as saying that there wasn't much use in staying so he left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to mention a word or two about some comments in the debate. I was surprised 

some of the younger farm Members didn't get up in the debate. It's too bad that some of the old politicians 

who are living in the past have to carry the ball for them over there. They talk about orderly marketing and so 

on, what happened back in the '30s, the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) gets up — it's rather pathetic really to 

hear the way he goes on. He doesn't really understand the problem, or know anything about it, but he does 

say we're going to destroy orderly marketing and the Wheat Board and he's living back in the 1930s and it's 

just an unfortunate situation. The Government does have sharp, young farm Members over there with a little 

imagination and I had expected that some of those Members would get up and give us their opinion on this 

particular Resolution. 

 

A couple of the Members, including the Minister, also mentioned LIFT and I must say a word about this 

because it's an indication of the Members over there, their attitude toward business in general. They don't 

realize that as long as there is surplus as we had — we had a surplus of wheat for 20 years — if you've got a 

surplus you've got a low price and this is what we had for a number of years. If you have a shortage of 

something, you're going to get a higher price. Why are we getting $5 wheat now? We are getting $5 wheat 

because there is a shortage. And why is there a shortage, it's because we cut down in production and had 

LIFT for one year and we're now getting $5 wheat. And for some reason or another, the Members over there 

just can't seem to understand this at all, they can't understand why you cut down your production for a year 

or two, get rid of the surplus and the prices goes up. This happens all over the world, it's happened again 

here, they talk about LIFT and they don't realize that the farmer is enjoying $5 wheat now simply because 

there was a reduction in the surplus. We cut down on our production for a year and now we have this much 

higher price and much better situation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words I just want to say that again it's unfortunate that the Minister of 

Agriculture and his cohorts are interfering with the good prices that the farmers are now getting for feed 

grain. We don't want to see the good prices destroyed as the Stabilization Plan was destroyed, we don't want 

to end up selling barley, three for a dollar again., we don't want the Provincial Government to start meddling 

in the feed grains situation because the farmers are satisfied with the prices they are getting now, they are 

happy with the situation as it is. Individual, provincial governments meddling in the feed grains situation can 

only be detrimental and we regret that they found it necessary to take this political action just before a federal 

election to get a very serious situation involved in a political campaign and it is obvious this is what they are 

doing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: : — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3038 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 134 — An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

He said:  Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in Bill 134, an Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

Act, are consequential upon the adoption by this Legislature of Bill 133, The Representation Act, 1974 — 

that great Bill. Bill 134 repeals the existing Section 2 and Schedule I of The Legislative Assembly Act, 

which respectively provides for 60 Members in the Assembly and described the constituencies of those 60 

Members, will now be 61. 

 

Bill 133, The Representation Act, sets the number of 61 and redefines the boundaries. It is proposed that 

Bills 133 and 134 become concurrently effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 134. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 135 — An Act to amend 

The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act. 

 

He said:  Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with MLAs' Superannuation Act and the specific amendments deal 

basically with four approaches. To increase the allowances payable to persons who cease to be Members on 

or after July 1, 1974; to increase the allowance payable to a person who becomes a widow of a Member on 

or after July 1, 1974; to provide an additional allowance to those persons currently in receipt of pensions 

from the fund and to avoid the duplication of contributions by the Minister of Finance. I'd like to deal with 

these specifically just very briefly and I hope that we shall get into the details of course, on the third reading. 

I want to warn you in advance that there will be some amendments in third reading, simply because this draft 

had to be made very quickly and the staff was under a lot of pressure in relation to drafting this Bill. 

 

With respect to the first item to increase the allowances payable to persons who cease to be Members on or 

after July 1, 1974, I don't think I need to say much. Obviously this will increase the demands on the fund and 

you will find a little later on in the Bill provisions for increasing the percentage paid by Members to meet 

these costs. The same would apply with respect to the second item. 

 

I want to say a word or two with respect to the additional allowance to those persons currently in receipt of 

an allowance. It is obvious that there is great need here and I think generally perhaps Members aren't aware 

of how small some of the pensions are being paid to MLAs currently. Without divulging any names or 

giving away any confidentiality with respect to them, I had a look through the list here and I find the Member 

who has the lowest monthly payment to him at the present time, has a pension of $110.60 a month and yet 

that person served 19 sessions in this Legislative Assembly. The lowest person on the scale, that's out of 33 

persons, the lowest person on the scale in relation to widows, and you are aware of the fact that widows 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3039 

 

get 50 per cent of the pension payable to the Member, the allowance payable to Members is $33.60. Yet the 

widow of that individual Member, that Member had served 14 sessions in this House. 

 

So I think Members will agree that there is need to do something in terms of the rising cost of living and the 

inflationary impact on Members currently now on pension. 

 

The last item I want to mention is simply this one to avoid duplication of contributions by the Minister of 

Finance, that is a minimal amount, not a very important section except that perhaps we didn't realize it was 

really happening. What has happened up to now is where one who was a Member of the House, has made 

contributions, they've been matched by the Treasury of the province. When he terminated his stay in the 

House with the consent of the majority of his electors he immediately was paid this sum of money that he 

had paid into the fund. When he came back to the House or if he came back to the House, a number of 

Members have done that, came back to the House when he had the right to elect to repay the contributions 

and earnings that had been withdrawn plus an accrual of interest over that period of time. A number of 

Members did that and when they did it, the Treasury matched it the second round, the second time and since 

the first amount of money had remained in the fund it was really a duplication and this amendment will take 

out that particular section. 

 

I mentioned previously that Members realize that these increased costs must be paid for in order to eliminate 

or prevent the possibility of a debt balance in the fund. It is proposed that the levy, the 7 per cent levy be 

increased to 9 per cent of each MLA's indemnity. 

 

There is no change with respect to the money paid to people who are members of the Executive Council, the 

Leader of the Opposition, the Government Whip, the Opposition Whip, Legislative Secretaries, the Speaker, 

or Deputy Speaker, because the formula remains the same for the contributions that they must make on the 

salaries they receive. The only change occurs at the Member level. 

 

I might mention one or two other things in the Bill. Reduction of eligibility for pension from age 55 to age 

50 with actuarial reduction. We have had some cases in the past of Members who had served for a fair length 

of time in the House, I believe one case as much as 28 sessions. The person was out of the House but still 

couldn't draw a pension because he hadn't attained age 55. He could have had the option if this had been in 

the Bill to start his pension a bit early and obviously would have taken a somewhat smaller pension, reduced 

by one-quarter of one per cent per month or 3 per cent per year or 15 per cent, if in fact he started the pension 

at 50 years of age. 

 

I think the most significant change in the Bill is related to a lock-in and vesting. Up 'til now the Members 

have had to have 8 sessions to qualify, this is eliminated under the amendments to the Bill. The individual 

automatically gains ownership of employer-employee contributions in accrued earnings for pension some 

time in the future when he becomes eligible for pension. 

 

The only withdrawal will occur in relation to those persons 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3040 

 

who have served less than one year. This goes beyond, of course, the provisions of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Benefits Act, which provides lock-in after 10 years of service and upon attainment of age 45. I think 

that is a most important provision frankly and a real model perhaps for pension plans in the future. 

 

There are other items in the Bill that perhaps should be mentioned in passing. Removal of the ceiling, and I 

just mention this very briefly. It really is largely meaningless; there has been a ceiling in there, but to date 

only two Members have exceeded that ceiling and those have been Members who have retired fairly 

recently. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, with those comments, perhaps we can leave the remainder of the discussion of the Bill 

to third reading and I think those amendments are reasonable and beneficial and in the interest of the 

Members of the House and they should be approved. I move second reading of the Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just a very few short remarks in the absence of the 

Leader of the Opposition. I wish to indicate that Members on this side of the House, I think most of them are 

going to support this Bill. 

 

There are two major reasons why I personally have come to this conclusion and the first one is that it 

increases the protection for wives and dependents of MLAs in the amendments or the changes in the MLAs' 

pension scheme. I think most of the Members of the House are aware that if one of the Members went out of 

this House and was hit by a car and didn't reach the age of 55 and was at that time on pension, his wife and 

his dependents would receive nothing. It has also increased the percentage from 50 to 60 per cent. I don't 

really think that is sufficient because I think that is the most important provision in the Bill. 

 

The second major reason I support the Bill is that it does improve pension benefits of retired MLAs who no 

longer sit in the Legislature. I am not going to repeat the figures, I have those figures which the Minister of 

Finance indicated. Some of the pensions are hopelessly in adequate. I can remember on one or two occasions 

we had to bring special Bills into the House just to see that a retired MLA, and on one occasion a retired 

Premier, could adequately look after himself in his retirement and in his old age. 

 

I, of course, am also supporting the principle of increasing the amount of contributions by MLAs toward the 

pension benefits because of the fact that the pension allowances will be increased. I think this is a good idea 

particularly with the rising costs and inflation. When the majority of Members do receive the pension I 

would suggest that perhaps inflation would have eaten away any benefits that are now accruing. 

 

I should like to make one suggestion to the Minister of Finance, and I think I express the feelings of both 

sides of the House. This is the third occasion in which I have been forced to stand up in this House and vote 

myself and other Members of the Assembly either an increase in salary or an improvement in my own 

personal pension benefits. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3041 

 

First of all, I think it is embarrassing for both sides of the House but even more so it is repugnant to me, that 

we should be involved in the decision as to what our pension should be, as to what our salary should be. I 

think as a result of that in most cases it is inadequate. Because everybody has the inherent fear that this is 

going to be politically unwise and as a result, for example, I know many MLAs on both sides of the House 

are now attempting to make the MLA's job a full-time job and quit their job or their permanent vocation in 

life in order to devote full time as MLAs. I would suggest that if that is the case the existing salary level is 

not adequate. 

 

Therefore, I have a suggestion to the Minister of Finance; that the Government would sit down and figure 

out what is a reasonable salary and what is a reasonable pension. Then bring in a cost of living index that 

will be related to the rising cost of living, so that this kind of an embarrassing situation will no longer be 

required. And that that cost of living index would increase as the cost of living does, or if the cost of living 

went down, the pension would go down and the salary would go down in accordance with the cost of living. 

And if we started off with a reasonable salary, reasonable pension, then I think the necessity of bringing 

these two Bills back into the Legislature and asking Members to take personal embarrassment, would not be 

necessary. (I know it is repugnant to the majority of us of having to vote this kind of improvement in our 

own personal allowances.) 

 

I would like to ask the Minister of Finance and the Government to consider this because I think it would be 

advantageous to all the people of Saskatchewan to know that Members of the Legislature are not perpetually 

bringing in at periodic times their salary schedule and their pension benefits and voting themselves an 

increase; that any increase or any improvement in either their allowances or pensions is directly related to the 

cost of living. I would hope that the Government would consider that. With those few words I will support 

second reading. 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, just one word on the Bill that is 

presented here today. I should like to say that I completely agree with the Member for Milestone and I am 

glad that as the Session ends I can completely agree with him. 

 

I should like to suggest that the Government bring in possibly for the next session what the Member for 

Milestone has suggested. However that the contents of that suggestion or that Bill would not take effect until 

after the next election so that the people of Saskatchewan are completely aware of what we would be getting 

as a pension or as a salary as MLAs. 

 

I think it is way overdue that we have increases in our pension, and I do agree with the Member that the 

MLAs' job has changed. It is becoming a full-time job and I would certainly concur with everything you have 

said and with what the Minister has brought in today. With that I will certainly support the Bill in second 

reading. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that Mr. Robbins is on his second go round, now is the Bill 

actuarially sound? 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3042 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — My comments, Mr. Speaker, will be very brief. 

 

I agree with the Member for Milestone and the Member for Nutana South, that Members of the Assembly 

should not be involved in the process of setting their own indemnities. Frankly, I think if your pension set-up 

is properly devised it will not matter, after your indemnity is set up by a special committee or a committee 

which is independent from the House if your pension formula is a reasoned one, it will on application to that 

indemnity bring the necessary results. It is the intention of the Government to work on this over the summer 

months and perhaps bring in in the fall further amendments. For instance there is nothing in the present 

amendments related to an escalator clause as yet, although we have been looking at propositions. We have 

had some very interesting propositions in relation to pensions. 

 

I am just going to mention one. We have had one Member say to us, if for example, my pension was $6,250 

and the current indemnity is $12,500, therefore it is one-half of the current indemnity. If the indemnity went 

to $15,000 then that Member's pension would go to $7,500. If the indemnity went down to $10,000 then the 

Member's pension would go down to $5,000. That is a very simplistic approach but it might be by far the 

best type of approach we could devise in terms of an escalator clause. 

 

I am pleased that Members generally take the approach that it would be wise, if at all possible, to get a 

committee outside of the House to devise an indemnity formula. I think that if we apply the pension formula 

to that then we will not have much difficulty. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND AND THIRD READINGS 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance) moved second and third reading of Bill No. 136 — An Act for 

granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending 

respectively the Thirty-first day of March, 1974 and the Thirty-first day of March, 1975. 

(Appropriation Bill) 

 

He said:  Mr. Speaker, before moving the Motion under Rule 48(2) I should like to make some remarks on 

the Appropriation Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the Appropriation Bill before us provides the sum of $48,927,410 for the 

further Estimates for the fiscal year 1973-74, and also provides $680,505,230 in funds to the various 

Government departments and agencies to provide the means to carry out the programs of this Government 

during the fiscal year 1974-75. 

 

Our Government, Mr. Speaker, is interested in serving and meeting the needs and aspirations of the people 

of Saskatchewan. This Appropriation Bill provides the means to do so. 

 

A little over two months ago the New Democratic Government of this province brought down its 1974 

Budget. Since that time 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3043 

 

we have witnessed criticism of those proposals from the Opposition. 

 

I am extremely proud of this Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, it is a bold Budget that breaks now ground for the people of this province 

and for the people of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is a fiscally sound Budget that is well suited to the temper of our economy. 

 

Over the last two months I have been pleased to hear the positive reaction to our Budget from the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There is no doubt about it, Mr. Speaker, it's a good and popular Budget. And that is 

why the Opposition doesn't like it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Their criticism and frustrations during this Session are quite understandable. 

 

The Saskatchewan economy is presently experiencing a period of unprecedented buoyancy. Farm incomes 

are high and other incomes have been greatly increased. Public and private investment has risen 

substantially. Housing starts are at record levels. Employment is growing and unemployment is the lowest in 

Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — However, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents are suffering along with the rest of the 

country from the inflation that has resulted from the mismanagement of the national economy by the Federal 

Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Their recent Budget which provides an opportunity to deal with this nation-wide 

problem was a miserable failure. Mere window dressing when bold new initiatives are required. 

 

Provincial governments, particularly one such as Saskatchewan can do little to attack the root causes of 

inflation. That is the responsibility of the Federal Government through its monetary and its fiscal policies. 

However, in contract to the Federal Budget, the New Democratic Government of Saskatchewan has taken 

positive steps to help the citizens of this province to cope with the inflationary problems of this day. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3044 

 

Let me review some of these steps. The removal of medicare premiums - $72 a family, $36 for single 

persons. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — A total of $15 million. The Property Improvement Grant up to the equivalent of a 20 

mill tax reduction; $300 maximum for farmers; $200 maximum for businessmen; $160 maximum for a 

householder, an increase of $20 million since we came to office over the former Homeowners Grant. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Increased school grants. We have picked up 100 per cent of the increase in recognized 

school costs for the third year in a row. A total increase of $48 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — A new urban package, Mr. Speaker, which puts over $20 million a year into the hands 

of the municipalities to help them hold the line and in some cases reduce the property tax burden. If you add 

those three items alone, the Property Improvement Grant Increases, the increased School Grants and the new 

Urban Package, you will find $88 million in assistance in reducing the tax on property. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, $88 million. A new Family Income Plan providing basic income 

supplement to all low and many middle income families at a cost in the current fiscal year of about $10 

million. A transfer of three cents a gallon of gasoline and diesel fuel tax to the Automobile Accident 

Insurance Fund to prevent an increase in insurance premiums and to provide premium reductions to 77 per 

cent of last year's private vehicle owners. An actual saving to the motorists of $9 million. 

 

I want the Opposition to take special note of the fact that that is not an increase in gasoline tax, simply a 

transfer. Further to that a gasoline tax reduction of seven cents a gallon and a diesel fuel tax reduction of five 

cents a gallon, combined with a farm fuel cost rebate of seven cents a gallon to offset the coming increase in 

fuel prices. That is worth $35 million to the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, this House is well aware of the major new thrust provided in 

this Budget for economic development. 

 

A firm basis has been established for stabilizing and diversifying our agricultural sector and new 

developments are planned in our manufacturing and processing industry. Steel, to name one of them. All of 

these developments are planned to reduce the historical vulnerability resulting from our dependence on the 

grain industry. We are continuing our fight 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3045 

 

to end the discriminatory national policies which have hindered our progress in the past and still do, Mr. 

Speaker, to the present day. 

 

Members opposite are critical of our spending program. I should like to ask them what they would cut out of 

it? Would they cut the Denticare Program? Would they remove the Urban Package which is providing $75 

per capita for very village, town and city in Saskatchewan. A total value of $45,750,000. Would they remove 

the Unconditional Grant of $10 per capita, at a cost of $6.1 million to the Treasury of this province from all 

villages, towns and cities? Would they remove the Equalization Grants of $4.3 million? Would they, Mr. 

Speaker, cut out the proposed expenditures for the Family Income Plan expenditures to assist working 

families on modest income in these difficult inflationary times? They never say what they will do, Mr. 

Speaker. They are afraid to say. They are afraid to take a stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They level nebulous, unsubstantiated charges. They do not offer credible evidence with 

respect to those charges. Every budget brought down by this New Democratic administration has contained 

substantial surpluses. Revenues have exceeded expenditures each and every year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They say that these budgetary appropriations are inflationary. When a government 

authority does not make a net demand on the economy as we are not doing when our revenue inflows exceed 

our expenditure outflows, it is not inflationary. We agree that when the Government expenditures outflows 

exceed revenue inflows, an inflationary impact on the economy occurs. The Opposition should be directing 

their criticisms to those jurisdictions in Canada which are running sizeable deficits in their current financing, 

such as the Federal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, they haven't very good aim and when they do take aim they draw a bead 

on the wrong target. A typical Liberal strategy. 

 

We have diminished the inflationary impact on a goodly number of people in those segments of our society 

who are least able to withstand that impact. We do not apologize for that approach. We have consistently 

argued that taxes should be related to the ability to pay principle. One of the most regressive taxes in our 

society is the property tax. We said that we would reduce the tax burden for educational purposes and 

homes, farms and small business to 25 mills. We have gone beyond that promise and have increased 

Property Improvement Grants from $12.9 million in the last year of Liberal administration to some $32.9 

million in the current year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: : — Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3046 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Opposition Members say we haven't reduced taxes. That is patently false. A few 

examples will illustrate, Mr. Speaker, as previously mentioned we increased the Property Improvement 

Grants by $20 million. That has an impact on property taxes. We have increased school grants since this 

Government took office by $48 million, that helps hold down the property tax rates. We have set up a 

Community Capital Fund of approximately $20 million a year for the next five years along with 

unconditional Grants and Equalization Grants payable to every city, town and village in this province. Add 

those three together and you have $88 million. We removed deterrent fees at a saving of $7 million to the 

people of this province. We removed the Medicare and Hospitalization premiums at a saving of $15 million 

to the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are reducing as of May 15th, gasoline taxes by seven cents a gallon and diesel fuel 

taxes by five cents a gallon and we are making a rebate to farm fuel purchases of seven cents a gallon which 

totals $35 million. We made payments into the Workmen's Compensation Fund of some $6,650,000 to 

enable pensions for people who are disabled and widows of workmen who were killed on the job, to bring 

those pensions up to a reasonable level. Add all those totals up and you will find you have a total of $152 

million. Add to that figure the AAIA premium, a transfer of $9 million and you have $161 million of direct 

effect in terms of savings to the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Opposition Members will say, oh, but you have offset those reductions with an increase 

in income tax. The personal income tax did rise by three per cent and the corporate tax by one per cent. We 

don't apologize for that. 

 

MR. LANE: — Six per cent. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Member opposite says six per cent, knowing that is totally wrong. We contend that 

we should get our revenues from a progressive tax like income tax and from increased resource revenues and 

we have currently a cash carry forward exceeding $45 million set aside for a rainy day. That is responsible 

budgeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Just one further brief word on our resource revenue. In our Budget Speech on March 

8th, last, I said and I quote: 

 

Further evidence of arbitrary action is apparent in the Federal challenge to the constitutional 

right of the provinces to control their own resources. 

 

Those words proved to be prophetic, Mr. Speaker. Witness the Federal Budget of May 6th with its proposal 

to disallow provincial government royalties, mining taxes and payments and similar effects as deductible 

items in computing income tax. A direct 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3047 

 

intrusion in terms of our right to collect on our own resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Lumsden would stop braying from his seat . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, it did occur to me that I should deal with some of the substantive criticisms of this Budget by 

the Members opposite but in reviewing their comments I find that there haven't been any. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — In fact it appears that they have carefully avoided addressing themselves to the content 

of the 1974 Budget. I must say, Mr. Speaker, this is the one area in which they appear to have exhibited 

some wisdom. 

 

In summary I want to repeat that I am extremely proud of this Budget. It is a Budget outstanding in its 

content and fiscally responsible in its design. Mr. Speaker, in accordance with Rule 48(2) it gives me great 

pleasure to move second and third reading of this Appropriation Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Just a few comments on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Swan Song. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — It may well be, Mr. Member, it may well be. 

 

My remarks on the Bill are going to be fairly brief. I have made my criticisms of the Government's Budget, 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of my original reply and I have repeated those in speaking to a number of other 

pieces of legislation that been brought forward to implement the proposals in the budget. I think we have had 

a good Budget Debate this year, a real good one and it has been a tough long Session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a moment or two I want to deviate a little bit from the principle of the Bill. This may well 

be my last comments in this Chamber. I say, may well be, that depends on a number of things. I intend to 

seek the Liberal nomination in the Battleford-Kindersley Federal riding . . . 

 

HON. MEMBERS: : — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — . . . if, of course, Members will be aware, if successful in that particular step, I wouldn't 

be back here next session. On July 9th, the answer is fairly simple and the decision I have to look at was 

fairly straightforward, depending entirely on the will of the electorate on July 8th, I'll either be retired fully 

from politics on July 9th or I'll be engaged full time, more so perhaps than ever. 

 

MR. MESSER: — With all due respect, I hope you enjoy retirement! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, I don't expect any different sentiments 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3048 

 

from my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture. But as I say it may well be presumptuous of me to say a 

word or two at this time. 

 

Since the defeat of the former Liberal Government of which I was a Cabinet Minister for a number of years, 

I have worked very hard at establishing a veterinary practice in the city of North Battleford and it has been a 

difficult job, Mr. Speaker, to serve both my constituency and the Legislature and my clientele. If I may say, 

the lot of a country veterinarian and in the fact that the calving seasons matches or coincides with the 

Legislative Session, makes it particularly difficult for anyone in veterinary practice in Saskatchewan and 

perhaps less productive in many ways too. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, I don't like the thought of the possibility of leaving here and not coming back 

because despite the headaches I have really enjoyed the place, the associations I have made, the 

acquaintances I have made both in the Chamber, in government and across the province. It has been a 

tremendous ten years and it has always amazed me how in the House — it took me a little while to get used 

to this when I first came — in that you can see Members on both sides and we can fight in here back and 

forth, real cross fire, very similar I suppose to the hockey teams in the Stanley Cup. When the game is over 

you fraternize and develop the kind of relationships and friendships, certainly with my own colleagues on 

this side but with a lot of Members on the opposite side. It has been a great ten years, Mr. Speaker! 

 

HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, I must say I find that a tough act to 

follow, I don't intend to announce I am leaving but I must say I want to welcome Cliff McIsaac into the 

contest in the Battleford-Kindersley riding. I can say that in my short stay in this Legislature I have come to 

know Cliff, the Member for Wilkie, reasonably well. His constituency borders on mine and I have come to 

respect him as a Member of the Opposition who does his homework and who can put in some pretty good 

cross fire in this House when he wants to as well. And who when it is all over on prorogation night usually 

ended up sitting around with a few of the other fellows, having a chat and doing whatever else we do when 

prorogation night comes. I know we are all, on this side of the House, going to miss the Member for Wilkie 

if he is successful in obtaining the nomination. I think we will miss him in this House but as it goes in 

politics we'll probably be out there working alongside our candidate, Rod Thompson, trying to help Cliff 

towards his retirement. That is the way of the political wars. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say a few words about this Budget. I am very proud of this Budget too. I am 

proud of the way in which the new Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins), the member for Saskatoon, put this 

Budget before this House, put up the case for the New Democratic Party and the New Democratic 

Government in this Budget and has dealt with the little serious criticisms of this Budget that came from the 

Opposition. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, one problem the Liberal Members had in this session is the fact that they couldn't 

make any real hard criticisms about this Budget because it is a good solid Budget in the interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3049 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, they like to talk about tax reductions, they like to talk about tax 

increases. I saw here and I haven't added up all the figures like the Minister of Finance has, but I think when 

I got the totals, when I heard the totals and I am sure when the Members opposite heard the total of the kinds 

of taxation reductions that this Government has supplied to the people of Saskatchewan versus the kind of 

Black Friday Budget which the Members opposite brought down when they were on the Treasury Benches, it 

made me proud to be a Member of this New Democratic Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I want to say here there is one way in which the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) is 

fortunate, he is leaving this House possibly in two or three months and leaving as a Member of the 

Legislative Assembly and he wont' have to wait to leave this House with the will of the majority of the 

people of his constituency along with the other Members in opposition. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this Budget. I am proud to have been a part of this Budget 

in its early formative stages. Proud of the part that we have all been able to play on this side of the House, 

contributing to the good things that are in this Budget for the people of Saskatchewan. And I am confident 

that when the provincial election comes, whether it is 30 days from now or a year from now, we will be 

returned to this House by the people of Saskatchewan on the basis of that Budget by an even greater majority 

than in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like also to say a few words about this 

Budget. Like the Members opposite, and the Member for Wilkie, I will be brief and I hope I serve as a good 

example for future speakers to be brief as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this Budget is similar to the legislation that the Government has passed in this 

Session in that it is characterized to me by two things. The first of these is the evidence of continued desire, 

avid desire of this Government to take more control and more power to themselves over all our means of 

production and also in the daily affairs of all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The second characteristic of the Budget, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, is that it shows the complete utter and 

abject failure of the Government t come to grips with the social needs of the day in this province. I say that 

this is particularly reprehensible, Mr. Speaker, from this Government because the NDP historically has 

always regarded themselves as the social conscience of the people of Canada. It is also reprehensible, Mr. 

Speaker, in the facts that this year we have had record revenues from the usual tax sources of income taxes, 

totalling a billion dollars and as well other hundreds of millions of 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3050 

 

dollars coming to the coffers of the province through the sale of oil and potash. 

 

Now, I spoke of control, Mr. Speaker, and I should like to refer to just four Bills where this control is shown. 

 

The first of these, Mr. Speaker, is the infamous Bill No. 42. The effect of this Bill was to nationalize 

completely the oil industry in this province. The Bill didn't affect the corporate giants which it was supposed 

to affect such as Exxon, Gulf and so on, but what it did do was severely damage the small oil operator and 

completely ruin the oil supply industry in Estevan and other areas. 

 

I suggest that the control that the Government has sought by means of this Bill has not worked to the 

advantage of the people of Saskatchewan but has worked to their complete disadvantage. 

 

The second Bill, Mr. Speaker, that I should like to refer to is The Mineral Taxation Act, which we just 

amended, I believe, today or yesterday which now allows the Government, in effect, to take over complete 

control of the potash industry and which I suggest means the end of future potash development in this 

province. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, is the Agricultural Land Bill. This Bill effectively stops other Canadians from enjoying 

the rights in Saskatchewan that we, as citizens of Saskatchewan would enjoy in other provinces. I would 

suggest that the Bill is merely a thinly disguised ruse to put even more land into the hands of the Land Bank 

and thereby under complete government control. 

 

The fourth Bill, Mr. Speaker, and the last Bill which I should like to refer to is The Elections Act. Again, I 

submit that the effect of this Bill is to put power and control of election procedures into the hands of the 

Government. Now the aims of this Bill, I suggest as I have mentioned before, are admirable, however, the 

aims of the Bill are not carried out by the legislation. The Elections Act seeks to control elections, which I 

suggest is proper, but not to have them controlled and thrust upon all other political parties by the party in 

power. This Bill, of course, will only help the NDP Government and will hurt all other political parties. 

 

I suggest, as well, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is a direct infringement on the freedom of choice of the people 

of this province to support political parties in the manner in which they may choose. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MALONE: — Now those are the control aspects, Mr. Speaker. Let me turn briefly to the social needs I 

refer to. To be fair I would say that the Government has done a few things in this regard. I would suggest that 

the highlight is the Family Income Bill, which is not in effect as yet and it is certainly too early to tell if it 

will be of any assistance to the poor people of this province. As I have said before I welcome this Bill and I 

will certainly not criticize it until such time as it shows that it is not doing the job. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3051 

 

I would suggest that the Dental Bill and the Drug Bill are a step forward. The Dental Bill certainly does not 

accomplish all of the ends that the Minister of Health indicated that it would, but it is a start. The Drug Bill, 

as well, is a start however, it will not help completely those people who are required to take or have many 

prescriptions of drugs through the years. However, in future sessions this will be changed. 

 

I suggest that there are important things where the Government has failed and failed completely. 

 

The first of these is old age pensions. The Government has not done one single thing to put one more penny 

into the pockets of the elderly of this province. We have had record incomes, as I say, from the usual tax 

sources and hundreds of millions of extra dollars from oil and we will from potash and not one penny of this 

is being used to assist our people. The purpose of the Act, according to the Premier, was to use this money 

for the assistance of our people, not for Saskoil and not for other little developments that the Government 

may pursue. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the Government, notwithstanding the comments of the Minister of Finance, has done 

nothing really to protect the citizens of this province from inflation. Those people on fixed incomes have 

received no benefits whatsoever from the budgetary proposals of the Minister of Finance. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps on a more personal note, I submit that this Government has done nothing 

to stop or even investigate the growing rate of abortions which is becoming a social and moral scandal to the 

people of this province and people of all Canada. 

 

The Members opposite, when you make these criticisms, usually acknowledge that there may be some truth 

in them, however, they have one reply always — if they can't step in and socialize something or nationalize it 

they then blame it on Ottawa. Everything that I have mentioned the Government has blamed on Ottawa. 

They said we can't give an increase to old age pensioner, Ottawa won't let us. I suggest to them that the NDP 

Government in British Columbia found no difficulty whatsoever in giving an increase in money to the 

elderly people. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that there is another matter that the Minister of Finance has failed miserably 

in and that is allowing people to remain on the tax rolls to pay provincial income tax where they do not have 

to pay any tax whatsoever to the Federal Government of Ottawa. This is scandalous. We brought it to his 

attention time after time during the Budget Debate and yet nothing has been done about it. 

 

I would suggest, therefore, Mr. Speaker, in closing that this Government has sadly misjudged the mandate 

that they received from the people of Saskatchewan in 1971. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MALONE: — When elected the people did not elect them to put controls and give themselves more 

and more power. The people of Saskatchewan, like people of all the other provinces of this country, seek 

social justice and equality before law. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Budget and the legislation 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3052 

 

brought into this Session by the Government does not give this to the people. I suggest, as well, Mr. Speaker, 

that when the next election comes along — and I hope it comes soon — the NDP will realize that they 

cannot pass legislation of this nature and I trust they won't have the opportunity to pass this legislation or 

present further budgets because they will be over here after the next election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, in moving the Budget the Hon. Wes 

Robbins stated and I quote: 

 

This Budget brings to fruition the New Deal for People, virtually completed, not in five 

years, Mr. Speaker, not in four years, but in three. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that one sentence well sums the attitude of this Government. It is a government that is 

self-satisfied a government that is sure of itself, that it is doing the best that it possibly can, to regulate 

capitalism as we know it. 

 

I don't want to deny that there are important reforms both in the Budget, both in the legislative program 

brought down by the Government. The Prescription Drug Program which I had the privilege of, in part, 

working with for two years, is a valuable step forward and nobody should deride it. The Family Income Plan, 

which has been worked upon in the Department of Social Services by people whom I know and respect; the 

Legal Aid Bill, worked upon by people also whom I know and respect as competent people. These, Mr. 

Speaker, are all valuable and worthwhile reforms for which it was worthwhile to defeat the Liberals in 1971 

and elect the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it as I launch into a criticism of the Government, it was a valuable step 

forward to have defeated the conservative and the reactionary forces which dominated this province during 

the 1960s and of which the remnants stand here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were also valuable reforms that have come out of Ottawa dating back to the old age 

pensions which Woodsworth extracted out of Mackenzie King in the 1920s; to the various reforms which 

David Lewis has extracted out of the Liberal minority government since 1972. 

 

The question has to be asked, as we sit here on the eve of a general election, with a minority government in 

Ottawa having fallen only within the last 48 hours: Why has the NDP broken with the Liberals federally? 

What is the significance of the Government of the NDP in Saskatchewan, the significance of the coalition de 

facto which existed for 18 months between David Lewis and Pierre Trudeau in Ottawa? What does this tell 

us about the evolution of Canadian politics, of Canadian political parties? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would submit that what we have in Canada today is that we have a convergence in Ottawa in 

which the Liberals and the NDP have come to represent the same issues, the same policies, the same kinds of 

people. And you see that from the interchange of the civil servants, the deputy minister who 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3053 

 

flew back and forth between the Federal Government in Ottawa and the provincial Government in 

Saskatchewan and these civil servants fit in and design the programs of Pierre Elliott Trudeau and they 

design the programs of Allan Blakeney in Saskatchewan. 

 

The DREE officials design programs for DREE in Ottawa and these same officials are seconded and they 

design the programs for the forest development of northern Saskatchewan. And what does it mean, Mr. 

Speaker? That the NDP has finally broken with Trudeau in Ottawa this week? Is it because the excess profit 

legislation brought down by the Federal Government has loopholes in it? Obviously that legislation has 

loopholes and I don't have to go through it clause by clause to know that. But the reforms which were 

brought in throughout the last 18 months, they all had loopholes and it wasn't because of the loopholes in 

that legislation that David Lewis finally decided to break with Pierre Trudeau. The reason that he finally 

broke with Pierre Trudeau was because if he left it any longer Canadian people would begin to realize the 

integration of these two political parties as they have evolved. People would begin to realize the vacuum that 

has appeared in the left in Canada, as David Lewis has manoeuvred, cajoled, gotten rid of the socialists of 

the ideological elements from the NDP. 

 

David Lewis has designed a party which in its essence is indistinguishable from the Federal Liberal Party. 

David Lewis in Ottawa has no policy to control inflation dissimilar from what Trudeau has. Trudeau is 

against wage and price controls and so is David Lewis. 

 

The Federal NDP is becoming enmeshed in the politics of survival, enmeshed in the politics in the centre of 

Canada. The NDP has forgotten the obligations which the CCF took seriously to present a left alternative to 

the people of Canada, even if the majority of the people of Canada were not prepared, were not ready for it. 

 

In the short run, Mr. Speaker, that may have been the advantageous thing to do, to play the balance of power, 

to get an extra reform or two out of Trudeau; to act as the left wing ginger group in this informal coalition 

which existed in Ottawa for these 18 months, but, Mr. Speaker, as time continues the myth evaporates that 

there is a significant difference, that the NDP is seriously committed to socialism in any way, shape or form. 

Whether it be in Ottawa or to return to Saskatchewan in Regina, if we return to the resource sector in the 

potash industry, the Minister of Mineral Resources admitted yesterday, that in 1973 the province got $8 

million in revenue out of the sales revenue of $195 million, in other words less than the sales tax. With 

respect to the energy, yes, the Provincial Government finally moved after the Federal Government had 

moved and for the last eight months there has been haggling between Ottawa and Regina over who is to get 

the public revenue. Meanwhile all corporate revenues have doubled in the last 12 months between 1972 and 

1973 levels and so one can hardly say that either the NDP in Regina or Donald Macdonald in Ottawa, have 

done a great deal to break corporate power over the resource sectors of this country. 

 

And the NDP has been content in Saskatchewan to play the role of western chauvinists. The NDP in Regina 

has made no distinction of its policies from those of Lougheed in Alberta. There is no fundamental 

distinction in the minds of the eastern 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3054 

 

Canadian, in the minds of the Saskatchewan public, as to what differentiates the resource policies of Peter 

Lougheed from the resource policies of Allan Blakeney. The Alberta Government is collecting the same kind 

and order of magnitude of revenue for a barrel of oil as is Saskatchewan. The Alberta Government has as 

good a Saskoil going in Alberta as Saskatchewan has. In other words virtually nothing is different. 

 

When we come to the forest sector, the NDP are pursuing more rational forest policies in terms of 

maximizing the revenue per tree, but I would submit there is no basic difference between the policies of 

large capital intensive projects, which the Liberals pursued with Carl Landegger and what the NDP is 

prepared to pursue. The NDP as we discussed last night you and your henchman, Mr. Bowerman, you both 

agreed that if need be you were content to see Carl Landegger develop the hardwood in order that it be 

developed now and not go to waste. 

 

There is no essential difference between the forest policies which have been pursued to date between the 

Liberals and the NDP. There are distinctions, but as the Attorney General would say, they are distinctions 

without a difference, or however that legal phrase goes. And even in the domain of social welfare, of social 

reform, which is the hallmark of the NDP and the CCF why have we been incapable of any major 

redistributions of income in three years? 

 

Why are we able, with virtually no debate, to spend up to $35 million of public funds to keep down the price 

of gasoline, but it becomes a major program of earth shaking importance for us to budget $10 million as an 

income support program for the poor. Mr. Speaker, $35 million for the ordinary petroleum consuming 

public, rich and poor, that can go through without a debate. $10 million for the poor, that is an earth-shaking 

revolution. 

 

And the idea of implementing the recommendations of the Senior Citizens' Commission Report, which we 

have all agreed, is very expensive — $80 million according to the estimate of the Government, that is 

literally impossible; it is unrealistic unless we have federal cost-sharing, unless the Federal Government does 

it. 

 

And so in the last two years, Mr. Speaker, I think there has come an end of an era. It is very confused and I 

don't pretend to know where the evolution of Canadian politics goes, but as the vacuum has opened up on 

the left in Canadian politics, unless there is a major transformation of the NDP, unless there is a major 

transformation of that party and in the present leadership of that party, which is content to play the 

federal-provincial negotiations to haggle with Ottawa over who gets more or less of the tax dollar which has 

been extracted from the oil industry, unless that major transformation occurs the left in Canada is not going 

to suspend judgment on the New Democratic Party. And the left in Canada, disorganized yes, small yes, but 

nonetheless a vital force in defining the future of this country, is going to have to build a new socialist 

political organization. It may be the Waffle, it may not be the Waffle, it may be some other political 

organization. I may play a role in it; I may not play a role in it, but politics abhors a vacuum just as much as 

nature does. 

 

And if the New Democratic Party is not willing to stand up 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3055 

 

and fight for the issues which would define an independent socialist Canada, then socialists in Canada will 

find a new organization, which is prepared to do that. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I take my seat. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words as we close 

this Session of the Legislature. 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Make it short! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I shall make it short. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am very pleased to take part in 

this last debate of the particular session, on the Appropriation Bill, on this Budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am pleased to take part in a debate on a budget that deals effectively with the 

problems of the Province of Saskatchewan, the problems faced by our people, particularly by those in middle 

and low-income brackets in this critical inflationary period. 

 

This Budget provides the framework for the balanced development of Saskatchewan now and in the years 

ahead. The progressive measures in this Budget are made possible because this is a New Democratic 

Government, Mr. Speaker, a government with the philosophy, the programs and the guts to insist that the 

resources of this province yield a fair return to the owners of those resources — the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members opposite have gone to great lengths in this debate to throw up smoke screens and 

scatter red herrings in an effort to obscure the facts. It has been typical of this Session, typical of the three 

years that the Liberal Party has served in Opposition, an Opposition which is resorting to the only tactics 

they how — the tactics of smoke screens and scattering of red herrings. We saw it again in the debate today, 

an Opposition of contradictions. 

 

The Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) in his freshman year and he says that the provincial Government 

should have done something about old age pensions. He condemns the Provincial Government for total 

inactivity, but not a word, Mr. Speaker, about the inactivity of the Federal Liberal Minister of Finance, John 

Turner, and his Budget. Not one red cent from the Federal Liberals for senior citizens, not one cent of 

concern from the Liberals in the Dominion of Canada for senior citizens. That is why the Government fell at 

Ottawa just two days ago. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And yet the Member for Lakeview gets up and says there is no concern for old age 

pensioners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member got up and talks about inflation, he condemns the Provincial Government because 

we should have done something about inflation. He says that everyone knows that 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3056 

 

the Provincial Government could have acted to stop inflation. Yet what did Mr. Turner do, in Canada? He 

went around defending against the Tories saying that inflation is international, he can't control it 

Canada-wide. Yet the Member for Lakeview says that we should be able to control it provincially. Somehow 

what we can't do nationally, we should be able to do provincially. That is what the Member for Lakeview 

would have this House and this province believe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see an Opposition which gets up and makes charges, which are absolutely incredible. On 

the Land Bank, this scare that the Land Bank is attempting to take over the land in the Province of 

Saskatchewan; this old slogan of Steuart or slavery, that we hear from the Liberals opposite. Like in the old 

days, Tucker or tyranny, today it is Steuart or slavery! 

 

Mr. Speaker, it didn't work in 1948 and it isn't going to work in 1975. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, how incredible can an Opposition be? The Members of the Opposition 

got up and talked about deterrent fees. The Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) and the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) during the course of the Prescription Drugs Bill debate had said that we had 

installed deterrent fees in the Pharmacy Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if there is anybody who should not be talking about deterrent fees it is the Liberals 

opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — If there is anyone who should not be talking about deterrent fees it is the Member for 

Whitmore Park, the present Whip of the Liberal Party right now, Mr. Grant. All of us in this province 

remember the $2.50 that the Liberals opposite put on in deterrent fees in medicare and hospitalization. We 

ask the Member opposite, why was it that he put on deterrent fees and his answer was because it helps them 

to participate in their own recovery. That was the position of the Liberals opposite, $2.50! And year after 

year when we put in a resolution before this House, urging that the deterrent fees should be removed, year 

after year the Liberals opposed it and they said that deterrent fees should remain. And now they have the 

audacity to say that they are against deterrent fees and accuse us of having them in the Prescription Drugs 

Bill that is before us now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how incredible can you get? How incredible and irresponsible can you get as an Opposition 

Party? 

 

I tell the people of Saskatchewan that there is no deterrent fee in the Drugs Act. I want to tell the people that 

even if there was a deterrent fee, at least this Government has established a Prescription Drugs Act and that 

is more than the Liberals ever did in their seven years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, we see an Opposition who get up and 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3057 

 

condemn this Government, condemns this Government for having passed Bill No. 42 and than at the same 

time condemns this Government for not having added more muscle to its negotiations with the Federal 

Government in the energy crisis. When we moved to enact Bill 42 to give us the muscle to deal with Ottawa 

they said that that was anti-Canadian. When we came back from Ottawa after having negotiated the deal for 

Canada, they say that is not good enough for Saskatchewan and that the Bill wasn't strong enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you see an Opposition which is straddling the fence; an Opposition who doesn't know where it 

stands on any important major issues of the day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Make no mistake about it, the people of this province know that the Liberals are 

political pragmatists pure and simple, no philosophy, no programs, no alternatives to offer to them and they 

will remember that in 1975. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, this Legislative Session has proven that the Opposition has failed in 

their tasks to scatter these red herrings; they have failed and they will continue to fail because the facts stand 

out clearly for all to see, even for the Member for Milestone to see. The Budget summarizes the programs; 

strengthens our economy; eases the burden of inflation as best as can be; meets the needs of ordinary people 

and the resources to mount these kinds of programs which come in an increasing measure from our 

nonrenewable resources — potash and oil to name the key ones. 

 

For the first time these resources are beginning to yield to the public, yield to the people of Saskatchewan, 

something approaching their true value. And the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) has the 

gumption to get up in this House and say that it is not a socialist venture. 

 

The Member for University, in his dream that somehow there will be a place in the political spectrum for his 

point of view, tries to differentiate. I want to tell that Member that for the first time in recent history in the 

Province of Saskatchewan we have a socialist government which has acted to ensure that the resources of the 

province belong to the people of the province and not to corporations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — When we passed The Forest Act amendments was that a sellout to the Liberal Party? 

When we passed Bill 42 was that a sellout to the corporation party? Absolutely it was not, Mr. Speaker, it 

was an act of the New Democratic Party and for the people, but he has to play the dream. He has no other 

alternative sitting as an Independent to the left, as he does, of the Opposition. He has to hope that that 

position survives. But I tell him that no one is going to be fooled by that position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me remind this House, briefly, of some 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3058 

 

other ways these new revenues are being used to redistribute the wealth in this province. The Minister of 

Finance has talked about it. Holding the line on gasoline and diesel costs for Saskatchewan consumers. Mr. 

Speaker, in a few days the price of gasoline at the pumps west of the Ottawa Valley will go up by six to eight 

cents a gallon but not in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, we are reducing the gas tax to hold the line on prices. For farmers there 

is a special farm cost reduction program to achieve the same effect. Mr. Speaker, we have shifted the three 

cents of gas tax to the AAIA, to hold the line on automobile and truck direct insurance costs. We have 

increased the Property Improvement Grants; we have introduced a new urban package of $100 million; we 

have launched a kindergarten program; denticare; a new day care program; providing more housing and 

more help to homeowners and home buyers; we have announced a major step toward a guaranteed income 

for working families in the lower income brackets — a Family Income Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are only a few, only a few, of the new and solid accomplishments achieved in this 

Session in this record Budget for the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this debate comes down to the wire, there is one issue and one issue which overrides all 

others, this Government, this New Democratic Government, believes firmly that the resources of this 

province belong to Saskatchewan and not the Federal Government. This Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Government believes fervently that windfall profits from these resources belong to the people of the 

province and not to the corporations of eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 is grounded in those beliefs, beliefs which are clearly supported by the Canadian 

Constitution. Bill 42 proclaims Saskatchewan ownership of petroleum resources; it captures windfall profits 

for the people of this province. Now the Federal Government entered into an agreement with our province at 

the end of March, which clearly recognized those two basic rights that Saskatchewan owned the natural 

resources and that the windfall profits should go to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. That was the 

agreement at the end of March or so we thought, until a few days ago, when the Government which now 

stands rightly defeated, clearly proposed to tax provincial resources; to renege on their agreement made with 

the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to go back on their word that they entered into with the Premier 

and the other Ministers; to invade provincial jurisdiction, and in the process to place the oil and gas industry 

in an impossible bind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the issue that we are voting on today. This is the issue we will be voting on on July 8th 

and voting in subsequent elections and the people of Saskatchewan will be watching. They will be watching 

closely to see how the Members of this House, how the Liberals opposite, how the Member for Saskatoon 

University cast their ballots. Will they cast their ballots for the province or for federal invasion and the 

central eastern Canadian Government? Will they cast their ballots for the people of this province or for 

eastern corporations that they have up until now defended? 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3059 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the issue. I am going to stand for the control of provincial resources, the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and for the benefit of those resources in the province, to the people of this province by 

supporting this Appropriation Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, there is only one thing you can say about the 

Attorney General when he gets up, he hasn't changed his speech since he came into this House in 1968. The 

same old tired socialist line. This has to be the most amusing windup of any debate I have ever seen, when 

the Member for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) and the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) start a 

quarrel. There is no honor among thieves. Who is the worst socialist? Who is the closest to the Communist? 

Who is nearest to Karl Marx, is it them or is it me? 

 

I want to tell Mr. Richards that there are no Communists in Canada; there are no extreme left wingers, only 

the John Richards who don't really represent anything. I believe in freedom of speech in this Assembly but 

some of the time that I have listened to this socialist drivel that comes from the Member for Saskatoon 

University I begin to challenge and question my own sanity. 

 

Now we get to the Attorney General. He said that the New Democratic Party is the only one that has the guts 

to get the resource revenues. It doesn't take any guts to confiscate by greed and graft and seizure and drive 

the little services and all technical workers and all of the service industry of the province right out of this 

province because you happen to have the power to legislate without negotiation. Without discussion, without 

anything. Now go down to Estevan and talk about Bill 42, where the companies are leaving day by day. Not 

Exxon, not Gulf, but the individuals who were born and raised in the Province of Saskatchewan. Does it take 

guts to take a potash company that has invested $80 million in the Province of Saskatchewan? It is in place 

and they can't withdraw the investment and then you turn around and break the agreement of years ago, and 

then without discussion summon them to Regina and dictate the terms of the new confiscation by taxation. It 

will have an impact on the mineral development of the Province of Saskatchewan for years, in fact, it is 

having it now. In a time of unparalleled prosperity in this province, young people are being forced to leave 

Saskatchewan to find jobs. They go to Alberta and Manitoba, Ontario and British Columbia because of the 

actions of this Government in driving out private investment and private capital. 

 

The Minister of Finance stood up and talked about the steel agreement. What agreement? The Premier gave 

us a copy of that agreement, but there is no agreement. The Premier said, "I am optimistic." The only hope 

there is of a steel industry in Saskatchewan is if the Department of Regional Economic Expansion puts one 

here and it depends on the $35 million that the Federal Government will give to this province. 

 

It is very interesting to listen to the Attorney General talking about the old age pensions. Do you know the 

reason why we are having a federal election in Canada? It is because David Lewis said, those dirty federal 

Liberals wouldn't give the senior citizens in this country a five-cent piece. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3060 

 

Do you know what that Government did? The Federal Government gave a $3 or $4 cost of living bonus to 

the senior citizens in this province and all across Canada to welfare recipients. Do you know Mr. Romanow's 

Government did? They reduced the welfare payment according to the increased federal grant for welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Federal NDP Party that brings down a government and causes a federal election and then an 

NDP hypocritical government in the Province of Saskatchewan that ignores the senior citizens denies that 

responsibility. The Attorney General says that the welfare of the senior citizens is a federal responsibility. 

That is not true and the Attorney General knows it. 

 

According to the Constitution of Canada, health and welfare are provincial responsibilities. The only reason 

that the Federal Government became involved in old age pensions in the Canada Assistance Plan, Medicare, 

Hospitalization, was to help out the provinces carry their responsibilities and don't deny it. Mr. Speaker, it is 

rather interesting that the old CCF didn't agree with the Attorney General. They had a supplementary old age 

pension program with the most vicious Means Test of any government in Canada. How come they had a 

supplementary pension plan? How come Tommy Douglas realized that the CCF had a responsibility to our 

senior citizens and the Attorney General has the nerve to stand up and tell every old age senior citizen in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, that they don't have a responsibility. That is nonsense and the Attorney General 

knows it and I believe the senior citizens of this province will recognize that it is shallow. 

 

When you listen to the Minister of Finance and what really amused me was that he stood up and said that the 

criticisms of the Opposition were very shallow. He said that we didn't have any substance to them. You 

should have seen him a couple of nights ago when the back benchers got at the Finance Minister. It was the 

most disgraceful performance that I have ever seen in a Minister of Finance. You didn't know how to handle 

yourself. And when you are putting out figures, like a rotating machine and had to answer with a little 

common sense, Mr. Minister, those new Members behind me made you look like a child of 15 years of age, 

and then you talk about substance. In fact, Mr. Speaker, these are three or four things that really stand out 

about this Budget. 

 

The first one, is the complete and absolute incompetence of some of the Ministers opposite in handling their 

departments in these Estimates. Mr. Speaker, I don't have to tell you because I don't want to name them 

personally. The Press knows and the back benchers know, they talk in the hall, they are ashamed of some of 

the Ministers and their performance that went on in this House and don't underestimate it. Mr. Speaker, 

compare it to that back bench behind me. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Compare them to some of those Ministers. There is no question of comparative 

ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you why. I want to tell you why! It's because it's the bureaucracy that's 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3061 

 

running Saskatchewan. You people have become slaves to the socialist planners. You know the best example 

is the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan; a scandal and a 

disgrace in the administration of government funds never before seen in Saskatchewan. Never before! You 

know, it's not only because of an incompetent Minister and an incompetent Department, an incompetent 

Deputy, incompetent civil servants, it's because of the socialist planners. They turn around and had a 

one-agency concept, a great socialist dream but when it came to a practical application they didn't have the 

resource and the backup of a central office and the experience and know-how of senior civil servants and 

that one-agency concept has been a complete and absolute failure. And the Government had better realize it, 

or that Minister is going to continue to be in trouble as long as he is here. Mr. Speaker, the collapse of the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan is only an indication of the complete collapse and incompetence of 

the majority of the Ministers sitting opposite and the way in which they handled their Estimates. It's kind of 

interesting, I've been in this House about 14, 13 sessions, never, never have I seen a group of people ferret 

out more information, do a better job in Estimates, and the Attorney General and the Minister of Finance 

know it, and so do all the Ministers. The civil servants were telling us stories about the Ministers scared to 

come to the House . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — . . . because of the incompetence of their department. 

 

The second thing that stands out about this Budget, Mr. Speaker, is the waste and extravagance. And, you the 

Government will stand accountable to the people of Saskatchewan for the waste and extravagance. It starts 

on July 8th. It will be the first test and I suggest to you that though there may not be too many Liberals, my 

colleague, the Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) will be one of them, Otto Lang will be another elected. 

There may be some Conservatives, but there are not going to be very many NDP Members. Because after 

$900 million, to increase the civil servants to 1,120 in one year, 3,500 since you became the Government, 

you've got to build, according to the Minister of Government Services two new government office buildings, 

just to house civil servants. There isn't a private company or corporation in the Province of Saskatchewan 

that can get a foot of office space in Regina, they are filled with civil servants. You know at 5:00 o'clock it's 

like a stampede getting out of those buildings, you've got to stand aside or the civil servants can trample you 

to death. The only time when they may be absent, the only time it may be safe is during the federal election 

because you'll have given half of them a leave of absence. Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, when you turn around and take $29 million spent in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, 

I'd like to see the Minister take that half a million dollars out of the boxes and the shoe boxes and spend it 

properly. That's what I should like to see. Two and a half years ago this Government, the Province of 

Saskatchewan spent $42 million in welfare, on the total welfare costs. This year it's $105 million. Now, just 

ask me that. From $42 million to $105 million in welfare costs in two and a half years. I think if the public of 

Saskatchewan knew that they would consider it a scandal, Mr. Speaker. And despite 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3062 

 

that, all that money, $900 million, that waste and extravagance still isn't doing the job. There's no pollution 

cleanup in the Qu'Appelle Valley. The Minister says we can't do it until the Federal Government gives us 

money. 

 

You know, thee are no jobs in development. There hasn't been one new industry come into the province of 

Saskatchewan since 1971. Not one. We see the planners for, maybe Mr. Landegger, the terrible American, is 

going to put an extension, a hardwood line in the Prince Albert pulp mill. Oh, and maybe the Federal 

Government will get a steel industry in Saskatchewan, but you fellow haven't been successful in attracting a 

single industry of any consequence and it's simply because of the policies that you people have implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance talked about education. You know, it made me a little ill because we 

must have missed the Estimates in the Department of Education. He talked about every year the increase in 

grants. There has been an increase in school grants every year since the Department of Education was 

formed. Not only that, the Minister should have turned around and taken a look. Ask the Member for Nutana 

(Mr. Rolfes) just about every single school unit in the Province of Saskatchewan has been forced to raise 

mill rates — Regina almost two mills Saskatoon three mills. Some of the RMs ten mills, one school unit 

three mills three years in a row, and the reason is school costs have gone up 12 per cent and all you fellows 

would give them was 8 percent. Oh, you gave them the most money. Of course you did, because costs are 

going up and every school system is spending more money, but you were cheap and niggardly with the 

school systems of the Province of Saskatchewan and it's what you've done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, who stands up very proudly, oh, very, very proudly, my denticare 

program, my drug program, pharmacare program, and yet you know he's squeezing the hospital budget so 

hard and so tight that the nursing profession for the first time, has to go on a strike and he stands up and 

criticizes them, while the Minister of Labour sits idly by and the construction industry is going into its 

seventh week, and you know why? Because he is squeezing and refusing to give the hospitals enough money 

to operate. And you know something, the nursing profession are going to react to that. They'll never forget it. 

They'll never forget it, Mr. Speaker, and despite that, imagine this is the great labour man in the NDP. He 

was one of the labour representatives. What was he? What do you call those fellows? The representatives? 

And he sold out because for the first time one agency that he had a responsibility to provide for them, and no 

group in the province of Saskatchewan deserves an increase any more than the nurses, because he squeezed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear about the deterrent fees. Why didn't you take some of that money from the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan, give it to those poor people that you are forcing to pay deterrent fees to get their 

drugs. You know, isn't that a tragedy. Who uses the drugs in Saskatchewan? Well, 50, 60 per cent are used 

by the senior citizens. Every time they have to go and get a prescription they pay the terrible $2 deterrent fee, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The third thing about this Budget, I don't want to take too long, Mr. Minister, because I know we've had a 

long Session, 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3063 

 

is the continual grab for power and the reason I want to talk about this, is because the Attorney General talks 

about the resource industry. Mr. Speaker, there is one way that the Province of Saskatchewan and the people 

of Saskatchewan can get revenues from the resource industry and that's through the taxation system. That's 

not the NDP approach. No that's not the Minister of Mineral Resources. Bill 42 has driven every oil 

company out of the Province of Saskatchewan, has completely stopped drilling, has affected every little 

Saskatchewan company that services them. They confiscated the mineral leases, on top of that they froze 

profits and took 100 percent of all the profits over a moderate one they turned around and increased the 

mineral tax from 20 to 50 cents in order to confiscate by taxation whether or not they have received any 

profit or not. Then they got into the potash industry. Nobody, nobody is going to question you for taxing the 

potash industry according to its revenues, but to turn around and get into the production business to set up a 

competing marketing agency and force them to pay in kind is going to remove and put a question in the mind 

of every mining company in the Dominion of Canada and in the North American continent. We needed a 

northern Saskatchewan department and that Minister of DNS is never going to get people off welfare. Mr. 

Speaker, it's disastrous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important thing about this Budget is what it didn't contain, what it didn't contain., Mr. 

Speaker, after $900 million, there is not an honest effort to help the old age pensioner, there's not an honest 

effort to help the cattle industry. The Minister of Agriculture got up this afternoon and talked about the feed 

grains situation and yet the cattle industry is dying in Saskatchewan, because of the poor prices, because of 

the high feed grains cost and he didn't do one single thing to help them in that Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but I suppose you've assumed by the remarks that I'm not going to support this 

Appropriation Bill. I think it's got misplaced priorities, I think it's got waste and it's got extravagance, I think 

it's a dishonest Budget, it doesn't even include all the revenues in the Province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I will not support it, I do not believe it solves the problems facing the people of Saskatchewan in 

1974. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I'll be brief, Mr. Speaker. The Members of the Opposition in their general criticisms of 

the Budget remind me generally of the hawker in the midway who was peddling snake bit remedy. The only 

difference is they haven't quite as credible a product. 

 

The Member who just took his seat, really doesn't merit much comment on his remarks in this debate. I can 

readily understand now why his seatmate is seeking the federal nomination. 

 

I should like to make a few remarks with respect to the Hon. Member for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac). I very much 

regret his decision to seek the federal nomination. I am sure we will miss him in this House. I had the 

opportunity a couple of years ago of attending the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in 

Charlottetown and I think most of the Members are aware of the fact that the Hon. Member for Wilkie came 

from that part of Canada. I had occasion to talk to a goodly number of people who 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3064 

 

knew Mr. McIsaac pretty well and they spoke very highly of him. If I paid much attention to the remarks by a 

former colleague, the Hon. Member for University (Mr. Richards) I suppose I could accept on the basis of 

his contention that New Democrats and Liberals are one and the same thing, that I should go to the Liberal 

nominating convention for the Battlefords-Kindersley and work for the opponent of Mr. McIsaac to ensure 

that he would come back to this House. 

 

Really most of the criticisms have been gone over so many times in this debate there isn't much point in 

saying much about them any more and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will simply conclude my remarks by saying 

we should end this debate and get on with the business of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on division, and Bill read a second and third time. 

 

MOTION 

 

MEMBER OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RIGHTS BOARD APPOINTED 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, now that we've finished, I take it we are 

finished with the Appropriation Bill, I should like to move, seconded by my colleague, the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Messer) by leave that: 

 

Mr. Myron Kuziak of Regina, in the Province of Saskatchewan, be appointed the Member of 

the Public and Private Rights Board under Section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure Act, 

1968, being Chapter 21 of the Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1968, as amended by Chapter 36 of 

the Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1973. 

 

Just a very brief word to say that this Bill requires a resolution of the House to appoint a person, Mr. David 

Keith was the first appointee and his appointment expired. It's not, a full time job, it's a part-time job of one 

day a month or so, and the honorarium is on a per diem basis. There is an individual by the name of Mr. Fred 

Delath who is doing really an excellent job for us as secretary, but I think we need to appoint someone in 

order to validate the proceedings of the Public and Private Rights Board and therefore the need to appoint 

this individual 

 

I have contacted Mr. Kuziak and I've spoken to my colleague, the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) 

on this matter. I don't think it should be too controversial and I so move. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, just one brief comment. I'm not going to oppose the 

Motion of the Attorney General, he's been very co-operative today in everything. I just want to say that if 

there is anybody in the province of Saskatchewan who deserves to be appointed by an NDP Government to 

an NDP Board, it's the son of Mr. Kuziak. He certainly earned his spurs, his father sat on the Cabinet side of 

the House for many years, I certainly wouldn't suggest he's a political hack, but it's certainly a political 

payoff. 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

3065 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, just for the edification of the Member who 

has taken his seat, the appointee is a paid-up member of the Saskatchewan Waffle. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 

 

At 10:12 o'clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor having entered the Chamber, took his seat upon 

the Throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor was pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to thank 

you and congratulate you on the work you have done. 

 

At this Fourth Session of the Seventeenth Legislature you have dealt with more than 130 bills and have set 

directions in government policy which will have a profound and positive effect upon the well-being of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Among the important steps taken, you have initiated progressive moves to make health services more readily 

available to all the people of Saskatchewan. You have abolished all premiums for medical care and hospital 

insurance; and you have initiated a pioneering program which will make prescription drugs available at 

greatly reduced cost. 

 

You have also approved the recommendations of an independent Constituency Boundaries Commission. 

 

Another important series of measures have been taken to bring oil and gas reserves in Saskatchewan under 

ownership and control of the province and to provide the people of Saskatchewan with the full economic and 

social benefits from the ownership of that resource. You have also taken steps to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan gain the full benefits from the exploitation of other mineral reserves, such as potash. 

 

In education, you have approved the establishment of a Universities Commission, and two independent 

universities in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

In the field of municipal government, you have passed a series of measures which will enable municipalities, 

towns, villages and rural municipalities to receive substantial new grants of money to carry out projects of 

their own choosing. You have approved further increases in Property Improvement Grants to homeowners. 

 

You have approved measures which will decrease substantially the taxes on gasoline and other fuels. 

 

You have approved measures to grant compensation to 

 



 

May 10, 1974 

 

3066 

 

individuals, small business and municipalities suffering the effects of 1974 floods. 

 

You have approved the Family Income Plan, which will enable working people on modest incomes to 

supplement their incomes to a level considerably above the compensation they would receive under social 

assistance. 

 

You have revised the system of Workmen's Compensation to provide greatly improved benefits to people 

who are disabled in the course of their employment. 

 

You have approved a legal aid system to assist people who would not otherwise be able to afford it. 

 

And among a great number of other new measures, you have passed legislation which will ensure that the 

ownership and control of farm land in Saskatchewan remains basically with the people who live in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the Public Service and I 

assure you that this sum of money will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the activities 

of the Session and wish you the full bless of Providence. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases his Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the Legislative 

Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 


