






















































Hansard: April 22, 1974


2539 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

55th Day 
Monday, April 22, 1974. 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to introduce to you 
and to the Members of the Legislature a group of 40 students from St. Anne School, located in my 
constituency. They are Grade Eight students and are seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied here 
by their teachers, Mr. Zurowski and Mr. Bernhauser. On behalf of the Members of the Legislature I wish to 
extend a warm welcome to them and particularly invite them to stay with us for as long as possible this 
afternoon. We particularly want to draw their attention that later this afternoon we will have an exciting 
visitor with us, His Excellency the Governor General of Canada, who will be here with us shortly and I do 
hope that they stay during his visit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do extend to them a warm welcome and hope that their stay with us this afternoon will be 
exciting and educational. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to the Members of this Assembly some 40 Grade Seven and Eight students from St. 
Charles School in Saskatoon. The school is situated in the present Nutana Centre constituency. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Noonan and Mr. Werbecki. I understand they will be spending a bit of 
time in the city today and I hope they don't have any major difficulty getting back through the Lumsden area 
tonight. I noticed a lot of water running over the road there this morning. 
 
I sincerely hope their stay will be an educational one and like the Hon. Member who preceded me I hope 
they are able to stay for the proceedings while His Excellency the Governor General is in the House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with my colleague 
from Nutana Centre in welcoming the children from St. Charles School. I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, of 
being the principal of that school some years ago and I remember many of the older brothers of the students 
who are here today. I also had the privilege of working with Mr. Werbecki for a number of years. 
 
I hope that the students will find their stay here in the 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2540 
 

Legislative Building educational and worthwhile and I hope they have a pleasant trip back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

APPRECIATION TO VOLUNTEER WORKERS WHO WORKED 
IN REGINA LAKEVIEW AREA 

 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I could 
beg your indulgence for a moment to make a brief statement of thanks and appreciation to the many people 
who worked in the Regina Lakeview area the past weekend. I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that without 
the several hundred volunteer workers, the great work by the City Engineering Department and the EMO that 
there would have been a disaster in Regina just the same as the disaster that has affected Moose Jaw. On 
behalf of the people of Regina Lakeview, as their elected representative, I want to express their appreciation 
to all of the hundreds of people who worked along the banks of Wascana Creek on Friday night, Saturday 
and Sunday. 
 
I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that adversity brings out the best in people and I think proof of this was 
shown along the banks of Wascana Creek over the past few days. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTION 
 

FORECASTING OF FLOOD INADEQUATE IN MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like, in light of the very 
heartbreaking disasters that we have encountered in Moose Jaw, I should like to ask a question of the 
Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers), for it seems that other areas in the province plus Regina seem to 
have had fairly accurate forecasting in preparation. I should like to ask why was the forecasting that took 
place in Moose Jaw so totally inadequate? I refer to the pitifully low estimate of flow in the Moose Jaw 
River and Thunder Creek and the lack of any forecasting in Spring Creek. It seems the only accurate 
forecasting was from this side of the House when we predicted a lack of forecasting. Is it true, Mr. Minister, 
that little attention was paid to Spring Creek because of the very fact that it has not flooded to any extent in 
the past years? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw to the attention of the 
Members of the House that insofar as the flooding at Moose Jaw is concerned we are this year dealing with 
the one in 200 flood, which means that this only occurs once in 200 years. Whereas previous record floods 
were of the order of one to 50 or one in 50 years possibility. 
 
The art of forecasting still requires a good deal of refinement. It is true that there was considerable 
forecasting done on the Thunder Creek basin which caused the initial 



 
April 22, 1974 

2541 
 

difficulty at Moose Jaw. I think that the, I don't have the exact wording of the forecasts as they were made by 
the Forecast Division, but I think they were in the order of what was the minimum amount expected and 
what was the greatest possible amount that could occur. The art of forecasting is still being refined, we did 
the best we could. We certainly had no figures in the Forecast Division to anticipate what levels might be 
expected with the one in 200 flood which unfortunately did hit Moose Jaw. I think that although that is a 
very unfortunate situation we did the best that could be done with the resources and with the knowledge and 
with the manpower that we did have available at this time. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The Minister is a very shaken man and he 
appeared very confident before this House when we were asking questions before and now he has admitted 
that there was no forecasting of any significance done. And the statement about one in 200 sounds like a 
Russian roulette game. It is very sad that we should get into this kind of a situation. It is like the Minister of 
Agriculture's statement that you shouldn't be residing in it. I should like to ask the Minister has the 
Government considered or has it declared Moose Jaw as a disaster area and is it true that financial aid is 
available from the Federal Government in a formula where the province picks up the first so much and the 
Federal Government and province splits so much and the Federal Government picks up the rest entirely? If 
so I should just like a statement from the Minister on what the Provincial Government is prepared to do to 
give financial assistance to the city and to the flood victims? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think I can assist the Member with respect to that. I 
think it will be known there is a formula which exists currently. There are some proposals for renegotiating it 
among the several western provinces but this is nothing more than a proposal at this moment. The present 
formula for federal-provincial cost sharing involves the province picking up the first $1 per capita. The 
province meaning, not the Federal Government, but rather the local people — the people who suffered the 
loss — and the Provincial Government. The next $1 million is dealt with on a 50 per cent Federal. The 
second million, 75 per cent Federal and so on. 
 
With respect to that, the Province of Saskatchewan has informally advised the Federal Government some 
days ago that we would likely be making a claim and we have today advised the Federal Government 
formally in a wire to Prime Minister Trudeau in the following terms: 
 

It is apparent now that damage resulting from spring floods in Saskatchewan will be in the 
millions of dollars. 

 
I think this is probably accurate. 
 

I wish to advise you that the Government of Saskatchewan will be applying for Federal 
contributions to assist individuals in local governments in meeting the costs of flood fighting 
and rehabilitation. 

 
And then I asked: 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2542 
 

Please advise the appropriate Federal officials with whom we should make arrangements to 
initiate our joint efforts in this regard. 

 
That is the current state of the relations between the Federal and Provincial Government. 
 
With respect to what the position of the Provincial Government will be in respect of individuals who have 
suffered loss, the matter is still under consideration. We are making arrangements for the assessing of the 
loss at Moose Jaw. I have been in touch with His Worship, Mayor Taylor, this morning on two occasions 
and have put our officials in touch with him and I anticipate that probably by tomorrow arrangements will be 
under way for assessing. We will be using adjusters, insurance adjusters, both independent adjusters and 
adjusters from the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office to make adjustments of the losses suffered so 
that we can ascertain the nature of the loss. Then we, together with municipal officials, can discuss the 
appropriate measures which should be taken in the light of the facts which will thus be ascertained. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I know I'm not allowed a second supplementary but I think the 
question is important enough and I did ask the question as to whether or not Moose Jaw had been designated 
as a disaster area and I should like the Premier to comment on that. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I looked into this matter and I found that designating an area as a disaster area 
apparently meant nothing, except from the point of view of being a P.R. presentation. It seemed to me that 
this situation required not an application of P.R. but an application of an effort to deal with the problem. I'm 
not suggesting for a moment that those who were talking about its being declared a disaster area were 
interested in the public relations aspect, not for a moment. I think some people are of the view that it is 
necessary to make such a declaration in order to apply for federal sharing. This is my advice that such is not 
the case. We could have declared it a disaster area but there didn't seem to be any particular point in that. But 
if anyone feels that there is a point in it, we obviously can do so. It seemed to us that such a declaration 
would perhaps cause a degree of public awareness outside of Saskatchewan which might have caused a 
misconception to arise as to the nature of the problem in Moose Jaw. Accordingly we did not act in that way. 
 

COMMITTEE TO ASSESS FLOOD DAMAGE IN RURAL AREAS 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — I appreciate and I am sure all Members of the House and the 
people of Saskatchewan and Moose Jaw particularly will appreciate the Premier's comments about assessing 
the damage at Moose Jaw. I wonder if the Premier is considering the damage to rural municipalities, roads, 
bridges, other aspects. I wonder if he is considering my suggestion of last Friday, that a committee be made 
up of urban and rural people as well as the Government of Saskatchewan. I am sure that the Premier is aware 
that flood damage is not restricted to Moose Jaw alone but many rural areas, many rural municipalities have 
suffered a great deal from flood damage. 



 
April 22, 1974 

2543 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We are certainly considering the appropriate way to handle this. It appears to us at 
this point that it is far too early to attempt to assess and to adjust any damages that might be suffered by the 
RMs. Most of the areas in question are still under a fair amount of water, and we are not in a position to 
assess what the damage might be. The urban damage in Moose Jaw is in a different category as the water 
there is now beginning to recede and it is possible to get into the places. The return to the flooded buildings 
is not going to happen as fast as some people think it is; there are inspections with respect to health, with 
respect to power and with respect to engineering soundness that need to be carried out. But I think that is, 
commencing today, that is my understanding and, therefore, that work will start. 
 

FOREST DEVELOPMENT IN NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I would like to direct to 
the Premier. In the public release of April 18th by the Government, the Premier stated to the Legislative 
Assembly that the Government has no plans, as outlined in the newspaper story, concerning forest 
development in northern Saskatchewan as I tabled in the material on Tuesday. In the Prince Albert Herald of 
Saturday is reference stating that a reliable source, whom I understand is a senior official of the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company, is claiming that there has been for some considerable time consultation between his 
corporation, Prince Albert Pulp Company and the Saskatchewan Government with respect to a hardwood 
pulp mill line. Would the Premier comment on the state of these negotiations? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The answer shortly put is, No. The answer shortly put with respect to the newspaper 
story is that I think it inappropriate to comment. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: — As a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, would the Premier give any guarantee that Prince 
Albert Pulp Mill will not be afforded the right to develop a hardwood pulp mill line? In other words that it is 
the Government's policy not to allow any further expansion to Karl Landegger's outfit in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it is pretty clear that if I answer any of these questions one 
way or the other, the process of attempting to elicit the policy by process of negation will go on and 
accordingly my answer is that I have no comment. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

STATE OF FLOOD SITUATION IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to make a somewhat more 
general comment on the state of the flood situation in Saskatchewan. May I report to the House that the 
situation in Regina is, I think, encouraging. The lake levels have dropped slightly. The lake levels are above 
those of 1971. 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2544 
 

They have not yet reached the peaks that were thought possible, something over 4,000 cfs, and accordingly 
the situation in Regina continues to be encouraging. We think that the level will drop off a few inches in the 
next 24 hours and then perhaps drop off more rapidly over a period of some ten days. 
 
In Moose Jaw there is a slow recession. The water went down one inch over night I am told. Moose Jaw 
Creek is now beginning to recede. Thunder Creek is expected to sustain a high flow for some time. There is 
a great deal of water in the upper reaches of Thunder Creek. Spring Creek has crested at 600 cubic feet per 
second and is down to 400. Spring Creek is unpredictable, I think this situation is thought to be in hand but I 
suppose no one is perfectly sure of Spring Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence I should like to say something about Lumsden but if I may leave it until 
after the visit of Their Excellencies, I think it might be more appropriate judging from the notes which are 
being passed on to me by the House Leader. So with your indulgence I will defer the statement until then. 
 
The House recessed in order that His Excellency Governor General Leger could address the Assembly. 
 

VISIT OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL 
JULES LEGER AND MME. LEGER 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Your Excellency, Mme. Leger, it gives us a great deal of pleasure on this occasion to 
be able to recess this Legislature for a short interval during our working Session, to be able to welcome Your 
Excellency and your good wife to the Legislative Building of the Province of Saskatchewan. I believe this is 
the first time that Saskatchewan has ever had the privilege and the pleasure of having His Honor the 
Governor General visit our Chamber. And I believe it is indeed a day which will go down in the pages of 
history within our province. I can assure you that we welcome you and your lady and your party to the 
province and as I said outside, we have additional swimming pools if anyone wants any they can have them 
for taking them away. But we do wish your stay here to be enjoyable and that your memories of the West 
will be pleasant. I don't know whether this is your first visit to the West or not, but if it is, I'm sure that it will 
be a memorable one for you. 
 
At this time I am going to call on the Premier to say a few words of welcome to your Excellency and your 
good wife. Mr. Premier Blakeney. 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, Your Excellencies. It is a rare honor that you bestow 
upon our House. I would like to echo the words of Mr. Speaker and welcome you and Madame Leger on this 
your first official visit to Saskatchewan and to this Legislative Assembly. I and my colleagues join with Mr. 
Speaker in expressing the hope that your visit to Saskatchewan will be a pleasant one. 
 
Not only is this a relatively rare occasion for us but also your visit brings, perhaps unfortunately, a relatively 
rare moment of harmony within these walls. By the very nature of our calling, politicians to the right of Mr. 
Speaker and to the left 



 
April 22, 1974 

2545 
 

of Mr. Speaker tend to accentuate the differences which divide us. Sometimes feelings run high, and on 
those occasions we appear to be adversaries. Sometimes we appear to be adversaries never to be reconciled. 
Indeed, that is some people's view of the political process. And I must say that we sometimes give 
justification for that view. This occasion, I think, makes it fitting for us to recall that, however spirited our 
debates may be, the forces which unite us are far stronger and far more lasting than those that divide us. 
 
You, Sir, and your office symbolize those forces of unity. You remind us that all of us on both sides of the 
House share a pride in being Canadians and that our loyalties extend beyond our constituencies, our Party 
and our province. They extend to Canada — and all of Canada — which we are so grateful to be able to call 
our homeland. 
 
You remind us too of the great traditions of the British Parliamentary system of the democratic process of 
which we are a part. A tradition which permits us to have a head of state removed from the cut and thrust 
and the controversy and the animosity of the party political arena. 
 
Your office, Sir, is the office of an encumbent who serves to represent those larger loyalties which we all 
acknowledge, but which we sometimes appear to forget. It is in this spirit which I wish to thank Your 
Excellencies for your visit here today. We look forward to the balance of your stay in Saskatchewan; we 
regret that we are not in the best position to entertain you; we look forward to an occasion when we offer a 
prospect of somewhat less water and somewhat more grass and vegetation. We look forward, in fact, to 
many future occasions when we hope that you will come out from Ottawa to the West, to this province and 
visit with, and I believe enjoy a growing association with, the province and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Thank you Premier Blakeney. I'm, sure all the Members of the Assembly join with you 
on your remarks to His Excellency, Mr. Leger and his good lady. 
 
At this time I should like to call on Mr. Cy MacDonald, the Member for Milestone, to speak on behalf of the 
Opposition. Mr. MacDonald. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Your Excellencies, I should like to associate myself and the 
Members of this side of the House with the remarks of the Premier. And in extending a very warm and 
sincere welcome, I point out like the Premier, that your arrival coincides with a moment of tragedy and 
triumph for the people of Saskatchewan. We assure you that the flood waters now moving so violently 
through much of our province, in no way dampens the warmth of our Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
To you, Sir, I want to point out that Saskatchewan like most of Canada is made up of people of many races, 
colors and creeds. But I want to point out also, Your Excellency, that many of our Saskatchewan 
communities have a strong ethnic background of your native tongue. I know that these people are justly 
proud of you and the manner in which you are carrying out your responsibilities. As a representative of Her 
Majesty we appreciate the strength and importance of your role as a 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2546 
 

unifying force in our country. Your position has always been recognized as a Canadian position. It is a vital 
link with our historic tradition of democratic government. Your personal reputation and prestige will add a 
great deal of stature to the office that you hold. 
 
To you and your good wife, we wish you a very warm and sincere welcome. I hope that your stay in the 
Province of Saskatchewan will be most pleasant and we look forward to many many such occasions in the 
future. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Thank you Mr. MacDonald. I am sure that all Members join with you on the sentiments 
that you have expressed on behalf of the Opposition to His Excellency on this occasion. 
 
Now, maybe His Excellency would like to reply and say a few words to the Members of the Legislature. So I 
shall call on His Excellency Governor General Leger to say a few words on this occasion. 
 
HIS EXCELLENCY JULES LEGER: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, Members of the Legislative 
Assembly. I consider it a great honor indeed and a privilege to be invited to the floor of this House where the 
political fortunes of Saskatchewan have been discussed for so many years. I am aware that you wish in this 
way to mark your attachment to the Crown, to our parliamentary system and to our country. 
 
For our part, my wife and I, are on a tour of the country which once finished will have taken us to all 
provincial capitals. We have already visited Quebec, St. John's, Victoria and Edmonton. We bring you 
greetings from the Premiers, the Legislators, the whole population of those provinces. 
 
Yesterday on our way here we flew over the flooded areas of the province. I know that I am the faithful 
interpreter of Her Majesty, the Queen, and of the whole country when I tell you how saddened we are by 
these disasters. But not withstanding the distances, the differences in racial origin, a strong feeling of 
community unites Canadians as is manifest in such periods of disaster. 
 
It is difficult to imagine today with so much water around that this land was once a desert which resulted 
from the prolonged drought of the thirties. Those who lived through that time showed courage and tenacity. 
This stubborn fight for survival against the hostile forces of nature allowed your province against many 
expectations to take up again and pursue its primary vocation. This struggle made you strong, determined 
men whose spirit of solidarity is matched only by your propensity for hard work. 
 
As early as 1905 one of my predecessors, Earl Grey, could observe here in Regina after the ceremony 
marking the launching of Saskatchewan as a province, the excellence on which the manhood, character and 
prosperity of a province so greatly, if not altogether, depend. Your capital, your city, your achievements 
testify that you lived up to this high standard. 
 
The intensity and the intimacy of your association with the earth around you, whether one of love or of fear, 
is an example to Canadians. More and more of us would in fact envy 



 
April 22, 1974 

2547 
 

this dialogue with the soil. This search for harmony with nature is being sought by those living in large cities 
— silence and solitude so necessary to the equilibrium are getting to be rare nowadays. Your claims enable 
you to appreciate through this unique combination of space, land and air the relationship of man and his 
world and possibly even God. 
 
In pursuing the vocation of agriculture you have fed, in addition to your fellow citizens a good part of the 
world's population and you have become a source of hope as well for the starving people. 
 
Haut de la dès considérations géographiques, politiques et économiques je mi'explique à votre contacte du 
developpement de votre pays comme étant le résultat de cette volonté de dépassement qui fut celle des vos 
ancêtres et des nôtres. Et come la somme des aptitudes diverses et du travail des différentes composantes de 
notre société, source de notre grandeur, de notre diversité a pourtant été souvent percue comme une force 
contribuée a l'interieur de notre vie nationale. Il est réconfortant maintenant et prometteur de constater qu' à 
mesure que ce multiplie les échanges entre les differéntes parties du pays ce sentiment c'est de la place a la 
conviction grandissante que cette diversité en fait l'une de nos plus grandes richesses. 
 
With faith one can move mountains but even with the faith of Canadians the Rockies could not be moved to 
Quebec, we could not catch cod in your rivers, nor make wheat grow in Labrador. That is what prompted the 
voyages of our explorers and remains the spring which drives our exchanges and our explorations in the 
Arctic, underground, and along our coasts. If the immensity of our land offers us the promises of great things 
to come it constitutes as well the real and permanent challenge to assure the harmonious development of our 
resources. We will have to show much prudence and wisdom, qualities made more and more necessary by 
the appearance of certain unforseen problems and difficulties of growth. We now speak of exhaustion of our 
natural resources, of pollution. Of insufficient good production, of industrial waste and over population. We 
ought to acknowledge that the economic development of our country is also increasingly linked with the 
evolution of world systems. We are privileged that we can count on sufficient resources to keep ourselves 
fed and housed and to produce a great variety of goods. Moreover within our own boundaries we can count 
on the great diversity of experience and skills. The complexity and the universal nature of contemporary 
economic problems require more than ever that we overcome our national egoism and co-operate willingly 
and industrially. We have demonstrated on many occasions that we have an original way to reconcile our 
divergent and even sometimes contrary interests. Because of our long and rich experience I have confidence 
that we shall be able to rise to the task which faces us, the harmonious development of our natural resources 
in the interest of all Canadians as well as in the interest of our partners abroad. 
 
It is quite natural that you strive to diversify your economy to protect yourselves against the changing moods 
of nature of which you now have a sad example, and against the fluctuating conditions of the international 
market of which you were victims so many times. You have been more than any other province beneficiaries 
and victims together of mechanization and automation. But you hold in your hand the destinies 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2548 
 

therefore not only of the people of this province but of millions of people abroad. It is not a light 
responsibility. 
 
May Providence, therefore, guide you in all your endeavors and my wife and myself thank you once more for 
the honor you have made to us this afternoon in inviting us in these Chambers. May I say that over the years 
now and then the temptation has been great for me more fully to join one or another of these assemblies but 
never have I done it until today and I am thankful. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Your Excellencies, on behalf of all the Members of the Legislature I wish to thank you 
for your kind remarks and the expressions which you have left with the Members of this Legislature. I think 
your visit here and your kind, warm words will mean a lot to the people of this province and I am sure that 
Saskatchewan looks forward to being able to renew the acquaintances with you again at a later day during 
your tenure in your office as Governor General of Canada. 
 
May I on behalf of all Members wish you that your stay in office will be pleasant and enjoyable and that you 
will be able to travel all parts of the country bringing the good wishes and the good will to other parts of 
Canada that you have done to us here in this Assembly today. On behalf of all the Members thank you and 
thank you Mme. Leger. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly resumed its proceedings. 
 

STATEMENT CONTINUED 
 

STATE OF FLOOD SITUATION IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to give an area by area report. I would, however, like to 
add comments on one other area and that is Lumsden. The river at Lumsden is still rising; the flow is now 
something over 13,500 cubic feet per second. It is expected to crest at possibly 15,000 cubic feet per second 
which would be six inches higher than it is currently. It will be above the safe level of the dykes for probably 
a week or more. It is believed that the dykes will now contain the flow in the sense that they are high enough. 
The concentration is now on sandbagging and reinforcing the potential weak spots. There is a vast amount of 
machinery and a vast number of people working at Lumsden. I would instance the Department of Highways; 
it has 65 trucks, 20 earthmovers, 20 front end loaders or bulldozers and something over 200 men there. The 
Public Service Commission has been sending public servant volunteers to Lumsden in shifts of 60 or 65, 
something over 200 have already been there. The roster is full until this evening. I don't know whether that 
has been extended beyond that or not. 
 
I think it would be useful at this time to add a word or two more about Lumsden because I think you'll know 
that several weeks ago the people in Lumsden were advised that they would face a flood in the Qu'Appelle 
far greater than anything they had ever seen before, far greater than anything in living memory. 



 
April 22, 1974 

2549 
 

There would be almost twice as much water in the river as there ever had been before in recorded history, 
and it seemed that the town of Lumsden was doomed. It seemed beyond human ingenuity to save it. All the 
predictions as to flood levels came true. The flood is even higher than twice the previous record that had 
been predicted and yet as I speak the town of Lumsden remains dry, safe behind miles of earth works as high 
as house tops. The river has, we believe, done its worst but it has not been enough to dampen the spirits of 
the people of Lumsden nor the hundreds of volunteers or construction workers who have been sweating 
night and day to hold back the deluge. The danger is not yet over; the river will rise even higher. No one can 
say, with confidence, that the town is safe. The people of Lumsden were told of the dangers so they moved 
their valued possessions to higher ground and having done that they rolled up their sleeves and went to work. 
The Provincial Government joined the fight. As I indicated, more than 100 pieces of heavy earthmoving 
equipment was brought in and men and volunteers came by the hundreds. The worked behind the dykes with 
the people of Lumsden. They worked around the clock; they worked and so far they have won. 
 
We knew that to save the town we would have to move a mountain and a mountain has been moved. We 
knew that men would have to perform feats of endurance beyond expectation, and the stories of these feats 
of personal endurance will be told for many years to come. The people of Saskatchewan can be proud of the 
way the flood waters in Lumsden have been held. Let us hope that the dykes will hold until the water reaches 
its peak perhaps tomorrow and until it recedes which will perhaps be another week. I have been there 
yesterday and the day before and I have seen the spirit of Lumsden has so far prevailed and seems ready and 
able to prevail in the future over the challenge which will be faced in the days ahead. And if this battle is 
won, as I hope and trust it will be, it will be an epic story in Saskatchewan's struggle against the elements, 
one more such story and one more very much to the credit of the citizens of Lumsden. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would beg the indulgence of the House to make a comment 
or two on the situation in Lumsden. We believe the figure given by the Premier of 13,500, I believe the flow 
right now could be approximately 14,000 which is well over double what the record highs were in the past. 
He talked about consideration of the fact that the town of Lumsden was doomed. There was one group of 
people that never believed that for a moment and that was the citizens of Lumsden. They are exhausted now 
but they are certainly not beaten and they are tired but they are certainly not ready to quit. If anyone can beat 
the waters of the Qu'Appelle and the rivers it is the people of the town of Lumsden. They are presently, as 
the Premier said, reinforcing and widening the dykes. It is kind of a strange situation to walk over dykes that 
are higher than the level of the school, above the roof tops of the school and the water is six inches on one 
side and the dykes 12 to 13 feet on the other and still being added to. The courage of the heavy equipment 
operators, as the dyke gets higher it gets narrower and they are driving this heavy equipment and they have 
got a foot on either side and they are nervous and you can't blame them. The courage of 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2550 
 

these people is to be commended. 
 
We talked about the tragedy of Moose Jaw and it certainly was. I think, and I am using the words very, very 
carefully, we have got a possible miracle in the town of Lumsden because they have fought, they have 
worked and it never entered their minds that the town was going to go and, as I say, they are exhausted, they 
are tired, they have been going at it for weeks. The dykes are at record heights. We hope they can get through 
the next 24 hours. If they do the town of Lumsden is going to be dry. The people deserve the credit, the 
volunteers deserve the credit and we can only hope for the best, but it looks pretty good right now. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT OF APPRECIATION 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank your 
office, Sir, and many of the Members of the House, particularly among my colleagues and specifically the 
Members of the Opposition caucus who sent greetings and consideration during my absence from the 
Session. I say, Mr. Speaker, it's good to be back although there is no indication that I am here to stay, 
although I hope that that is so. 
 
I want to say while I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the Member for Milestone (Mr. 
MacDonald) that on the Saturday before I left this Session I attended a provincial hockey meet down in 
Milestone where the Shellbrook Kinsmen were meeting in a playoff of the provincial finals in the Midget C. 
I was going to bring that information to the Member for Milestone so that he would be aware of that fact that 
Shellbrook Kinsmen Midget C hockey players again came up with a provincial championship. I only wanted 
to indicate that to show the Member for Milestone that we do play our hockey like we play our politics and 
that is to win. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with all Members of the House in 
welcoming the Minister back. I am sure that all of us always share the concern when a Member has an illness 
and is forced to leave the House and be hospitalized. The only thing I would have said, it's regrettable that he 
came back before his Estimates because we would hate to send him back. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

HOUSE SITTINGS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move seconded by the Premier 
(Mr. Blakeney): 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, commencing Tuesday, April 23, 1974 
meet at 10:00 o'clock a.m. each sitting day and there shall be a recess from 



 
April 22, 1974 

2551 
 

12:30 o'clock p.m. until 3:20 o'clock p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I believe this has been discussed with my colleagues opposite and in 
effect it means morning sittings starting tomorrow morning. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

WITHDRAWAL OF MOTION NO. 3 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to have leave to withdraw Motion No. 3. Just by way of 
explanation, I should then like to have leave of the Assembly to substitute for it a motion which calls on the 
House to sit Wednesday evenings only. The motion as it is presently worded calls for Wednesday evenings, 
Friday evening and Saturday and we wish to withdraw that for the time being and simply put in for the 
Wednesday, so may I have leave to withdraw Motion No. 3. 
 
Withdrawal agreed to. 
 

WEDNESDAY EVENING HOUSE SITTINGS 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, then by leave I should like to move, seconded by the Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney) by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That on Wednesday, April 24, 1974 and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, 
Rule 3(3) be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:00 p.m. 
until 9:30 o'clock p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Snyder that Bill No. 
80 — An Act to provide for Compensation for Workers for injuries sustained in the course of their 
Employment be now read a second time. 
 
MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in resuming debate on the Workmen's 
Compensation Bill, I wish to think back to a time only three years ago when the people of this province 
turned out the party opposite and placed their confidence in this New Democratic Party Government. One of 
the contributory factors to that victory was the promise made by Members that workmen would be supported 
by this Government in their fight for a fair deal in union negotiations, in Occupational Health and Safety 
legislation and a much more responsive attitude towards the whole area of protection of workmen in their 
place of work. 
 
One of the first official problems I faced as a new Member was a number of seriously neglected cases of past 
injuries which had not been fairly dealt with by the Workmen's Compensation Board and there is very little 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, since that department had been downgraded to a mere skeleton staff with a very 
limited budget. I am not blaming the members of the Board for their lack of consideration of claims brought 
to them but 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2552 
 

rather on the restrictions placed on them by the niggardly, inconsiderate Government which is now sitting 
opposite. 
 
A great deal of credit Mr. Speaker, must go to the present Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) for having 
immediately gone to work to improve the staffing and in taking a more humane approach to the entire field 
of Workmen's Compensation. Probably the most important immediate move by the Minister was the 
appointment of a more responsive Board and later the appointment of a Workmen's Advocate whose job it is 
to provide a second avenue of appeal for an injured workman if he feels he has not been properly dealt with 
by the Board. As a result many of the complaints we received were appealed and in those cases where 
adjustments were justified they were made. I know personally of a case of a man who lost an eye in an 
accident at IMC (International Mineral Corporation, Canada) and after hospitalization was paid a temporary 
disability pension for a few months and then cut off in spite of the fact that he was unable to return to his job. 
After two years of trying to obtain suitable employment he brought the case back and is now being paid a 
permanent partial disability which he should have had from the beginning. He will certainly appreciate the 
improvement brought about by this Government. 
 
Due to the rapid increase in the cost of living many of the benefits payable under the old formula have 
become eroded and the old rates were no longer realistic. The provisions in this Act providing a two per cent 
increase for all disability pensions now being paid for past accidents for each year that they have been in 
existence is a welcome step. Dependent widows will now receive $275 a month instead of $134 a month, an 
increase of over 100 per cent. Dependent children receive $65 rather than $52. Minimum pensions payable 
to permanent totally disabled workers will rise to $325 a month from $173, almost 100 per cent. Certainly 
these are desirable improvements and reflect the desire of this Government to provide a reasonable level of 
protection to injured workers. 
 
An item of particular interest to workers in my constituency relates to the coverage for industrial disease. 
Under the new Act payment for disability due to an industrial disease will receive the same compensation as 
would a worker who had sustained a disability due to an injury even though he was still able to earn full 
wages. Because of the high salt dust factor common to all potash mining operations the danger of 
impairment from this corrosive dust is always present and it would be surprising indeed if cases do not show 
up after some years of working in such conditions. This will be added protection for our workers at the mine. 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and yet much concerned over the fact that the Section relating to the inclusion 
date of farm and ranch workers under the provisions of The Workmen's Compensation Act have been 
withdrawn for the present not because I do not believe that there is an urgent need for such coverage because 
there is, but because I believe a great deal more study and publicity must be undertaken to convince farm 
operators of the serious position they could find themselves in by not being protected in cases where 
workmen are injured on their farm. A number of cases have recently come to light of some very large 
settlements being awarded to workmen, either killed or totally disabled, in farm accidents. Settlements of 
$50,000 to $70,000 are not uncommon and in some cases higher costs have been 



 
April 22, 1974 

2553 
 

assessed. To a farm operator without some form of insurance protection this could well mean the loss of his 
entire assets to pay the claim. 
 
Employees in all walks of life including farm laborers are now much more aware of the protection that they 
have in the courts through civil suits in case of severe injury. Where once the farmer could pay the hospital 
bill of an employee or maybe continue his wages for a few weeks while he was disabled now he often finds 
himself confronted with a civil action which could cripple him financially. A large number of private 
insurance plans are now available to protect farmers against liabilities in case of injury or death of workers. 
In almost all cases there are some exclusions and loopholes which can be extremely costly either to the 
worker or to the farmer depending on the legal interpretation made by the courts. For instance many plans 
will not cover back injuries or hernias although these may have been a direct result of an accident. In almost 
all cases legal action would have to be instigated to cover damages and the resultant court action could drag 
out for many months during which time the injured would not receive any payment. Most companies have a 
voluntary compensation package which can be purchased in addition to the regular liability policy. These are 
generally based on payroll and vary with the company. I should like to give a few examples. 
 
Company A provides the farm operator with personal coverage against accidental death or disability 
anywhere from $1,000 to $50,000 maximum. The rates vary from $1.75 per thousand and may go up 
consistently to $87.50 for $50,000, the coverage against accidental death. In addition dismemberment 
coverage of $1,000 can be purchased at $1.05 per thousand up to a maximum of $50,000. Wage protection 
can be purchased to a maximum of $50 per week for a maximum of 148 weeks for about $47, and an 
additional $15 can buy $100,000 of liability insurance. The cost of such a policy to a farmer for $10,000 
would be $17.50 for death benefits, $10.50 for dismemberment and at a $50 a week wage loss indemnity 
another $47, plus $15 for liability. A total of $100 for this basic protection for himself as a farmer. Having 
paid the above he can purchase protection for his paid labor at the rate of 50 cents per $100 payroll, which is 
low. Benefits, however, would be for deaths or dismemberment $3,000 which is again very insignificant; 
wage benefits of $30 per week for 126 weeks and $500 for medical expenses. 
 
Company B provides the basic employers with liability of $100,00 coverage for three years at $16.50 plus 
$1.35 per quarter section of land operated by the farmer, which recognizes the greater risk as land size 
increases. 
 
Employers are covered at $1.50 per hundred of payroll with a limited liability of $3,000 per injury. Benefits 
payable are $30 a week for 26 weeks, for total disability and 2/3 of wages not exceeding $30 per week. If 
death occurs as a result of the injury within six months $175 is paid for funeral expenses and dependents get 
$30 a week for 100 weeks, or just about two years. 
 
I simply record these two plans which are typical of almost all the plans now being offered to farmers as 
protection against liability. These plans would provide reasonable protection for the employers in case of 
short-term disabilities, but would prove totally inadequate should a long-term disability or death result from 
an injury. 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2554 
 

Rates under the Workmen's Compensation Plan would be somewhat higher than most of these private plans 
but are much more comprehensive in many important respects. 1. There will be no liability attached against 
the employer in any case under this plan. 2. Permanent total disability pensions of $325 per month for life 
with permanent partial disability pro-rated as to the degree of disability, also for life or until such 
circumstances change, as compared with $30 per month disability pension if under the private plan. 
 
In case of fatal accident a lump sum is paid for the funeral expenses plus a lump sum of $500 to the spouse, 
plus a monthly pension of $275 to the spouse until death or remarriage. All drugs and medical costs are 
covered. Industrial diseases could have some important implications for farm laborers because of dust, 
pollen or damage to hearing due to excessive noise. 
It can be seen from the examples given that the Workmen's Compensation package is much more 
comprehensive than the average private plan plus the fact that no legal liability is incurred by the employer. 
Benefits are paid as long as the effects of the injury exist even for life. Another benefit not normally 
provided under any private plan is the program to rehabilitate an injured worker after an accident. 
 
Under this provision the board may make whatever expenditure is necessary to lessen or remove any 
handicap due to injury. This kind of post-injury care is extremely important in severe injury cases. The value 
of these features to the employer is obvious, particularly in an occupation such as farming, which rates as the 
most hazardous occupation on most insurance ratings. 
 
At a time when competent farm help is extremely hard to find this added protection would certainly be an 
added attraction which could well determine whether competent help will be available to all in the near 
future. Most employees have now come to expect this kind of protection and will hesitate to work if it is not 
provided. It would appear to me that this will become one of the normal costs of farm operation in future 
farm budgeting. 
 
In order to reduce the paper work involved, in assessing costs under the plan, a simple form of procedure 
will have to be used. This could well follow the form now being used by businesses where an assessment is 
made on an estimated payroll at the beginning of the year and balanced with actual payroll at the year end. 
 
Because it is urgent, Mr. Speaker, and important that adequate protection be given to farm employees to 
bring them up to the same level with industries, I would urge all farm organizations to immediately begin a 
campaign of information to farmers and ranchers, advising them of the dangers of lack of protection and the 
benefits available to them by coming under the umbrella of The Workmen's Compensation Act. 
 
Such a familiarization program could well be a project for local Wheat Pool and United Grain Growers 
committees, Agriculture Societies and other farm groups. Before a need can be met it should be identified by 
the people involved. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) was critical of this Bill because it does not contain 
provisions for a 



 
April 22, 1974 

2555 
 

universal sickness and accident plan, which would cover employees on or off the job, as proposed in the 
Task Force Report. I certainly agree that this plan would be desirable, however, it would of necessity have a 
substantial price tag, and I question whether the cost of such a plan could be borne, even in part, by an 
employer except for that portion which reflects his time on the job. 
 
I am hopeful that this Government will see fit in the next year or two to propose such a plan to the 
Legislature. It will be very interesting at that time, Mr. Speaker, to see whether the Member for Moose Jaw 
North really supports such a plan or whether he reverts back to the normal Liberal stance of protecting the 
large insurance companies, against what they would call an encroachment on that industry. We will be 
watching with interest to see what his stand will be when the time comes. 
 
Since this Bill extends additional protection to the work force of this province, both through higher payments 
and wider application, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and happy to add my support to the Bill at this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the other day I said that I 
would have a couple more words about this and I won't take very long tonight in this House. As I made 
mention before I adjourned I said that the most serious deficiency in the Bill is that there is no .. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. If the Member is talking about having adjourned the 
debate on this matter I am wondering what he is doing now re-entering the debate. 
 
MR. GUY: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. Of course the Member was not in his seat the other day 
when it was called and the Minister of Agriculture should know by this time, he has been in the House a few 
years, that when a Member is out of the House he still has the opportunity to participate in the debate. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Yes, the Member for Moose Jaw North has the right to speak. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I did make a plea for escalator clauses to be attached to pensions as they were 
granted and I said that the pensions that we are granting now will quickly fall behind and we will soon be 
asked again, in this Legislature, to bring them up-to-date. 
 
I think there was wide representation for the escalator provisions and it was recommended by two Task 
Force Reports. It was also suggested that the Government should become involved financially with the 
financial cost of the escalator provisions. 
 
I want to say something about merit rating. I think there is a great deal of desire by many employers for some 
sort of merit system for those employers who have an exceptionally good 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2556 
 

safety record. Consideration should be given to the concept. There is provision for this concept but it is not 
being used. This is presently a method being used in other provinces. I understand that Alberta, for example, 
has a system whereby an employer with a good record is given a rebate. 
 
The Task Force Report recognized both advantages and disadvantages to using a system of merit rating. On 
the balance of advantage and disadvantage, the report recommended that a merit system not be instituted. 
The report also recommended against a demerit system used as a penalizing system. 
 
Bill 80 incorporates the penalizing demerit system but does not incorporate a merit system. The Report 
recognizes several disadvantages. 
 
It cites a resistance to recognize injuries and an over-enthusiasm to get people back to work quickly. It cites 
that employers may refuse to hire people considered to present a risk of injury. It also cites an example where 
an employer may have bad luck. There is also concern of administrative expense. However, on the positive 
side a merit system could be a real incentive for employers to expend moneys to reduce injury and accidents. 
This is something that is taken away from our system. The very nature of Workmen's Compensation takes 
the risk away from the employers. It makes them not liable for court action and so on. It really takes the 
incentive, in large part, away from the employer to spend sums of money to reduce injuries and accidents. 
 
Surely the reduction of accidents must be the first consideration. Getting financial protection to employees 
has to be secondary to the aspect of prevention of injury. We must remember that assessments to employers 
are a very significant cost to an employer. He may be paying four or five per cent or higher of his payroll to 
the Worker's Compensation Fund. On a construction site this could be a considerable amount of money. 
 
If a merit system were to be an incentive to provide extraordinary preventive measures with the employer 
knowing that he could get a rebate of assessments, this could possibly mean a large amount of money could 
be directed to accident prevention. We must remember that especially in a construction industry work 
obtained is obtained by competitive bidding, so that it could be a very important measure. 
 
Under the present system an employer is forced to bid as low as he can and then he must keep his costs as 
low as possible. There is little attempt to provide any more accident prevention techniques than are required 
by law, because of the financial position of the contractors. 
 
There is much to recommend the merit rating system. The Workmen's Compensation Board should give 
serious consideration to implementing this system. 
 
I should also like to suggest that because of the fact that we are not including an escalator clause for 
pensions, that a review of the Workmen's Compensation Act, in four years, or every four years, is not going 
to be good enough. With the rate of increase in the cost of living this Act will soon be outdated and I suggest 
that it should be reviewed in less than four years because of this. If the review was started in four years from 



 
April 22, 1974 

2557 
 

now, and it would take the best part of a year to report, and then action taken by the Legislature it could well 
be 1979. So in light of the rapid changes occurring in our society I feel that a review could be undertaken 
sooner than the four years as stated in the Act. 
 
The Workmen's Compensation Act requires that employers, through the fund, must pay for the medical and 
hospital bills of injured workers. Our universal health schemes are not universal in this province. All of the 
public are covered by MCIC and SHSP except the worker who is injured on the job and who is covered by 
Workmen's Compensation. If the worker is not covered by Workmen's Compensation then MCIC will pay. 
However, if a worker is covered by compensation then the employer must pay for medical expenses. There is 
really no logical reason for the Workmen's Compensation Board to be responsible for medical expenses. 
This is a carryover from the time before hospitalization and medicare and I would suggest that the 
Workmen's Compensation fund be relieved of paying for medical and hospital benefits. 
 
With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate that I will support this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I did not intend to make any remarks to this 
Bill but having heard the Hon. Member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) I felt that a few explanatory words might 
be in order. 
 
It does seem that the Hon. Members, as a matter of habit, tend to like to take a few swipes at some mythical 
position that they have established for the Liberal Party, even on a Bill such as this, which I think should 
receive the concentrated and, if possible, non-partisan attention of both sides of the House. 
 
Regrettably, the Member for Saltcoats had these remarks in his speech because otherwise he had obviously 
done some work on the subject and I think that if his basic thesis was that farmers should receive more 
information and hopefully with the result that they would find it advisable to participate in the program, if 
that was his basic thesis, then quite frankly, there is much to be said for his remarks. 
 
It was, however, the distortions in his speech that lead me to make a remark or two at this time. First of all I 
should like to make it clear to the Hon. Member that I continuously resent the suggestion that I am a 
protector of the large insurance companies because, in fact, I believe that governments at all levels have been 
duped by the insurance industry, first of all, in the number of things that are in the Insurance Act. Almost 
every Insurance Act contains a very joyful provision for the benefit of the insurance industry and I refer to 
that as the arbitration clause. Those people who support that clause in these Acts tend, not in very case, to be 
people who have either had no experience or virtually no experience with that type of clause. Those of us 
who have had experience with it recognize how fully and thoroughly it is to the advantage of the insurance 
industry and it is something which this Government has done 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2558 
 

nothing about, since 1971, something the Liberals did nothing about from 1964 to 1971; something that the 
CCF did nothing about from 1944 to 1964. 
 
The record of the CCF and the record of the Liberals in that respect is a tie for first place in supporting the 
best interests of the insurance industry. I am talking about the insurance industry insofar as it applies to fire, 
all forms, except life insurance. They tended, both Governments, tended to be in the pocket of the industry, 
perhaps because they didn't understand the business and in that case I don't think a lot of credit or discredit 
should be handed around by anybody on that side of the House or for that matter on this side of the House. 
 
Therefore, the remarks of the Hon. Member for Saltcoats, quite frankly reflect, despite his obvious industry 
for which I congratulate him, nonetheless a certain lack of information and clearly a lack of experience in 
this particular business. 
 
I should like to suggest as clearly as possible that if anybody has assisted the insurance industry the 
CCF-NDP have since 1944 supported them for more years than have Liberals and both take good credit in 
helping them out in their claims. 
 
I agree that farm workers today can suffer injury and they will either receive a lot of money, as a result of 
somebody's negligence, or they will receive none at all. I do agree with the Hon. Member for Saltcoats that 
the addition and the inclusion of farm people in this would probably overall be to the benefit of farm workers 
and in the long run, I think, of some benefit to farmers themselves. The problem, of course, is that there is an 
assessment to be made to the farmers and quite frankly, I am not sure that farmers like to be assessed by 
government any more than they have up until now. 
 
The only thing that I should like to mention is this, that when we are comparing plans it is clear, from my 
experience, that if you collect money you either collect all that you are entitled to or you don't collect 
anything at all. And if you don't collect anything at all then the public purse must support the individual 
involved. So if a man loses both arms by amputation, obviously if he can't go to work, the people of the 
Province of Saskatchewan are going to have to support him and consequently, Workmen's Compensation, 
through a considerable extent helps the public purse in the sense that people are kept off welfare payments. 
 
But let's take a look at The Automobile Insurance Act. I just did some quick calculations while the Hon. 
Members were speaking. I want to do this merely for the purpose of showing that all government plans tend 
to shaft the people they are supposed to benefit. 
 
Take a look at this. If A loses his arm somewhere up to the shoulder, he gets a maximum of $3,000, but if it's 
just below the elbow he gets a maximum of $1,600, and that is it. It doesn't matter what he does for a living. 
That is the maximum benefit that he can get. 
 
The fact of the matter is this, that government programs by and large are not much more generous than 
private programs. The only difference with the private programs is that you get what you pay for and you 
know it in advance; the public program 



 
April 22, 1974 

2559 
 

you get what you pay for but you don't have much choice in picking the level. 
 
Take a look at another one. If you lose your hand you are regarded as having a 40 per cent disability, you get 
$1,200. If you lose part of your hand, you get $60. Sixty dollars, that is not exactly a marvellous recovery. 
What I am suggesting is that by and large I agree with the Hon. Member's basic thesis and I am disappointed 
that he had to take a swipe at the Liberal Party because the fact of the matter is that the NDP have not exactly 
covered themselves with glory and to be honest there hasn't been a major improvement, not one major 
improvement to the Workmen's Compensation plans for 40 years. This period covers I believe a 
Conservative — the tail end of a Conservative government, the one and only one in the province — probably 
the only one we shall see in this century, and by the way in case the Hon. Member wonders about this, 
Workmen's Compensation was instituted as a Liberal program, not as a CCF program. I am sure that 
historically — I don't like to go back that far — the fact of the matter is that it is a Liberal program. The fact 
is also that both the CCF and the Liberals did virtually nothing to improve the program. I practised law from 
1954 to 1974 now. I have had the opportunity of practising law eight years under the CCF, seven years under 
the Liberals, and I want to tell you that there wasn't a great deal of difference in the administration. In both 
cases the officials were very sympathetic but limited by the amount of dollars they had and the legislation 
before them. That has continued to this day. 
 
I think that the Hon. Members would do well if they tried on occasion in the House to get their facts right 
before involving themselves in partisan politics. When you want to be partisan, be right. 
 
I am rather hoping that the Hon. Member — I want to congratulate the Hon. Minister of Labour for the 
activity that he has shown in this particular area. I am very pleased with it. Quite apart from the fact that the 
Hon. Minister is one of the two or three Ministers who promptly responds to correspondence from MLAs, a 
matter that I think on occasion should be commented upon, quite apart from that the Minister has shown 
some activity in this area which is long overdue. I congratulate him. I agree with the Hon. Member for 
Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald), there are many things that can be done. I agree with the Hon. Member 
for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding), we are not doing enough, but by golly it is more than has been done in about 35 
years. 
 
Therefore I support the Bill, but it doesn't go far enough. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a brief comment if I may 
with respect to the remarks of the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
He worried about the fact that an escalator clause hasn't been put in Workmen's Compensation benefits. I 
agree with him that an escalator is required in terms of cost of living. But I think you must agree that you 
take a reasonable amount of time to really assess the cost of an escalator. I am afraid that a 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2560 
 

lot of the Members in this House perhaps on both sides haven't really assessed that cost. I just did a bit of 
calculation here while I was listening to the long dissertation by the Member for Albert Park. I took an 
example of an individual who might have a disability pension of $400 and assumed that he was 65 years of 
age, that is a rather rash assumption because most people injured on jobs aren't 65 years of age when they are 
injured. If you increase that through an escalator clause of five per cent per year for ten years, the pension 
would then be up to $651.26 a month. And if you took the differential between the actual pension which is 
assumed has been paid for out of the rates currently applicable under the Workmen's Compensation 
Regulations, you would have to find another $28,913.20 to meet that one claim. 
 
Now that is on the assumption of a five per cent escalator clause. Suppose it was ten per cent per year as the 
rate of inflation is currently. That $400 pension in ten years would climb to $1,037.56 a month. And the cost 
of buying that pension would be in excess of $74,000 for one claimant alone. 
 
We better think fairly carefully in terms of setting up an escalator clause. I assure you that I favor it but it has 
to have a fair bit of study before it can be inaugurated. 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words in closing 
debate on second reading of Bill 80. I want first of all to express my gratitude to Members on both sides of 
the House for their vocal support of what I think is a very good piece of legislation. If my mail is any 
indication, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is virtually unanimous support for the changes that are to be found in 
this piece of legislation. I do feel obliged, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I want to comment very briefly on the 
remarks made by the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) when he spoke on this debate 
some time earlier and when he resumed debate today. 
 
He reactivated the argument with respect to merit rating and I suppose I shall be repeating myself if I bring 
forward some of the arguments that have already been offered in this House. I think it is a well established 
fact that the provisions that the Hon. Member suggests, the merit rating provisions, are provided for in the 
present legislation and in the legislation that is being contemplated. 
 
There are a number of features which I think cause the board to use the merit rating system judiciously, 
basically because experience has indicated that where a merit rating system has been used, there is a 
tendency for some employers to fail to report injuries in order to keep their accident ratio in good proportion 
and accordingly the board has shown some reluctance to use a widespread merit rating system. Also the 
board points out to us some of the very difficult administrative problems which arise with a merit rating 
system in light of the fact that it is necessary to keep track of individual employers for a merit rating system 
and accordingly in other jurisdictions where a merit rating system is used it is generally only applicable to 
the larger employers because it creates such a giant administrative problem. So the merit rating system in 
effect is discriminatory against the smaller employers. 



 
April 22, 1974 

2561 
 

In addition to this the Member for Moose Jaw North drew attention to the fact that he believed that medical 
costs, I believe in his words, should be borne out of the public purse and that medical costs that are 
traditionally the responsibility of employers should now become the responsibility of the public purse. 
 
I should say that we have looked at this matter and I believe most other jurisdictions regard medical costs as 
a legitimate responsibility in connection with an accident that has taken place in an industrial setting. I 
should remind him too that the provincial purse is contributing under the terms and conditions of this Bill, 
some $6.5 million. Provision is being made for a total of $6.5 million. I think at a time when the generosity 
of the public purse has been extended to that point I wouldn't think we would be considering at least at the 
moment, the relief of employers of the additional costs for medical care, which I said earlier, has been a 
traditional responsibility of employers. 
 
I find it rather significant, Mr. Speaker, that Liberals left it to a Member who was not part of the previous 
Liberal Government to express whatever dissatisfaction or whatever criticism could be marshalled about Bill 
80. The Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) join in half-heartedly, I thought. It seemed to be something 
of an afterthought and actually contributed very little at this point. But I think this shows that Liberals realize 
that for any Member of the previous government to rise in their place with words of criticism about this Bill 
would be totally unconscionable. 
 
During the infamous seven lean years, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal government did so little about Workmen's 
Compensation, that the sum total of the changes made during that period amount to basically nothing. As a 
matter of fact I found it rather amusing to hear the Member for Moose Jaw North quoting from the 
Murchison Committee of 1968. 
 
The Murchison Committee Report wasn't really nearly as extensive as the Task Force Report on Workmen's 
Compensation. It actually proposed very little in the way of meaningful change and yet even though those 
few things that the Murchison Report did recommend were almost totally ignored by the Members opposite 
when they made up the government. 
 
The Murchison Report recommends, for example, that a worker's counsellor be established to aid and assist 
injured workmen in presenting their cases before the Workmen's Compensation Board. It wasn't until 1971 
when we formed the Government that the legislation was enacted to provide for a workmen's advocate much 
on the same basis as what was recommended in the 1968 Murchison Report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious that no one opposite who was a Member of the government between 1964 
and 1971 had the courage to rise in their place and offer objections or observations concerning Workmen's 
Compensation in this Legislature. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North expressed some concern during his remarks about the fact that changes to 
the legislation were brought about in this House in the form of a new Act, a new piece of legislation. He 
seemed to be concerned that this 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2562 
 

was an indication that we weren't seriously considering other amendments. 
 
I should like to point out to him that even if the only change that we had made to the Act was to change the 
word 'Workmen' to 'Worker' wherever it appeared, it would have meant that practically every section of the 
Act would have had to be amended in order to accommodate this very minor wording change. The simple 
fact of the matter is that the amendments that we introduced meant that almost every section of the Act was 
changed if only by a minor wording change and that made amending the existing Act completely impractical. 
 
There was no more obscure motive than that behind the introduction of a new Act when Bill 80 was brought 
forward. It cannot in any sense be taken to mean that we are completely satisfied with the Act as it is and that 
we do not intend to introduce further amendments in the foreseeable future. 
 
The Hon. Member referred to the universal Sick and Accident Scheme which was recommended by the Task 
Force also, Mr. Speaker. I would want to say at this point that I am very much in sympathy with the idea 
expressed by the Task Force and I would not disagree with the Member on this particular point. However, I 
should like to make a point also, a point that perhaps should be obvious that to implement such a plan would 
be a very major undertaking and could not be embarked upon in any kind of good conscience without a most 
thorough advance study and preparation. 
 
We have been closely watching the developments of such a scheme in New Zealand where they were several 
years between the initial recommendation which gave rise to that scheme and its actual implementation on 
April 1, 1974, less than a month ago. 
 
The Department of Labour has been actively researching this idea and has taken an initial look at some of the 
options involved and some of the questions that will have to be answered before any further action can be 
taken on the idea. I will give Members of the House my personal assurance that I have no intention of letting 
this recommendation lie dormant and I intend to pursue very actively the possibilities for introducing a 
scheme into this province. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North, I think believes or attempts to judge the motives of our Government by 
the do-nothing performance of his own colleagues when they were in a position of authority between 1964 
and 1971. Let me assure all Members of this House that we won't be content to sit on our hands and refuse to 
consider new programs and new ideas as Liberals did for seven long depressing years. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North also referred to the Task Force recommendation that suggested 
compensation should be payable under two headings; loss of bodily function and income maintenance. I 
should like to inform the House that the first draft of the amendment to the Act did contain a section which 
would have attempted to accomplish the dual heading system of compensation. However, the Workmen's 
Compensation Board quite rightly pointed out to us some of the administrative problems inherent in the 
sections which were in the first draft of the Bill. 
 
Members of my staff and the Workmen's Compensation Board spent several hours wrestling with the 
concept and we finally 



 
April 22, 1974 

2563 
 

came to the reluctant conclusion that we couldn't proceed with such a section at this time. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, the key to present difficulties with the idea is the concept of income maintenance. If we can find a 
method whereby the Board can compensate disabled workers for their actual income loss without at the same 
time putting the Board in a position where it must keep day to day, or at least week by week track of the 
incomes of disabled workers, then we shall be well on the way to implementing that particular proposal. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North also commented on the fact that the legislation presently before the 
House does not contain a future escalator clause and he repeated that suggestion today. I should like to quote 
from my remarks when I opened debate on second reading. I said and I quote: 
 

We have not lost sight of that recommendation. We are continuing to give the matter the 
most serious study in an attempt to find the appropriate mechanism by which this can be 
accomplished. 

 
Those are not just empty words, Mr. Speaker, it is the truth of the matter and it is under serious consideration 
by the Government. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North also mentioned in passing the fact that teachers had not been included 
under the new Act. I should like to say that wherever the Department of Labour has considered changes in 
legislation we have made a determined effort to consult in advance those groups who are most directly 
concerned with the legislative change which we contemplate. For example, when the Workmen's 
Compensation Board regulations were changed to bring in several new groups under compulsory coverage, 
we made a determined effort to speak to those groups, to locate them, to have them make representation to 
us in each of the areas involved and we carried on discussions with them about the matter prior to the 
regulation change being implemented. 
 
In the case of school teachers, my Deputy Minister and his assistants met with representatives of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation to discuss the possibility of bringing teachers under the Act and it was 
determined that teachers have, through their collective agreements, negotiated a very complex series of 
private forms of coverage where disability coverage relates to the pension plan and the sickness benefits 
relate to the disability coverage and so on. Bringing teachers under Workmen's Compensation would have 
affected a whole number of things outside the realm or outside the scope of the Workmen's Compensation 
Board. So on that basis it was the feeling of the representatives of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation in 
which we concurred that at this point teachers should not be brought within the compulsory coverage of 
Workmen's Compensation. 
 
The Member also mentioned rehabilitation, and while I would not pretend to claim that we meet all of the 
objectives of the Task Force a beginning has been made. The sum of $169,000 has been set aside in the 
Budget of the Department of Health to provide for the capital costs, for the equipment and the facilities of a 
'work conditioning and assessment' unit at the Wascana Hospital. This project is only in its planning stages 
and I understand hospital personnel are examining facilities in Edmonton and in Vancouver before 
proceeding further. The 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2564 
 

Workmen's Compensation Board will have an input into the development of this facility and it is clear that 
some steps have already been made. 
 
I should like to point out that when we do deal with the Task Force recommendation on Rehabilitation it will 
not necessarily be by way of legislation. At this stage it does not appear that any of the recommendations of 
the Task Force on Rehabilitation will require legislative changes to implement. Those changes can be 
accomplished by way of administrative procedures either through the Workmen's Compensation Board or 
through the administration of various agencies or departments of government. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, acknowledging the fact that continuing attention must be paid to the plight of 
injured workers and recognizing that changing circumstances will require regular assessment, I think that it 
should be observed that Saskatchewan, with the passage of this Bill will assume again the pre-eminent 
position which it enjoyed a decade ago with respect to Workmen's Compensation. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am particularly pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that Bill 
No. 98 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Universities Commission be now read a second time. 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should like to address some 
comments to this Bill and I trust if I lapse somewhat into discussion of Bill 99 and 100 we will not be too 
strict inasmuch as all three constitute a package. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the first point I wish to make is to congratulate the Government, that finally we 
have passed the psychological barrier and have recognized the reality of there being two institutions of 
higher learning in the province and that we are over and done with the various games of two campuses, one 
university formulas which were so dear to the heart of President Spinks of the University. I think that it is a 
psychological advance of some importance and I am pleased that we have come to recognize that we have in 
the province, imperfect as they may be, two institutions which have evolved in different directions. 
 
In Saskatoon we have the more orthodox institution with emphasis on professional schools, natural sciences, 
the institution which has done the bulk of the graduate work and doubtless will continue to do so in the 
future. 
 
In Regina we have the emphasis on under-graduate teaching, oriented towards social science, humanities and 
fine arts. In many ways those two institutions can and should complement one another, provided appropriate 
rationalization occurs. I shall return, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this word rationalization. It is 



 
April 22, 1974 

2565 
 

a word I am afraid we have too much as a simple concept to define what we want to do without over 
defining the word. Nonetheless we do have these two institutions which have gone in their different 
directions. I suppose at this juncture there could be nothing finer than to quote into the record some of the 
statements by Woodrow Lloyd at the time of laying the foundation stone for the Regina campus back in 
1963, in which he stated in a speech of some impact, some import, what were his hopes for Regina campus 
in particular: 
 

We in Saskatchewan have here an opportunity, if our need had just been more classrooms 
and laboratories this might well have been achieved elsewhere with greater case and good 
effect. But something different can be done here. Different and worthwhile and needed. So 
let me express the hope that this will not be just a small sale model of that which has been 
done on the Saskatoon campus. A university must, of course, serve its students in helping 
them to find the way to be disciplined and informed and I hope sensitive minds. But the great 
tradition of universities being, which I sometimes am afraid we lose, is it ought to be on the 
cutting edge and not merely observing from a safe distance the scene which has passed by. It 
and its graduates will do this only if it is properly immersed in the lives of those who make it 
possible. 

 
Let me express the hope that those of that future date satisfy their curiosity of what we really 
did, will know because of history that the best hopes of Saskatchewan people were advanced 
by the fact of this institution. 

 
Glowing words, Mr. Speaker, many of them not to date fulfilled, nonetheless, I hope that these three Bills 
constitute a new beginning in the most unhappy state of university administration which has characterized 
the University of Saskatchewan for the last decade. 
 
I want, in particular, to address myself to two issues. The role of the proposed university commission and the 
question of engineering. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two basic functions which the commission can play. That of the advocate, that 
of the judge to use the legal analogies. Either the commission can serve an as advocate of what the university 
wants in presenting and being a facilitator of presenting university demands to government, or it can have 
executive authority and judge upon the merits of various demands which come to it. 
 
One of the problems with the previous structures which we've had is that everybody wanted to be the 
advocate, nobody wanted to be the judge. The department made recommendations to the departments within 
each individual college, then made recommendations to the college. The college made recommendations to 
the principal; the principal made recommendations to the Finance and Personnel Committee of the Board of 
Governors; the Board of Governors advocated these recommendations to the Government. So we have the 
department advocating to the college, the college advocating to the principal, the principal advocating to the 
F and P Committee and the F and P Committee advocating to the Board and the Board to the Government. 
Somewhere along that line decisions got made with respect to budgets, with respect to 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2566 
 

staff and the decisions come back down the other way and everybody said, I didn't make the decision, 
somebody else up there made it. All I did was argue your case. So a department which found that a 
particularly cherished program didn't get approved, learned from the Dean of the College, I argued your case, 
but somebody in the principal's office didn't do a very good job; and you went to the principal and the 
principal said the Board of Governors weren't in favor of it; and the Board of Governors said we didn't have 
anything to do with it. This was the Government's fault. 
 
Now, the question obviously has to be asked, has this Bill settled the issue, as to what extent the 
Commission will be judge, with respect to the various questions which will come before it or to what extent 
will it continue to be advocate, merely a facilitator, passing on the question, buck-passing if you like, further 
along the line. I trust that the Commission will have a great deal of authority and will exercise its powers. 
Obviously, you can't interpret how, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and no amount of legislation or 
descriptions in legislation is going to determine precisely what happens when the actual thing is in operation. 
 
For example, if you read Clause 6(d) the powers of the Commission; the Commission can receive, allocate 
and distribute capital and operating funds and any other money allocated by the Government for the purpose 
of the institutions. The implication from (d) and from (e), and I shall read (e), 'subject to the terms of any 
trust upon which it may be held it may divide between the institutions as the Commission sees fit.' Section 
(d) and (e) imply that the Commission has the authority to be judge with respect to many of the crucial 
questions of which one of the most crucial obviously is the question of the division of funds as between the 
two campuses. 
 
However, if you read Clause (c) the responsibility is to receive, review and rationalize the budgets which 
could imply that the role of the Commission is merely to receive, review and pass them on. Likewise if one 
reads Clause (b), it implies that the responsibility is to inquire into financial requirements of the institution 
and advise the Minister of the sums of money required. There will remain the question, and I submit that it 
has not been satisfied to date, to what extent is the Commission going to be making decisions or to what 
extent will it continue to play the role of the Board of Governors, as advocate of what lower echelons of the 
university want. 
 
I'm not asking that there be any finer writing of this in the legislation. I would prefer there to have been no 
Commission which would have clarified the responsibility of the Department of Continuing Education in 
many of these areas. Nonetheless we can hope and pray that we will get out of this legislation some firm 
decision making from the Government with respect to matters which lie within its domain. 
 
I must note with some concern Section 6(o) which states that the Commission can delegate to the institutions 
any of the powers conferred upon it by this Act, which would seem to be something of a loophole clause, 
which means we may be back, God knows where. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this juncture I think it's appropriate to turn to this contentious word, well, not a 



 
April 22, 1974 

2567 
 

contentious word, but this magic word, which appears throughout the legislation, the word 'rationalization'. I 
refer to it in Clause 6(c) that the commission may receive, review and rationalize the budget. In 6(m)(ii) it 
states that the Commission shall establish committees, for example, there should be a program co-ordinating 
committee, the purpose of which is to advise the Commission on all matters relating to the rationalization of 
undergraduate programs. And in the following clause it talks about rationalizing programs and other matters 
having to do with post-graduate programs. 
 
Throughout the legislation there occur references to the Commission's responsibility to rationalize. It is 
almost as if there does exist somewhere this platonic ideal of the rationalized university, which somehow we 
shall strive towards in Saskatchewan. So be it, being human we shall fail. There is no platonic ideal 
university, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There exist bricks and stones and people and conflicts and fights and 
political decisions to be made. There also exist academic decisions which should not be the purview of the 
Government. But there is no magic rationalized ideal. And to take one very concrete example, we cannot 
solve the dilemma of the engineering college by the search for the rationalized, ideal, platonic engineering 
decision. Plato cannot tell us about how to resolve the engineering dilemma. We, the Government as 
politicians will have to make a tough decision. I personally think that the right decision is that all engineering 
should be concentrated in Saskatoon and the Regina faculty closed out. I think that engineering in Regina 
conflicts with the primary purpose of the Regina campus as outlined by Woodrow Lloyd in the laying of the 
foundation in 1963. Nonetheless that is not my decision to make. Neither is it a decision of each of the 
individual campuses. I hope that the Commission will grasp firmly this nettle and will make decision. I think 
we have seen in going through the various inabilities of the Board of Governors to decide on this issue, the 
result being the formulation of the Lapp Commission, which provided an excellent report and with whose 
recommendations I agree. That was not acted upon and the Board of Governors continued to recommend the 
continuation of two years of undergraduate training in engineering in Regina. And now we've got the Hall 
Commission, which comes back and recommends a reversal of the Lapp recommendations. We don't have a 
rationalized decision, we don't have any decision. And I'm afraid no amount of rhetoric, referring to 
rationalization in this Bill is going to solve that problem. I only hope that the University Commission will 
see fit to make a decision shortly, quickly and neatly. 
 
A final comment, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill, before I take my seat. I have additional comments about which I 
should like to make on Bills 99 and 100. I trust to as great an extent as possible we will follow the Wilsonian 
doctrine of, 'open decisions, openly arrived at." In particular, with respect to major programmatic decisions, 
such as to what extent we should have new programs, engineering being an example. In most of these kinds 
of decisions by the Board, there is no reason why these should not be open to the student body, the faculty 
and the general public who may be interested in the administration of the university. With that, Mr. Speaker, 
I will support the principle of this Bill, Bill 98, an Act respecting the Saskatchewan Universities 
Commission. 
 
MR. H.E. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before we call the vote on this Bill, I 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2568 
 

would just like to record my opposition to the Bill in that I don't think the Bill would really be necessary if 
we continued with the one university concept in Saskatchewan. It should really follow Bill 99 instead of 
preceding it because if it was possible to defeat Bill 99, this one would not be necessary. 
 
I oppose the two universities in Saskatchewan, because I don't think the population in Saskatchewan 
warrants it and with the declining population I feel sure that the university in Saskatoon can look after the 
educational needs of our young people in Saskatchewan at this time. You know, I get a little tired of the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina fighting over who is going to get the most for their cities, I think this is what 
it amounts to in a lot of cases. A lot of these decisions are made because of political rather than because of 
economic factors and for this reason I'm opposed to the next Bill which will create two universities in 
Saskatchewan and therefore I have to oppose this one too. 
 
MR. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that I can't share the enthusiasm that the Member 
for Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) showed a few minutes earlier for this Bill, in fact, the three Bills, 
setting up two separate universities in Saskatchewan. Like my colleague from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) 
I am opposed to the principle of two separate universities. I think that 1974 will go down as the year that the 
NDP destroyed the University of Saskatchewan and its good reputation in educational circles throughout the 
North American continent. 
 
In 1973 they tried to destroy the university, but thanks to the university faculty and students and the people 
of Saskatchewan and the Liberal Party they were staved off for one year, but unfortunately it was only 
survival for one more year until the NDP through other devious means have now seen fit to desecrate and 
destroy the University of Saskatchewan as it's been recognized throughout the North American continent. 
 
Saskatchewan has always been noted for a high standard in their university, high standard of faculty, high 
standard of curriculum, high standard of graduate studies and a high standard of graduates who come out of 
the university. And even after the Regina Campus was started there was still hope that the University of 
Saskatchewan would maintain those high standards. True enough, the Regina Campus being new had to go 
through some growing pains and it was hoped that the stability of the University of Saskatchewan as such 
would raise the standards of Regina Campus, rather than see the standards of the University brought down to 
the standards of a new campus. This was happening if the NDP Government would have left them alone. 
The standards at the University of Regina Campus were being raised as each passing year went by. 
 
There was concern, of course, when Regina Campus was started that the University of Saskatchewan, the 
curriculum and the faculty would be watered down, but the hope remained that the Board of Governors and 
the Senate would, as I say, bring the new campus, the fledgling campus, up to the standards of the original 
university and it appeared that this was being done. But this hope is now gone. We have two separate 
universities. There is no strong co-ordinating agency to make sure that there is no overlapping and to make 
sure that the standards of both will be maintained. They are now both free to go their own way. 



 
April 22, 1974 

2569 
 

They will both be weaker rather than stronger. There will be a deterioration in the faculty and staff; the 
curriculum will be watered down; there will be overlapping — unnecessary overlapping, jealousies will 
arise. In fact, I suspect that jealousy is behind most of the desire of Regina to have a separate university. Of 
course, conflicts are sure to develop between the two universities in a province where the population is 
decreasing, as my colleague from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) pointed out. There is no need and there is 
no way that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan can support two universities with the standards and at the level in 
which the University of Saskatchewan has made its mark. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan, as it is known by the people of Saskatchewan, has gone as a result of the 
NDP probably playing politics for the benefit of the Regina campus and the Regina Members. I can really 
see no other reason than that for creating two universities at this time. 
 
You know we have always been proud of the University of Saskatchewan. The administration, the faculty, 
the students, we have always been proud of the standards that have been set by the university; we have been 
proud of the way that the business and the professional communities have welcomed graduates from the 
University of Saskatchewan. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this will no longer be the case. Students will no 
longer be sure when they graduate from either the University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina 
that they will be welcomed with the same feeling that they are coming from a single university that has as 
high a standard as any in Canada, in fact, any in the North American continent. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That's nonsense and you know it. 
 
MR. GUY: — Yes, and I notice that the Members for Saskatoon have been very silent and I was expecting 
some of them to have the courage to stand up and be counted in regard to their university in Saskatoon and 
they are not. They are prepared to let this Bill go through and they sit there just as a wet sop to the Members 
from Regina. The Minister of Health has got the young backbencher from Saskatoon, cowed to the point 
where he won't even stand up and defend his university. He has been bulldozed into it. No, Mr. Speaker, I 
tell you if there has been one disservice done to the people of Saskatchewan during 1974, it has been the 
destruction of the University of Saskatchewan by this Government. No longer will students from all walks of 
life who will go through these hallowed halls of this University, be able to go out and make a living with the 
knowledge that they have come from a university whose standards have been recognized throughout the 
world. 
 
This is why, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support these particular Bills, 98, 99 nor 100, which is destroying the very 
fabric upon which the University of Saskatchewan has been built. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I may well have a remark or two 
about this and subsequent Bills and I beg leave to adjourn 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2570 
 

the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy (Minister 
of Education) that Bill No. 99 — An Act respecting the University of Regina be now read a second time. 
 
MR. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, just a word in support of Bill No. 99. 
 
I think those who misunderstand the real issue read politics into natural advances. You know distortion was 
met and discounted by the Hall Commission and I commend them for it. I leave the decision to these wise, 
objective and learned commissioners. I don't see anyone on the Opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, who 
compares with them in intelligence or good logical reasoning, yes, or even good looks. I understand the sort 
of Liberal trouble-making that is brewing over there. But I think that this Bill will (1), expand the 
educational opportunities that are available for the young people of this province; and (2), it will involve 
more people in the administration of education; (3) it will bring the University much closer to the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first consideration of any legislation such as this, which we write, should be what services it 
will provide and what standard of education will be made available to the young people of our province. In 
my estimation the separate university on this campus, by its concentrated nature, will make available a wider 
variety of subjects, more special application in the type of subjects that are needed. The operation of a 
separate university, I predict, will eventually provide educational opportunities not only for the student 
graduating from Grade Twelve but for the adult student as well. 
 
In every respect increased educational opportunities for southern Saskatchewan are advantageous, and they 
are needed; not rivalry between universities, but the welfare of students is the real issue, so that the 
educational opportunities will increase, will be sharpened and will be more effective. 
 
With a separate Board of Governors, with its own administration, its own Senate, there will be a stepped-up 
interest in the University of Regina. The day will come, I hope, when the new senate for this university will 
hold within its ranks, a wide representation in areas across the rural and urban areas of southern 
Saskatchewan, so that the ingenious, imaginative guidance of southern Saskatchewan people will be utilized 
to the full. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the cost of education increasing it will require the most representative people we can find 
to make up the Board of Governors and the Senate, in order to put at the disposal of a wide cross-section of 
Saskatchewan students an academic program that meets the needs of the province. 
 
With the prospect of investment in the huge steel complex in the province, the educational program of our 
province changes from day to day. Even the location of such a complex will dictate, to some degree, the type 
of educational endeavor that 



 
April 22, 1974 

2571 
 

will take place at the University of Regina. 
 
Autonomy of operation for the University of Regina, with involvement of new people on the Board of 
Governors and the Senate, will bring the University of Regina close to the community of southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is as it should be. This University in no way should be distinct and separate from the rest of the 
province. Its organization came about after much thought; after much public discussion; following the 
recommendations of a commission competent and thoroughly knowledgeable, dedicated to the best academic 
interest of Saskatchewan. 
 
Organization presents a challenge to the people of Regina, to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it 
also presents an opportunity to expand and make available better educational opportunities to the student; a 
chance to involve more of our people in the University itself and finally, by so doing, by accomplishing these 
two objectives, to bring the university, with its advantages, much closer to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion, for it opens the door on new opportunities for education in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, during your absence I spoke on Bill 98 
with respect to the University Commission and I should like now to address a few remarks specifically to the 
Bill concerning the internal structure of the universities. The remarks I will make I think are equally 
applicable to both Bill 99 and Bill 100. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should first like to preface any remarks by stating that I think there are very severe limits to 
what structural changes can accomplish. I don't in any sense, have a view that if we can write the perfect 
legislation, to refer back to remarks I made with respect to Bill 98, if we can arrive at the platonic structure 
of the ideal internal working of the university, that thereby we will have the perfect university, that is 
obviously a chimera. Nonetheless it is probably valuable to concern oneself with structures of universities as 
indicating the ideal, the goals, the directions in which one wants to move. 
 
Let me first refer to the Senate. I can dismiss, I hope, my concerns about the Senate very quickly. I think the 
Senate is a useless appendix to the university and should be struck out in order to effect, as all of us so much 
want, a simplification and rationalization in university structures. I have yet to find anybody who can tell so 
precisely what the senate usefully does besides occasionally meeting, providing appropriate appointments for 
a few people. 
 
With respect to the Board of Governors, the Board of Governors is constituted on page 16 and 17 of the Act, 
Section 56 referring to Bill 99 and provides for, in Section E and F, one student, one faculty member 
respectively. I think that this structure of the Board of Governors risks posing, again, all the problems of a 
Board of Governors dominated by political appointees of whatever government is in power, who may or may 
not be particularly knowledgeable with respect to the universities. 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2572 
 

It is no new idea, I am plagiarizing it blatantly from the ideas which circulated in the Regina Campus, but I 
think the concept of the tripartite structure for the Board of Governors is an excellent one. Tripartite is a 
sense that one third would be public representatives appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council; one 
third faculty representatives elected by the members of the faulty of the university institution in question; one 
third students elected, I would argue by senior students, third year and above. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the advantages of this structural format are many. When you arrive at an institution of 
5,000 as in the case in Regina, 10,000 as in the case in Saskatoon, when it is a very large institution one 
could only, I would say, get the input of all the people involved in the institutions if there are mechanisms 
whereby all of them can easily have access to it. I think the faculty, as much as the students, have by and 
large been excluded from real decision-making at the level of the Board of Governors. 
 
It would not be in any way difficult to arrange for the appropriate length of time, length of term, the faculty 
could elect a certain number — one third of the members of the Board of Governors, as with the students. 
There are objections on the grounds that one of the decisions being made could refer to faculty salaries, 
student tuition rates. Nonetheless if the commission has the power and the strength it is supposed to have 
according to the contentions of the Minister of Continuing Education, these matters should be able to be 
dealt with. 
 
To come down to the Department level, I would argue that with qualifications, parity is the right ideal to 
have in the formulation of committees within departments. 
 
I can refer to failures and to successes. I think maybe at this juncture it is more useful to cite some successes 
of where students have played major responsible roles in delicate decisions involving good academic 
judgment. One of the examples, ironically, comes from what one might expect to be one of the most 
conservative of faculties, the College of Medicine in Saskatoon. 
 
On the Admission Committee for the College of Medicine, students play a key role in determining who 
should actually be admitted to this professional college. The Biology Department in Saskatoon has long had 
an enviable record of involving students up to and including the level of parity on its major committees 
within that department. 
 
Obviously that is not an unambiguous nor simple success story. If we refer back to the recent Caldwell 
Report, and the full title of it is I am afraid a typical indication about the state of internal university 
administration. The Report is entitled, "Report to the Saskatoon Council of the Special Committee to Review 
the Progress of Implementation of the Report of the Council Committee on Student Participation." That is a 
mouthful, Mr. Speaker, but it means that it is a committee to study the report of another committee and to 
see whether anything has happened in the other committee and this report has gathered about as much dust 
as the original committee report. 
 
Nonetheless I should like to read a passage which illuminates to me what I think is the most unenviable 
reactionary 



 
April 22, 1974 

2573 
 

attitude which I am afraid characterizes a certain percentage of the faculty and the senior administration and I 
suspect also, government people dealing with university affairs, with respect to the students. I quote: 
 

If we draw the line (the faculty) anywhere short of student participation in parity and 
completely open decision-making in all things there are people who will press by one means 
or another, by physical disruption if need be, as the occasion arise, or as they can be created 
to achieve their total literally totalitarian objectives. Their beliefs like those totalitarians are 
religious in as much they can only be confirmed, never refuted by events. 

 
Whatever happens is never due to excitement but always to the system. Violence is never due 
to their provocation but always to the authorities it resists. We are condemned as much for 
discriminating against such people on the grounds of mere belief, as for extending to them 
what they themselves will dismiss as repressive tolerance. It is their slogans and tactics 
which induce others far more numerous than themselves, together with a few louts who can 
now get away with murder, by cloaking their behavior in ideological terms to demand that 
the universities be organized internally and align externally so as to become micro-causes of 
some kind of political democracy. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that you can appreciate the flavor of that medieval rhetoric, the fine words like louts 
included here, the totalitarianism, students who are concerned with parity or linked with totalitarianism; their 
ideas considered to be religious in a negative sense. That kind of metaphysical approach to students' 
demands to be involved in decision-making, sort of harks back, I suspect to the attitude of the 19th century 
bosses of the concept of trade unions. Unfortunately this characterizes too much of the senior thinking of 
senior people in both governments and universities upon the potential of students to make responsible 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I shall support in principle this Bill as much as it follows from Bill 98, 
however, I should like to give notice that I shall move a number of amendments in the Committee stage 
which I hope will allow Members to give some more serious embodiment to the ideas that I discussed with 
the Board of Governors of tripartite structure, for the rest of Committees at a departmental level with student 
parity. As the Minister of Continuing Education stated Bills 99 and 100 as presented did not address 
themselves to any questions of internal reform of the university and I think that before we proceed further 
with this issue it is beholden that the Legislature do take seriously the ideas about reform of internal 
university administration that has been batted around for the last decade in universities across the country 
and across the continent. With that, Mr. Speaker, I take my seat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a good deal of pride that I rise on this 
occasion to welcome the new member of the educational community, the University of Regina. I look 
forward to the 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2574 
 

continued growth and development of this University. It already has a great tradition and as it grows in 
tradition and maturity I am sure that it will make a tremendous contribution to our entire community life. I 
do want to say that I have some particular comments to make about the University of Regina, and what I 
expect of it, and what I worry about. 
 
First of all, I should compliment the many fine people already associated with the University of Regina. 
Secondly, I hope the University will look with disgust upon radicals who have intruded upon this University, 
those who would subvert the University to narrow and selfish political purposes. I attended a meeting on one 
occasion about a year ago at the University, speaker after speaker rose and said that what was absolutely 
needed was the conversion of this University (and all universities) to a socialist university. Now I believe 
that this is the utter condemnation and negation of the word 'university'. I do not want a socialist university, I 
do not want a capitalist university, I do not want a free enterprise university. Each and everyone of these is a 
contradiction of the word and the term 'university'. It is a denial of the essential characteristic of a university. 
I believe that the University can and should weed out the radicals but, of course, it must be done from within 
the University itself. But I want to emphasize that it is one thing to teach what communism is, it is quite a 
different thing to advocate communism from the podium at the University. I am sick and tired of some of the 
nonsense that goes on at some of our universities. I am sick and tired at the failure of some of our 
Government leaders to take a stand against this nonsense. Without discipline there is absolutely no freedom. 
In this respect I believe that our academic leaders are entitled to, they need and they must have the legal and 
moral support of the political leaders and the members of the community. I hope to see more discipline at the 
University. The selfish students, some of them professional students, who seize offices, destroy records and 
so on are no credit to themselves, they interfere with students who actually go to university with the intention 
of getting an education. Now, quite frankly, I believe that these people ought not to be allowed to continue to 
interfere with the orderly process of education. I hope to see a full recognition of the role of teachers in our 
universities, with appropriate salary provisions in the budget. Buildings are fine but a machine does not have 
judgment. It has been a great habit of late to downgrade the professions, while the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation people received a well-deserved 15 per cent raise, teachers received about two thirds of this, 
nurses today are short changed. Throughout society we see the professions being totally short changed and 
our teachers, quite frankly, rank among the worst. They are, quite frankly, not receiving appropriate 
recognition for the contribution they are making to society. I hope people recognize that the teachers and 
particularly those at the University do not operate on an eight or nine month year, many of them are as close 
to being full time educators as possible. 
 
I hope that the University of Regina is a university of outreach. I hope that it will go ahead and move into the 
community, contributing to the community and, of course, being nourished by it. This is being done to a 
considerable extent right now, in the faculties of education, recreation and in technical areas. I hope this 
process continues. The ivy walls of the university have to come down, the university must be 



 
April 22, 1974 

2575 
 

part of the city and the province, and I agree with the Hon. Member who spoke a moment or two ago, of the 
entire province. Saskatchewan cannot afford useless duplication in its services. Where the student body is 
large enough, such as Arts and several other areas, there will be appropriate duplication, instead of 
duplication on one campus there will be appropriate duplicate facilities on the other. In general, however, I 
am sure that the University of Regina will be mature and reasonable, that its representations to the University 
Commission and to the Government will not make unreasonable demands but will make a fair and 
even-handed contribution. I feel confident that the University of Regina will make a great contribution to the 
city and to the entire province. I hope it will be a good companion to the University of Saskatchewan at 
Saskatoon. I hope that the university team, the University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan will 
be a one-two academic punch, unrivalled in Canada. 
 
As a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan I have and will continue to give my support, respect and 
best wishes to the University of Saskatchewan but to the University of Regina, I wish it well, I wish it good 
luck, I know that it will make a fine, new addition and I welcome it. 
 
I may have something further to add to this, Mr. Speaker, and consequently, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTION 
 

CONSTITUENCY BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 
 

That the final report of the Constituency Boundaries Commission established pursuant to The 
Constituency Boundaries Commission Act, 1972, laid before this Assembly by the 
Honourable Mr. Speaker recommending that the area of the province 

 
(i) lying south of the dividing line as defined in Section 14 of the said Act, be divided into 59 
constituencies, and (ii) lying north of the dividing line as defined in Section 14 of the said 
Act be divided into two constituencies, be hereby approved and adopted by this Assembly; 
That the descriptions of each of the constituencies as recommended by the said final report, 
except the description of the boundaries of the constituency of Saskatoon-Mayfair, be 
approved and adopted by this Assembly; and That the final report of the Commission be 
altered by deleting the description of the constituency of Saskatoon-Mayfair, and substituting 
therefore the description as set out in the schedule which was attached to the final report, and 
that the final report of the Commission as so altered by approved and adopted by this 
Assembly. 

 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, as one who now 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2576 
 

represents a constituency which will be dissolved at the time of the next Provincial Election, I must say a 
few words on this Bill. The words I have to say can really be summed up by saying I am in complete 
agreement with this Bill. I am in complete agreement because I see the end of vicious gerrymandering. I see 
the end of ridiculous boundary changes made by politicians such as in the past to save their own skins. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who? 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, I didn't really say, "Who?" 
 
I see the end to confusion in the minds of voters as to what constituencies they might live in. Mr. Speaker, I 
also see this Bill as being the closest thing to true representation by population — something we have not 
had in this province for a long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, Saskatoon-Hanley constituency will no longer exist after the next 
election. For those of you who may be interested I harbor no animosity towards the Commission which 
recommended this should be so. I harbor no ill feelings because I know it was charged with doing a job, and 
it certainly did it well. I also know it did its job with complete independence, and I stress the word complete 
independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principles involved in the setting up of the Independent Boundaries Commission were 
noble ones, ones I agree with, for who could really argue that each Member of this Assembly should not 
represent a number of constituents roughly equal in number to the number any other might represent? 
 
Mr. Speaker, might I just point out some of the indignities Saskatoon-Hanley constituency has been 
subjected to in the past. In the first place, it is probably the only constituency which was ever gerrymandered 
four times in three years. It is probably the only constituency which once shared an area with another 
constituency at the same time. It is probably the only constituency which experienced or was involved in a 
retroactive gerrymander. It is probably the only constituency which has as one of its boundaries the main 
street of just a tiny, tiny village. Mr. Speaker, it is probably the only constituency which started out noble in 
shape and ended up with the outline of some grotesque, repulsive monster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the passing of this Bill in this House could quite possibly assist in narrowing the credibility gap 
which sometimes exists between the people of Saskatchewan and the politicians of the day. In fact, I know it 
will, for in my campaign prior to the last election, many people I met welcomed our party's promise to stop 
gerrymandering from ever rearing its ugly head again. I also know that these same people and many others 
are pleased with this Bill and await its speedy implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Saskatoon-Hanley I want to say that I will most certainly support this 
Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a 



 
April 22, 1974 

2577 
 

great deal of pleasure that I have been given this opportunity to participate in this debate. The legislation we 
have before us tonight reflects the completion of another commitment that our party made with the people of 
Saskatchewan during the last election campaign. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that all Members of this 
Assembly will lend their support to this report as the people of Saskatchewan have made it very clear that 
they have little regard for the past practices of allowing politicians to dictate constituency boundaries. 
 
Over the years, Mr. Speaker, we have watched boundaries change from time to time. These changes were 
made for political purposes and nothing more. Some of the changes were quite subtle, however, but for the 
most part the gerrymandering which was carried out was blatant to say the least. As Members of this 
Assembly, if we are serious about honoring a principle of representation by population we must support the 
recommendations of this Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission. 
 
I commend the members of the Commission for the fairness which is reflected in these recommendations. As 
one studies the proposed boundaries, Mr. Speaker, it becomes very clear to me that impartiality formed the 
basis for their deliberations. It is clear that the redefined boundaries will eliminate the advantage or 
disadvantage which certain candidates have had to deal with in the past due to the political nature of the 
boundary line. One only has to examine the boundaries as they exist presently to understand, Mr. Speaker, 
the necessity of an independent redefining of constituency lines. There are many people across this province 
who never knew from one election to another which riding they would be in in the next trip to the polls. The 
defence of Members opposite as they attempted to influence their chances by carving up the riding to their 
own advantage to me, Mr. Speaker, was in no way justifiable. It was the New Democratic Party which 
during the last election campaign stated that this political gerrymandering would be done away with if we 
were elected. The voting public of this province responded to that commitment and I am pleased today that I 
have a chance to debate this issue, an issue which marks the fulfilment of that election pledge. 
 
During the past two years there have been many political pundits who have speculated on the reasons for the 
political demise of the former Liberal Government and I agree with those who say that their gerrymandering 
was the major reason for the voter rejection they suffered in 1971. One of the fundamental principles of a 
democracy is the principle of representation by population — that principle was not followed in the year of 
1971. One can state many examples, however, the most blatant case occurred right here in the city of Regina 
where the Regina Centre constituency had over 17,000 registered voters I believe and Albert Park had 
slightly over 4,000 voters. There can be no justifiable defence for boundaries such as this. 
 
During the course of our brief provincial history, politicians and governments were given the responsibility 
to articulate and define constituency boundaries. I am afraid that governments of the past have not honored 
that commitment and have chosen rather to base their decision on political motivation. The people of 
Saskatchewan do not expect, and I say, Mr. Speaker, they will not tolerate such practices. I am confident that 
these proposals which install a new era of impartiality and fairness will win the wide-spread approval of the 
people of this 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2578 
 

province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the issue is clear. Why should an Independent Boundaries 
Commission be necessary? Current boundaries surely point to the need; however, just as important the 
public must be assured that the changes which are made are in no way a reflection of political parties 
meddling with the fundamental principles of democracy. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the issue of constituency boundaries was drawn into the political arena during the last 
election campaign. Our party made a political issue out of the redefined boundaries, however, Mr. Speaker, 
that was done for reasons quite different than the political motivations of Members opposite a far as this 
issue is concerned. 
 
The Liberal Government of the day politicized the matter by instituting unprecedented gerrymandering. 
Members on this side of the House made the issue political by pledging to end the gerrymander and place the 
responsibility of redefining boundaries on a fair and equal basis, in the hands of an independent procedure. 
 
The proposals that we have before us today mark the fulfilment of that pledge. I am hopeful that Members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, do not attempt to make a political issue out of these recommendations, with the 
assertions that these proposals are in any way a reflection of favour in the direction of the Government. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it could be argued that these proposals, in some instances, work to the disadvantage of 
several Members of this side of the House. In spite of the fact, however, Members on this side of the House 
wholeheartedly endorse the principles of an Independent Boundaries Commission and we are prepared to 
lend support of the report that they brought in. 
 
I hope Members opposite are similarly inclined, as the issue to me, Mr. Speaker, is too important to be 
dragged through the political wringer with both sides attempting to score a political point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the upcoming provincial election in Saskatchewan will mark the first time ever that all 
candidates for public office will enter the arena on an equal footing. There will be a new public confidence 
in the democratic system as all ridings will be fought on the basis that no single candidate will have a built-in 
advantage prior to the vote being taken. 
 
The next vote, Mr. Speaker, will result in the election of candidates who will not be faced with future 
changes, that his only claim to office is the advantage gained through inequitable boundary revisions. I am 
confident that these proposals will result in the attraction of new candidates into the political arena, 
candidates who in the past have declined nominations, knowing that the odds were stacked against them 
even before the election day. 
 
For a moment, Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a word with respect to the Weyburn constituency. On the 
proposed 



 
April 22, 1974 

2579 
 

changes the Weyburn constituency is affected quite drastically. Much of the traditional area will be included 
in the Milestone and the Estevan constituencies, if these proposals are approved. From a political point of 
view these areas have been very good to me over the years. I have been fortunate enough to receive a 
considerable amount of support from them. Mr. Speaker, I hope that during those years, as their 
representative in this House, I have served them with equal consideration .. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — . . . a consideration which they so rightfully deserve. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, I so decide to again let my name stand for the nomination in the new Weyburn constituency, 
and if I am fortunate enough to win the next election, I will continue to work diligently on behalf of not only 
those citizens residing in my constituency, but also I will work towards the furtherance of programs and 
policies which will result in beneficial changes for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The election to public office is an honor which has few parallels. The responsibility which is entrusted to 
public servants, is one which cannot be viewed lightly. I am very confident that all Members of this 
Assembly recognize the tremendous trust which has been given to them as a result of the elevation to the 
public office. 
 
I also believe that everyone in this Assembly will, Mr. Speaker, in no way deliberately set out to jeopardize 
and I feel because of that, this Assembly will unanimously give its support to this legislation as it reflects the 
very basis of democracy, a democracy which those before us fought and died to preserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I offer to you and Members of this Assembly my fullest support for this legislation. There are a 
few other comments that I should like to add at a later time, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of 
Agriculture) that Bill No. 79 — An Act to Regulate the Ownership and Control of Agricultural Land in 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, if I can beg the indulgence of you people to listen to me a little longer, I 
will try and speak on this one as well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I am pleased to have this opportunity to address myself 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2580 
 

 to this, which I think is very important legislation. 
 
As a Member of the Special Legislative Committee which toured the province with the original White Paper, 
I can tell this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that I have been very interested in this question. The question of who 
should own and control our agricultural land is one which has been intensified over the past couple of years. 
 
The Government was perhaps not the first administration in Canada to recognize the problems of foreign and 
corporate ownership, however, it was the first Government which was prepared to come to grips with the 
issue and prepared to take a stand in favor of the people who it represents. My colleague, the Hon. Minister 
of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) clearly pointed out the necessity of legislation of this type. I think all Members 
of this Assembly have recognized for some time the pressing necessity of coming to grips with the 
ownership of land question. 
 
It is not too surprising that Members opposite should heap criticism on this legislation, because if you 
remember, Mr. Speaker, while they sat on the Treasury Benches, they certainly did not at that time exactly 
jump up to the defence of the farming industry in Saskatchewan with legislation to offset the adverse effects 
of foreign and corporate ownership. 
 
I recall vividly the viewpoints of Saskatchewan people as we held hearings across the province. Yes, there 
were concerns over some sections of the original White Paper; however, there was an overriding feeling by 
the vast majority of those people who appeared before the committee, that something had to be done. 
 
When our Committee's final report was presented and debated in this Legislature, I gave my qualified 
support to it, although I too, had some reservations respecting two of the recommendations which were 
placed before this House. However, my reservations in no way lessened my concern over the ownership of 
land question. 
 
In many instances, Mr. Speaker, the problems which were placed before the Committee were local, or 
regional in scope. There were few proposals which gained the unanimous support or rejection of those who 
presented briefs. This reality further taxed this Committee in its interpretation of views and its compilation 
of the final report. 
 
Our report also presented this Government with the heavy responsibility of interpreting the direction we 
should follow in the presentation of legislation. 
 
I commend the Government and the Minister of Agriculture for this Bill. It certainly reflects and takes into 
account the reservations many people had about the original White Paper and I think that it offers sufficient 
leverage to satisfy the skeptics. There have been a number of political interest groups, including the Liberal 
Party, who have consistently opposed our Government's move into this arena. 
 
It was not the first time that they have opposed our initiatives in agriculture. One only has to review debates 
on the Land Bank legislation. It is, to my way of thinking unfortunate that all Members of this Legislature 
could not have taken this issue on collectively, outside the political sphere, however, such was not the case 
and our Government, for the most 



 
April 22, 1974 

2581 
 

part, was forced to go it alone. However, I do not have any doubts concerning the outcome, as I am confident 
that our initiatives will result in the type of overall positive affects which we feel this legislation will create. I 
am not suggesting that this legislation will solve all the problems associated with this matter. I do not feel 
that any single piece of legislation is going to have a 100 per cent effect, however, that does not mean that 
government has a lessened responsibility to deal with problems as they arise. 
 
As we debate this legislation, the question keeps coming back to me: Who should own and control our 
agricultural land? This New Democratic Party Government has consistently argued that the family farm unit 
is the most efficient method of farming. However, I want to stress our viewpoint that we do not look to 
agriculture in simple economic terms. Agriculture has long been and will continue to form the basis of this 
province's number one industry. 
 
In terms of economic and social responsibility we believe the family farm unit is the only way to proceed. 
For generations family farmers have worked and toiled to provide men and women in all parts of the world 
with the necessary sustenance to keep on living. Their contribution to society cannot be measured in dollars 
and cents and this Government firmly believes that we have a responsibility to ensure that this segment of 
society is afforded the protection necessary to offset and combat unfavorable situations that arise from time 
to time. Such is the case tonight as reflected in this legislation. 
 
Many other provinces have addressed themselves to this problem, however, they have failed to come to grips 
with the best way to proceed, the result being that the problem is intensifying monthly and yearly. 
 
This Government is not prepared to proceed on the 'let the other guy try it first' basis. The issue is clear; it 
has been studied; it has been taken to the people and it has been drafted into legislation. It is now up to all 
the Members of this Assembly to decide whether or not we proceed. 
 
When we all study carefully the implications of the action, or inaction, I am confident that most Members 
will find themselves of the opinion that we must move now if we are to provide our family farmers with the 
necessary protection against the unfavorable impact of stepped-up foreign and corporate takeover of our 
agricultural land base. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I say, Mr. Speaker, the impact will be stepped-up due to the fact that the agriculture 
industry is presently experiencing unprecedented buoyancy. Prices for our agricultural produce continue to 
escalate as the national and international demand for food intensifies and grows. 
 
Corporate interest in Canada, and outside of our nation, see the advisability in investing huge capital sums in 
agricultural production and at the present time, agricultural land is the most attractive investment 
opportunity. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, we allow these interests to expand, what 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2582 
 

we are really saying is that from here on in, the market is open. We welcome all comers. The one with the 
most money will be the one who reaps the most benefits from increased agricultural production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is where the New Democratic Government holds out a different philosophy. We feel that it 
is the family farmer who should reap the benefits derived from the accelerated supply and demand situation. 
Now at a time when the agricultural economy is riding a crest of relative prosperity should we alienate our 
relationship and the let the farmer fend for himself in this capital intensive marketplace? When we brought 
in the Land Bank legislation we clearly displayed our commitment, Mr. Speaker, to the agriculture industry 
of this province and through this legislation we simply reiterate that commitment. I, for one, am pleased to 
lend my support to this legislation. 
 
Yes, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is unparalleled. There is nothing to compare with it in 
other parts of Canada. Because we present something untried, that, Mr. Speaker, is not to suggest that future 
amendments might not be needed, we have prepared for that eventuality. However, if we had waited until 
any legislation was fool-proof I doubt very much if we would today have such experimental programs 
operating as medicare, Government Insurance or Land Bank. This legislation is not as rigid in scope as was 
the original White Paper. Many provisions of this Act follow closely to the recommendations of the 
Legislative Committee. 
 
During that debate, I think you will remember, Mr. Speaker, I forwarded a couple of reservations I had 
respecting the retroactivity of the proposals with respect to corporations operating in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, at this time I want to tell the Assembly that perhaps I still have some reservations with respect to 
certain sections of the legislation. However, I still support its scope. Many of the issues and concerns which 
were discussed and debated during our hearings were local or regional. However, it is folly to think that we 
would ever be able to assemble legislation which would recognize and encompass all regional problems and 
fail to recognize the overall impact of the subject matter. 
 
If we are serious in saying that we believe in the maximum number of family farm units in Saskatchewan, I 
say, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility to demonstrate that commitment in terms of positive action. To 
date, I have received very little unfavorable reaction to this Bill. I know there are cases in the Weyburn 
constituency whereby this legislation is going to have a somewhat problematic impact. However, I feel that it 
will, Mr. Speaker, result in far-reaching positive effects for the vast majority of farmers in this province. 
 
I believe there are an adequate number of provisions in this Act to deal effectively and flexibly with the 
variety of problems which exist in the farming industry. 
 
I commend the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) for taking into account many of the serious questions 
raised respecting the original White Paper legislation, and I comment this Government for again involving 
the public in drafting this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the overall favorable impact this 



 
April 22, 1974 

2583 
 

legislation will generate, and because of this Government's demonstrated sincerity and its determination in 
legislating for the benefit of the majority, it is a pleasure for me tonight to offer my support to this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to direct a few remarks to this piece of 
legislation. I might say that the one thing that has come to my attention in this debate is that party politics is 
a wonderful thing and apparently the Whip on that side has a pretty good whip because he brought the seven 
Members into line awful fast. He brought them into line to supporting a position exactly opposite to what 
they recommended in the report, absolutely opposite, Mr. Speaker. In this report, of which I was a member 
of the Committee on the Ownership of Agricultural Land, the seven Members who sat on that side of the 
House — there were eight and one subsequently was appointed to the Cabinet — the Members were Mr. 
Kowalchuk, who is now in the Cabinet, was the Chairman, Mr. Carlson, the Member for Yorkton, Mr. 
Hanson for Qu'Appelle-Wolseley, Mr. Kaeding for Saltcoats, Mr. Meakes for Touchwood and Mr. Owens 
from Elrose, Mr. Pepper for Weyburn and we Liberals, Mr. Wiebe, Mr. MacLeod and myself. Mr. 
Tchorzewski was appointed but only was able to attend one or two meetings because of his subsequent 
appointment. 
 
The most interesting aspect of this thing was that no where in the report did one single Member on the 
Government side recommend that there should be any restrictions against other Canadians, not one. They 
agreed totally with the Liberal position, the three Liberals and the seven NDP agreed totally with the Liberal 
position of no restrictions against other Canadians and it says precisely in this report under a resolution of 
that nature. Now, we have the very same Members standing in the House telling us of why they support 
restrictions against other Canadians. So the party system works well over there and the old system that we 
used to hear from the NDP about individual freedom and so forth certainly got lost somewhere in the shuffle 
because they brought the seven members from this Committee in line awful fast. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have met on this Committee that at no time did we support 
legislation against other Canadians because we thought it would balkanize Canada and our view of Canada 
was not to balkanize it into ten little countries across this nation. The NDP supported that position but I 
rather suspect that some of the ones in the Cabinet and some of the others of different thinking they just 
threw the report out the window and in other words told us that we had wasted our time and put in what they 
wanted to. 
 
Even in the sense, Mr. Speaker, even to the extent that the last Member who spoke, and I have considerable 
respect for the last Member but he and the Member for Elrose (Mr. Owens) made a very, very lengthy 
recommendation on corporate ownership. This is one of the words they used, the recommendation was that 
any corporation accepting a farm family or community group or co-operative association now owning 
agricultural land are required to dispose of the land by a specified date, 20 years from now. This is what the 
two Members said. This recommendation if it is passed in the sense of retroactive effects, it should only be 
used under very special and urgent circumstances. 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2584 
 

In this case we do not feel that there is sufficient agricultural land owned in our province by corporations to 
warrant such drastic measures. This was exactly one year ago, practically, today. 
 
These corporations purchased land in good faith and under the rules and regulations and government 
restrictions in effect in the years in which the transactions were completed. They did nothing wrong or 
illegal. In some cases these holdings were purchased, buildings established and our Canadian citizens in 
many cases became the tenants of them. This all happened since the early part of the century. If this 
recommendation No. 3 is legislation, these tenants would be forced into a position where they would have 
either to try to purchase this land or give it to someone else who might be in a position to do so. I think this 
is very significant, Mr. Speaker, because this is why I am against the retroactivity of the Bill. This could very 
well be someone who does not require the land because they already have sufficient to carry on a viable farm 
unit. From the hearings that we held in the province, which covered many areas, there were only a few cases 
which caused alarm. And the Member went on, "Therefore we oppose Recommendation 5: No corporation 
except the farm family and the community group, or agricultural co-operative association should be 
permitted to operate any agricultural enterprise after five years from now." Now this was the Members' 
recommendation supported by the three Liberals on the Committee, the two NDP Members who 
recommended against retroactivity. Now, we on this side, at least, Mr. Speaker, are going to be consistent 
because we still are against retroactivity because we will find, just as the two NDP Members said in this 
legislation, that much of the land that is currently held in Saskatchewan today, the renters are getting a pretty 
good arrangement. As soon as they are forced to sell this land the person renting may quite possibly be 
forced into buying it. They will either have to buy it or give it up. Therefore, the idea of retroactivity is a 
poor one and it is a poor piece of legislation that the NDP have drafted as far as retroactivity is concerned. 
 
As for future corporate ownership I support the Bill. In the recommendation and in the Bill it suggest that 
corporation ownership be restricted to one-quarter section and I support that provision for the future but I can 
suggest to the Members opposite that they will cause considerable hardship with the retroactivity feature in 
this legislation they have talked about. Because many of the people who are renting land from corporations 
of which there are extremely few — I think we found three in our hearings — it was a very small amount of 
renting from other individuals who are now currently American owners, that that retroactivity feature will 
force many renters to either buy or get off that land because the land will be sold to someone else. The 
Members said in their recommendation which I read to you and we support that, we still consider the 
retroactivity feature a very poor one. 
 
Now I might say that all of the Members on that side of the House in the Committee hearings agreed that 
there should be no restrictions against other Canadians. We think that this was realistic at the time and we 
think it is extremely realistic today. Certainly if every province in this country is going to throw up a 20 mile 
border against other Canadians for any of a number of reasons we aren't going to have a country, we are 
going to have ten countries, Mr. Speaker. We aren't like Prince Edward Island where there is only a few 
miles of beaches and a few miles 



 
April 22, 1974 

2585 
 

of resort area, we are a country here in Saskatchewan of millions and millions and millions of acres of land 
and the kind of legislation that the Province of Prince Edward Island is possibly requiring for their beach 
areas and so forth isn't required here in this province. 
 
I do support the legislation which is aimed at foreign ownership and I might say in fact I could quite 
truthfully say, I would support to a much greater extent than what the NDP have brought in. We 
recommended in the Committee Report, the three Liberal Members recommended that: 
 

The Legislature enact legislation limiting the future acquisition of farm lands by non-resident 
aliens. 

 
Now I would support very severe restrictions against non-resident aliens and not some wishy washy crazy 
ideas like we've got in this Bill that if you live 20 miles inside the United States border you can buy all of 
Saskatchewan. What kind of nonsense is that in this kind of Bill? We got a 20 mile border south of my 
constituency in the United States and if you live ten miles into United States you could buy up half the 
country of Meadow Lake and if you live 30 miles into Manitoba you can't, Mr. Speaker. Now no amount of 
logic will ever be able to tell the people of Saskatchewan that that type of draft can make any kind of sense. 
 
So I want to sum up by saying that this Committee that has reported has absolutely received no attention 
whatsoever from the Government. It did exactly what we anticipated was the Government's intention at the 
time, to try and bail themselves out of hot water that they had caused trying to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that it was some White Paper or some other proposal which nobody at the time believed and 
nobody believes today. It was a Bill just like any other Bill introduced into this Legislature of Saskatchewan 
that had the approval of the NDP and had the approval of the Cabinet. It came in here just like the 100 other 
ones we got this year. And then they found themselves in a jam so they came along and they said, "Oh, that's 
not a Bill, that's a White Paper." Somehow or other they printed 'Bill' at the top instead of White Paper. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it was a Bill and everybody in Saskatchewan knows it was a Bill and so do all the front bench 
in the NDP know it was a Bill. So it was also an irony that the Minister of Agriculture didn't say it was 
anything but a Bill until after it had been here for a week, which was a rather strange arrangement you might 
say, to say the least. 
 
So I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, three particular principles which should be in this piece of legislation 
which are sadly lacking. First of all, severe restrictions against foreign ownership and by foreign ownership, 
I don't mean Canadians. The second one, Mr. Speaker, is no restrictions against Canadians of any kind, this 
is one country. The third one, Mr. Speaker, is that I do support as far as the future is concerned a restriction 
on corporate ownership of agricultural land. This is in the Bill but I do not support retroactivity as far as this 
legislation is concerned because all it is going to do is do harm to the people who are presently renting that 
type of land. I want to also say that this Bill is attempting or the NDP is attempting to try and confuse people 
by really bringing in a law against corporate ownership. Most of the corporate ownership in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan to date can 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2586 
 

can still take place on a quarter section just as well as it ever could before. Corporations are still allowed to 
own a quarter section of land, I approve of that, but make no mistake about it you can build a pretty big hog 
barn on a quarter section of land or a pretty big feed lot, so the NDP in effect are not really bringing in 
restrictions as far as corporations and much of agriculture is concerned. They are restricting it to the amount 
of land ownership and in that essence I support it. 
 
So I just want to sum up by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I think it is disappointing that we spent all that money 
and all that time to draft a report, which I consider to be a good report. The Committee I think had harmony 
within it and certainly the original Bill didn't add to anything but some difficulties as far as Committee 
members are concerned. But in any event I think the Committee did draft a good report and the Committee, 
as I said before, was unanimous in having no restrictions against other Canadians. The key recommendation 
in the whole report has been totally ignored by this Government, Mr. Speaker, so how could you honestly 
say that there was any purpose in having a report if the Government paid absolutely no attention to its key 
recommendation. 
 
I just want to say that I would support very much and I think it is absolutely necessary that we have a good 
foreign ownership of land Bill but this certainly isn't it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T.L. HANSON (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely amazed at the lack of 
knowledge of the Member who has just completed speaking. I think if he would have taken time to read Bill 
79, he would have found that indeed the Bill itself almost copied in identical proportions, the Report of our 
Special Intersessional Committee. Corporations do indeed have 20 years to dispose of the land that they now 
have and in my opinion that is too long, however, we had to reach a consensus of opinion within this 
Government. 
 
Another feature that the Member opposite stated the Bill was in error designating restrictions against other 
Canadians I should like to point out that it is totally within the power of the Province of Saskatchewan to 
control matters relating to boundaries. But totally outside of the power of a province to control matters 
relating or restricting people on the basis of religion, creed, color or ethnic background or place of allegiance 
and therefore this is the only avenue left open to this Government. 
 
I think that the Intersessional Committee on Foreign Ownership of Land that we served on did prove to be of 
real value. In that Committee report on page 32, we stated that there were indications that nearly one per cent 
of the land in Saskatchewan was foreign owned. I questioned the value of this figure of one per cent and I 
should like to point out some facts that lead me to believe in the fallacy of statistics taken on a voluntary 
basis. Page 32 of the report states that the estimates from our questionnaires for the entire province is that .97 
per cent of the agricultural land is owned by persons whose addresses are outside of Canada. I want you to 
remember the wording, 'whose addresses are outside of Canada.' And in questioning these statistics I did an 
analysis of some of the surveys that we did. I found out, for example that the CPR or 



 
April 22, 1974 

2587 
 

Marathon Realty was reported to have owned 1,079 quarter sections in our voluntary RM survey, which is 
essence, actually owned 1,625 quarters of Saskatchewan land. That is a total of 260,000 acres, Mr. Speaker, 
of fine Saskatchewan farm land. 
 
Bringing this investigation closer to home, I looked at the records of Boll Land Company which farms in the 
Fillmore area, the same community where I carry on the business of farming. In the RM surveys it was 
pointed out that the Boll Land Company controlled 27 quarters of land. In actual investigation we uncovered 
the facts that Boll Land Company which is Florida based, in fact, actually owned 66 quarters of land —
10,137 acres of Saskatchewan land. So I did a little more investigating into the members of the Boll Land 
Company. 
 
I find that the president is Morse Frederick Boll, a friend of ours in Fillmore who is the John Deere dealer; 
secretary is Albert Martin Andreas, Miami Beach, Florida; director is Martin Lowell Andreas, Miami Beach, 
Florida. When we look at the shareholders of this great corporation, which incidentally is registered as a 
Saskatchewan corporation, because the mailing address on the tax notices is to the Boll Land Company in 
Saskatchewan, 41,000 shares are owned by Morris Boll, sounds like a lot; one lone share is owned by Albert 
Martin Andreas and one lone share is owned by Martin Lowell Andreas. There are 163,998 shares owned by 
the Andreas Corporation, Miami Beach, Florida. From these types of investigations, I think the survey that 
our Committee did, as well as the survey done by Professor Jacob Brown, do not truly indicate the state of 
affairs in Saskatchewan regarding foreign and corporation ownership. 
 
One fact that the Brown survey brought out was that in some RMs — seven to be exact — within the 
southern area of the province, more than nine per cent of the land within those RMs was owned by American 
interests. 
 
The Liberal Members opposite said in their reservations that oftentimes the opinions of the Government 
Members of that Committee were prejudiced, but I say that it was only because of my prejudiced opinion 
that I carried on the investigation a little bit farther than our investigations within the Committee structure 
permitted us to do. 
 
I say that the discrepancy between 66 quarters and 27 quarters as reported in the voluntary questionnaire 
proved that my prejudiced inquiring mind probably served Saskatchewan better than the minds which just 
take for granted any facts that are thrown at them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am having a bit of trouble with my voice tonight, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of 
Health) that Bill No. 102 — An Act relating to the Acquisition, Distribution and Sale of Certain Drugs 
be now read a second time. 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, as we consider 



 
April 22, 1974 
 

2588 
 

this Bill or if we consider an Act for that matter we should try to define the problem and once that is defined 
then consider what the solution is to that problem. 
 
In this matter of The Prescription Drug Act, that we are dealing with today, the problem is clear in my mind 
and I think the Minister in his speech indicates that he is aware of the same problem and that it is clear in his 
mind. He made reference to facts that two per cent of the families bear about 20 per cent of all drug 
expenditures, and that five per cent of the families bear about one-third of all drug expenditures; that, indeed, 
10 per cent of the families in Saskatchewan bear the cost of one-half of all the drug expenditures in this 
province. 
 
I think this identifies the problem and I think that both sides of the House agree on that. I ask if the proposed 
drug plan deals adequately with this problem. Does the drug plan, as outlined by the Minister, redistribute 
the costs or, in fact, does 10 per cent of the people still pay 50 per cent of the costs that are incurred over the 
counter at the drugstore? 
 
I think that the drug plan as outlined fails in this respect. I think it is a fact that 10 per cent of the people who 
pick up half of the costs will still pick up close to half the costs. I think a second problem is clear and, again, 
the Minister indicated that he agreed and that he was aware of this type of problem. I would quote from his 
speech. 
 

People who must face these high prescription drug expenditures are often the people who are 
least able to afford the high cost; the sick, injured, chronically ill and the elderly. 

 
He went on in another quote: 
 

That elderly and chronically ill are particularly hard hit with drug costs because some 
individuals may be medically required to consume several types of drugs each day of their 
lives. 

 
I think there is clear agreement on this fact. Does the proposed drug plan redistribute expenditures for drugs 
so that the chronically ill, the elderly and so on, do not have to pay proportionately more than those of us 
lucky enough not to have high drug expenditures? 
 
I think the drug plan does not. The Minister indicated that the plan would cut the cost of drugs to 
Saskatchewan people in half. Well if my family has expenses of say $20 per year, then I can expect that if 
the plan is introduced, to pay about $10. If a family has a chronically ill member or more than one member, 
and average expenses as high as $400, then I suppose they can expect to pay close to $200 if the plan, 
indeed, cuts the costs in half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interrupted the debate. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


