


























































Hansard: March 26, 1974


1760 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

37th Day 
Tuesday, March 26, 1974 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all Members of this Assembly, 15 Grade Eight students from St. Francis School in 
Regina North West. They are seated in the west gallery with their teacher, Mr. Yano. We extend to them 
a warm welcome and we hope that their visit here to this Assembly will be pleasant and informative. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure as well to introduce 67 
students from St. Andrew School, seated in the east gallery. They are accompanied by Mr. Phil Halter, 
their teacher. I must say that St. Andrew School is located in a very fine residential area of our city, 
Douglas Park, and we are pleased that so many are able to come this afternoon. I am sure they will gain 
much by visiting their democratic Legislative Assembly in this province and in this city, and I know that 
they will be able to use the information in their Social Studies. 
 
I should also like to welcome a group of Air Cadets, in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are here from 
Crystal City, Manitoba. There are I believe 17 cadets and they are accompanied by Capt. Gorrel, Lieut. 
McKittrick and Mr. Poirier. We do welcome them most sincerely. I had the privilege of greeting them at 
City Hall. This is their first visit here and they are touring many of our sites in our community. I should 
like, again, to welcome them to this Assembly as well as St. Andrew School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. P. P. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to welcome to this House a group of 66 
Grade Five Students, accompanied by five adults and their teacher, Mr. Unrau from Clavet School. For 
your information, Mr. Speaker, Clavet School is a large rural school in the Saskatoon East School Unit, 
located roughly 13 or 14 miles east of Saskatoon. I understand that they were to have visited the RCMP 
Barracks and also the Museum of Natural History. I have no doubt that they probably saw many 
interesting things and learned many new things also. I hope, boys and girls, that you see the MLAs at 
their best this afternoon. I hope that you will learn something about the Parliamentary process in action. 
Also, I would hope that you have a good trip home and that you end up being able to say that it was a 
very successful day for you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1761 

Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure on behalf of my 
colleagues and myself to join with the Hon. Member from Regina Wascana in welcoming the Air Cadets 
who are with us today. I am not sure if I am the ranking officer in the House, but as one who has served 
in the forces I can assure the House that we appreciate, and I know that every Member appreciates, the 
discipline and the ability and training to work in teamwork, one with the other, that is produced by the 
cadets; and the officers are to be congratulated in bringing them to this city and they couldn’t have 
picked a better place to come than Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of students on your 
behalf, from your constituency of Wadena, a group from the Quill Lake School, 25 children from Grade 
Six to Grade Nine. They are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Boyko, Mr. Aitken and Mrs. Engemoen. 
I know I pronounced that wrong and I apologize. I believe they are in the Speaker’s Gallery. I know on 
your behalf and on behalf of all Members we wish them a safe journey home and enjoyable day while 
they are here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. D. W. Cody (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Member for Wascana in 
welcoming the students from the St. Andrew School. I think he mentioned a teacher and I am not sure 
that he is here, but I do know that their other teacher, John Stockmal who sits right above me, is here. 
Mr. Stockmal is a resident of the Glencairn area and we have become great friends, because our sons 
play hockey together. I certainly welcome him and the students here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Sawdust on Ice of Copp Creek 
 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish to direct a 
question to the Minister of the Environment. 
 
It has been brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan forest product saw mill at 
Sturgis has deposited a large quantity of sawdust on the ice of Copp Creek and Lilian River, 
approximately 500 yards from the Assiniboine River and the dam. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, when spring 
breakup occurs this will seriously deteriorate the oxygen levels and will substantially affect the town 
water supplies that will be taken from this river. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, — and I have a picture of the situation that exists there — the question that I 
should like to ask the Minister is why has his Department not enforced regulations that exist as far as 
this deposit of sawdust is concerned? 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1762 

Hon. N. E. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, the Department of the Environment 
does make or requests other agencies of government to make inspections where any company, private, 
corporate or Crown is carrying on practices that are damaging to the environment. I am not able at this 
time to advise him whether or not we have investigated this particular situation. I am certainly willing to 
look into it. I would appreciate it if the Hon. Member would provide me with the details as to the precise 
location so that the matter can be investigated. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — Well I think that it is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the Government’s own Crown 
corporation apparently doesn’t live up to their own regulations. I would suggest, very seriously, that the 
Minister look into it immediately before the ice breaks up because it could cause an extremely serious 
problem. 
 

Audit of Saskatchewan Metis Society 
 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Culture and Youth. 
 
A few days ago in the Legislature here in discussing his Estimates, there were some questions raised by 
myself and the Leader of the Opposition with respect to an audit of the books of the Saskatchewan Metis 
Society and some requests that we have had dealing with that. Since that time I have had several other 
requests since it was aired in the House. At the time the discussion was not recorded, as I understand it. 
The Minister told the Assembly that the Federal Government was conducting an audit, I believe. That he 
and his Department were a part of that and going to be their contribution and their funding of the Metis 
Society would also be audited by that Federal audit. As a result no provincial audit was required. 
 
Is this the essence of what the Minister said at that time? 
 
Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth): — No, I don’t believe I said that the funding 
that would be provided by a provincial department was necessarily being audited by the Federal 
Department auditors. 
 
I doubt very much whether that in fact is the case. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, that is very interesting. My understanding was in that particular study in 
Committee, that the Minister did say the province felt no need to conduct any audit for the simple reason 
that the Federal Government was going to be doing all the auditing. Now he tells us a little bit 
differently and I am not too sure why. I want to read a telegram received by the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, this morning: 
 

As per your telephone conversation earlier today. 
 
And this is from the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State. 
 

Audit of Metis Society of Saskatchewan by the Department 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1763 

of Supply and Services scheduled to begin April 15th. 
 
Now the Minister told us the other day this it was already underway. 
 

Target date for completion, June 7th. Federal audit to cover only core funding money by 
Secretary of State and will not cover any moneys granted by the Provincial Government. 

 
And yet the Minister came into this House during Estimates and blithely assured us that the Federal 
Government was going to do the auditing. The question is very simple: when can we believe this 
Government opposite when it comes to spending money and the misspending of money? 
 
He has assured us that they are going to be looking after it, obviously they haven’t. Is he now going to 
change his story of the other night and take some action? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if in fact there was a question asked I should like to reply to it. I 
think that Members opposite can believe the Government when we have given a reply by simply 
listening to what the answers are that are being given. 
 
I did not say, under consideration of the Estimates of the Provincial Secretary’s Department, that the 
federal audit was being done of provincial funding. I made it very clear that it was being done of funding 
that was provided by the Secretary of State’s Department from Ottawa. Not only did I state that clearly, 
Mr. Speaker, I did it three or four times because the Members opposite pursued that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I should like to say that on these types of questions, it is quite plain in the rules that 
telegrams should not be read and then base a question on them because they lead to dispute and 
arguments. Questions should be concise and if the answers are not what the Members want then they 
should place a question on the Order Paper. 
 

Leases Granted by Lands Branch 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question 
of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall that several days ago my deskmate the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) 
made what I consider to be very serious allegations of direct political interference by the Minister of 
Agriculture in connection with leases granted by the Lands Branch of his Department. Now the Minister 
was on other business the night these allegations were made and, of course, did not have a chance to 
reply to them at that time. But he has been on his feet on several occasions after that, and has made no 
explanation whatsoever of these allegations. 
 
I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, that these allegations were confirmed in a court hearing before a 
Queen’s Bench judge . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Hon. Member may or may not 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1764 

have been in the House when this question was raised earlier. This was a statement made in a debate and 
I don’t think that statements made in a debate, they may or may not be factual, the Chair doesn’t have to 
decide that. But a statement made in debate should be answered in the debate and if not answered in the 
debate then a written question should be put on the Order Paper. It should not be brought about upon the 
Orders of the Day. 
 
Mr. Malone: — On a Point of Order, I understand that these questions are to find answers to things that 
are of very public concern and interest. And my question to the Minister will merely be whether he is 
prepared to give an explanation of his actions at this time or at some time in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think questions like that while it pertains to or arises from statements in debate 
should be put on the Order Paper in a matter of a Resolution rather than ask a question and then it could 
be debated. You cannot debate them on the questions on Orders of the Day. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — On a Point of Order. How would you word that question? Will the 
Minister please defend his actions, is that the way? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It is not up to the Speaker to tell the Members how they should word their questions, 
but I think that the House will realize that if every statement made in debate became questions on the 
Orders of the Day, we should go around and around the same circle. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — Just on the Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. Here the question arises not necessarily from 
a debate but from court findings and court records which the Member has in his possession. So it is not 
out of debate that this question arises for some investigation or for some justification of the Minister’s 
action. 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I should like to say 
and bring to the attention of the Hon. Members to your left that Estimates will be coming up for the 
Department of Agriculture, the subvote Land Bank will be sure to be debated and scrutinized with some 
diligence by all Members of this Legislature and I think that would be the most appropriate time for 
myself to bring forward any defence, if I have any defence to bring forward, and I assure you that I will. 
 

Regina Pats Hockey Club 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, then I wonder if I might be permitted to ask a question of the 
Minister. 
 
I realize that the Minister of Agriculture is acting Minister only at the present time, but it is a matter of 
some importance and I wonder if I could present it to the House and to him, having regard to the fact 
that the Regina Pats Hockey Club is on the verge of moving to some other centre, possibly Spokane, 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1765 

Washington, thus leaving Regina without a major junior hockey club at all. This, Mr. Speaker, is a major 
sporting thing for Regina. The Regina Pats are the most complete junior hockey system as such in 
Canada and I wonder if the Hon. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, the rules of this House are being continually broken with speeches rather 
than questions and I suggest to you that this certainly should not go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I ask Members who ask a question not to preface it with a speech and I wish they 
would try to get their requests as questions rather than as speeches. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I was hoping merely to give a little background to the Minister because 
he has a problem and I am sure that he doesn’t know all about his Department. 
 
My question to the Minister is this: Would he give some consideration, as quickly as possible, to 
assisting either the city of Regina or the Regina Exhibition Board to create the kind of a facility in 
Regina which would allow us on behalf of the city, to make whatever representations are necessary to 
keep the Regina Pat Hockey Club here? I should like to encourage him on behalf of our side of the 
House, and I am sure the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Baker) would be anxious to get a favorable 
reply too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Messer: — I am not aware of any direct discussions between the Regina Pats Hockey Club and the 
Department of Municipal Affairs or presentations being made on their behalf in relation to whether or 
not more adequate facilities would retain the Club here in Regina rather than locate at some other point. 
The point suggested, Spokane, Washington, has been mentioned by the Member for Regina Albert Park. 
But I do want to assure this House that if there are representations being made that certainly the 
Department of Municipal Affairs and this Government will consider them very carefully. Having said 
that, Mr. Speaker, I will say that for the first time ever there is a good deal of money being made 
available in an unconditional grant from the Community Capital Fund to the city of Regina to a 
maximum of $75 over a five-year period of time on the basis of the per capita population of the city. 
And if the city so chooses in their wisdom to budget some of that sum towards an agri-dome or to some 
other facility which will provide better conditions for that Club to play hockey in, then certainly the 
Government has contributed in a major way to have that Club retain its activities here in the city of 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. It’s difficult to ask a question in this House 
because we are constantly interrupted. Now we won’t mind being interrupted by Mr. Speaker, but 
constant interruptions by the Minister is something that I hope you can control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Maybe I could ask then if the Hon. Minister hasn’t heard about it, it’s possible that somebody has gone 
to the Minister of Culture and Youth, perhaps he could answer. The only problem 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1766 

that we are faced with, Mr. Speaker, is that this unconditional grant is now being spent in about 14 
different ways by the Hon. Minister opposite and quite frankly I was hoping we could get a nonpartisan 
discussion on this point. Obviously we can’t. Now the question is: Has the Minister of Culture and 
Youth received any requests from the city of Regina, because if he has then I should like to hear about it 
and what action can be taken right away? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We are getting out of order on these questions. Questions if you check the rule book, it 
is quite plain should not be asked on future policy but what is a fact at the present time. Questions are 
being put to ask Ministers to make a decision on future policy before it has come to government. I think 
that type of question would be better taken up privately or dealt with otherwise because they don’t 
qualify under the rules as questions. 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, the only problem we face over here is that this 
must be the worst Question Period in Canada because we can never get a question without being 
constantly interrupted by the Government Benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the Question Period in this Legislature doesn’t suit the Members it is within 
the powers of this House to lay down rules and regulations which they wish to govern. If the present 
standing rules are not satisfactory they can be changed by the Members concerned. 
 

SPEAKER’S RULING 
 

Questions Put by Members — No. 202 
 
Mr. Speaker: — In calling Questions put by Members I wish to say that appearing on the Orders of the 
Day is question No. 202 which pertains to the Legislative Assembly Office which falls under the 
jurisdiction of the Speaker. I refer all Hon. Members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 
Fourth Edition, Citation 184, page 155, which is in part as follows: 
 

Standing Order 39 does not allow Questions addressed to the Speaker. If, however, Members 
write to the Speaker and inquire about measures placed under his control he is bound to give the 
information required. The House of Commons of which he is the head is like one of 
Government’s departments with a staff of several hundred officers, clerks and employees. The 
annual expenditure including Members’ indemnity is under his supervision as well as the Library 
of Parliament and the Parliamentary restaurant controlled by joint committees of both Houses of 
which there is a joint chairman with a Speaker of the Senate. His prestige would suffer if his 
name appeared frequently on the Order Paper or in Votes and Proceedings in connection with 
questions relating to appointments or sessional employees, meals in the restaurant or books 
received in the Library. His position is not only administrative but it’s 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1767 

quasijudicial. Being the presiding officer he cannot be drawn into any discussion on the floor of 
the House. 

 
So for the above given reason I rule that question 202 is out of Order. 
 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to your ruling does this mean, going back to 
the beginning of the quotation from Beauchesne, a letter outlining a similar request directed to you 
would receive your consideration? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — That is correct. Jurisdiction under the Speaker’s office, a letter directed to the Speaker, 
the Speaker will get the information but it does not go through the floor of the House. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 13 — Nationalization of the Provincial Oil and Gas Industry 
 
Mr. J. G. Richards (Saskatoon University) moved, seconded by Mr. Lange (Assiniboia-Bengough): 
 

That this Assembly urgently calls upon the Saskatchewan Government to consider 
nationalization of the provincial oil and gas industry. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I imagine the Members of the House have been waiting with bated breath for this 
debate, with eager anticipation in order to be able to delve once again into obviously the most crucial 
issue which has been before this House this Session. As some of you may have read reports in the 
Leader-Post in the previous Saturday edition, you will realize that there have been some slight 
complications and hang-ups and some slight reluctance on the part of some Members to undertake this 
debate. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we have arrived at this occasion and I don’t apologize for raising the issue 
once again given its importance and primacy, nor do I intend to go over once again the classic 
arguments about refinery closures, profit rip-offs, about low royalties. My basic purpose today in 
moving a motion which I shall move at the conclusion of this debate, calling upon the Saskatchewan 
Government to consider nationalization of the provincial oil and gas industry, my major purpose in 
raising the debate today is to introduce some new calculations with respect to profitability of the 
Saskatchewan oil and gas industry. Secondly, to discuss the question of the wasting of this resource and 
the need for an immediate new policy with respect to exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the indulgence of the House I have prepared a summary of the oil industry in 
Saskatchewan in 1973; these figures are also contained in the tabloid which I have just distributed to 
Members and I should like to go over them — a summary until we get into the more complicated 
calculations. Mr. Speaker, in talking about the total cost figures of $1.60 per barrel, these figures include 
pro-rated exploration costs . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think the Hon. Member is preventing his mike from 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1768 

picking up the recording for the recording staff. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. We would not want to be losing this for posterity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, total costs included in this table, drawn from the Canadian Petroleum Association involves 
exploration costs pro-rated per barrel. Exploration costs have been in the order of 1.2 billion 
cumulatively since 1947 for a per barrel of approximately 63 cents given the discovery in the province 
of approximately 2 billion barrels of oil. The producing costs which cover all costs of lifting the oil and 
facilities associated with lifting, amount to 62 cents and using 1973 figures of provincial taxation of 35 
cents, we have a total cost figure, according to the Canadian Petroleum Association, of $1.60 per barrel 
of Saskatchewan produced oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again according to the Canadian Petroleum Association, the figure for the average price 
received in 1973 is $3. The debate last December used the figure of $3.08. There is a slight 
disagreement and I am quite willing to use the lower figure for the sake of the argument. Either way you 
cut it, $1.40 is the profit per barrel at this juncture. Now, for reference, $3.38 is the frozen price as of 
September, 1973 for oil. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these figures are summary figures per barrel in 1973. We are going to have to 
introduce some more sophistication into this before we finish but let me even at this juncture entertain 
some qualifications. The capital cost figures of 63 cents per barrel are based upon proved reserves as 
published by the Department of Mineral Resources. The Department of Mineral Resources assumes 30 
per cent recovery ratio. Actually known to be in the ground is approximately 7 billion to 8 billion barrels 
that have been discovered and given the higher prices which are currently being earned for oil you can 
certainly expect better recovery techniques in the future which may well be considerably above 2 billion 
which are actually listed in current figures supplied by the Department of Mineral Resources. 
 
Now these figures, Mr. Speaker, jar considerably with what has been put forward by various industry 
spokesmen in the last few months who have been complaining bitterly about the imposition of Bill 42. 
 
I should like to draw several arguments from this. This first argument is to compare the situation of the 
small independent producers to that of somebody farming land which is so poor that it would require 
$10 per bushel wheat before he could earn a living. There are small operators in Saskatchewan on 
marginal fields requiring heavy recovery technique expenditures who would not make money unless oil 
prices could continue their inflationary spiral above the $3.38 frozen level as of last September. 
 
A second problem, is that in an industry which has been used to an excessively high rate of return and a 
rate of return in other provinces which is even higher than in Saskatchewan, the rate of return in the 
United States which is higher than in Saskatchewan, given the various subsidies and incentives, why 
should the industry stay in Saskatchewan? The argument is that you can earn a 50 per cent rate of return 
somewhere else, why 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1769 

Content yourself with a measly 20 per cent in Saskatchewan? But admittedly, as Members here on this 
side of the House have stated, exploration has decreased. To quote accumulative figures according to the 
latest I’ve got to the March 9th, 1974, exploration in Saskatchewan, total footage drilled, 96,000. That 
compares with 205,000 feet drilled in this same period in 1973. There are five drilling rigs in operation 
in Saskatchewan in 1974 at this point, compared with 12 in operation at the same time last year. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, there is a final point to be made. Surely the Government must have understood 
and recognized when it introduced Bill 42 that the oil industry would retaliate in various methods that it 
had and one of them would be to try and disrupt the domestic Saskatchewan oil and gas industry as it 
exists. And that surely was the reason for the introduction 12 months ago of the Saskatchewan Oil and 
Gas Corporation enabling legislation. But clearly in that piece of legislation which at the time of 
introduction the Minister of Mineral Resources at the time (Mr. Thorson) stated it to be urgently needed 
and that it quickly would be set up — 12 months later there is no exploration activity being undertaken 
by the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation. When you phone up their office you get given a phone 
number of a professor’s office on the Regina Campus. The Minister in charge now says, “Hopefully 
staff will be in place in April,” heaven knows when actually operations will begin. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give some more detailed discussion. Before I do, however, I think 
Members might be interested just to have some appreciation of what has happened in the ensuing 12 
months in 1973. For the total western Canadian oil and gas operation one has got a doubling of the 
surplus reported by the Canadian Petroleum Association, a doubling from $476 million in 1972 to a 
profit earned in western Canada of over one billion — $1,021 billion. And it should be noted, Mr. 
Speaker, that those figures of $476 million and $1.02 billion, those figures include the expenditure on 
Arctic exploration which for 1973 was $265 million. In other words $1.02 billion is after all the 
exploration activity undertaken by the oil industry in the Arctic. So obviously the idea and the argument 
that the expense of Arctic exploration is such as to take away and diminish any of the profits earned in 
southern Canada is nonsense and rubbish. It should be seen precisely for what it is. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this draft we have accumulative experience in Saskatchewan of expenditures by 
the oil and gas industry. As one can see starting from 1947 it is a very low level, there was a peak in the 
late 1950s, decline in the early 1960s, peaking in 1965 and roughly stagnating since then. Mr. Speaker, 
the black line at the bottom represents total capital expenditures on exploration and development. To the 
last year recorded here, 1973, these expenditures amounted to $45 million. Of that $45 million only $9 
million was accounted for by actual exploration on new wells. The remaining $36 million involved 
development wells and did not involve exploratory activity. The difference between the black and the 
red line, Mr. Speaker, between 45 and 99 that covers operating expenditures such that in 1973 the 
cumulative expenditures on capital and operating expenses were $99 million. If you add to that the blue, 
we have a total of $130 million having been spent in 1973 for capital expenditures up to the black line, 
operating expenditures up to the red and the blue gives the figures for provincial taxation paid. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1770 

It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, at this juncture that the provincial taxation had actually declined as a 
proportion of total oil and gas revenues. Going back to the year 1966, in that year, there was a $218 
million total oil and gas revenues in the industry and 37 million was taken into the provincial treasury in 
the form of royalties, bonus bids, etc. That was a percentage of 17 per cent. 
 
By 1970 when the Liberals left, the last complete year the Liberals were in power, that figure declined to 
13 per cent. But unfortunately since the NDP came to office this figure has continued to decline, such 
that it is now in 1973 a mere 11 per cent of total revenues. If we turn over the overlay we get the figure 
on the overlay of the increase which is certainly quite phenomenal in the last year, but has obviously 
been cumulative over the period ’47 to ’73. This gives the picture of total revenues received by the 
industry. 
 
Up to the period 1957 we had an annual situation in which expenditures were higher than revenue. Since 
1957 you’ve got a situation in which revenues have in each year exceeded expenditures such that in the 
last year of operation, 1973, one has total revenues of $266 million compared with $130 million in the 
form of expenditures. Approximately 50 per cent in that year of revenue was surplus or profit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is of considerable interest from the point of view of economics is to try and 
assess what has been the average rate of return of this industry over its lifetime. Obviously, merely to 
take the last year of operation with its phenomenally high oil prices, is not a fair figure. That’s the first 
table which I gave here, although accurate for experiences in 1973, it does not give the cumulative 
experience of this industry over its lifetime in the province. 
 
Now, in formal economics what is required is to construct an internal rate of return analysis. And what is 
meant by that is quite simply to try and arrive at a figure which represents what would have been the rate 
of interest earned had the corporation invested its capital in some safe asset as opposed to investing it in 
an actual ongoing corporate entity. 
 
If I might give an absurdly simple example, if in 1973 a businessman invests in a factory $100 and in 
1974 he earns a revenue from that factory of $250 of which $50 goes in the form of taxes and $50 in the 
form of wages he then has left over in 1974 $150 on an investment in 1973 of 100 and taking this 
absurdly simple example if everything is squared off at the end of this 1974 period, there’s no factory 
left, there’s no scrap value left, there’s no capital assets to consider, the rate of return is obviously $150, 
relative to an initial expenditure of $100 in a one year period, the rate of return is 50 per cent in one 
year. 
 
Now, obviously that is a gross simplification, because what we have in this situation are expenditures 
spreading over a 27 year period and revenues spread over a 27 year period. Also the matter is 
complicated by the fact that at the end of 1973 what is not used up, all the oil discovered as in my simple 
example about the factory which presumably disappears in a puff of smoke at the end of one year, we 
have left 800 million barrels in the ground which the oil companies can still take out. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1771 

Now, what I would like to do at this juncture is to bring forth the following table which gives the 
internal rate of return on assets invested in the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry, using various 
assumptions. So the first table gives a rate of return in 1947 to 1973 assuming Canadian Petroleum 
Association figures with respect both to expenditure and revenue. It also assumes that the oil companies 
will receive no further revenue in any way, shape or form. The first figure of 11 per cent would mean 
that if the oil and gas industry were nationalized tomorrow with no compensation paid for oil in the 
ground, for oil facilities such as feeder pipelines and this, I must make this perfectly clear, I’m talking 
about crude oil production, we’re not talking about refineries or retail operation. This is referring to 
production end of the business. This is what the industry has earned to date, taking no account of what 
assets it still has. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, making those assumptions the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry has earned an 11 
per cent rate of return on its assets. To put that in perspective that should be compared with the blue 
figures which give an average for 1966 to ’70 of all non-financial corporations, their rate of return on 
assets. And we see that the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry has already a rate of return twice the 
average of non-financial corporations in Canada. However, obviously the assumption involved in the 
first calculation of 11 per cent, namely that there would be no further revenue earned, is totally 
misleading. Let us assume that the oil industry in Saskatchewan uses up the 800 million barrels which 
are still in place and remember these are 800 million barrels calculated on the present recovery 
techniques. A reservation is that it may be decidedly too low, given that higher prices justify better 
recovery techniques, but assuming the 800 million barrels, assuming a 5 per cent annual reduction in 
production as the Department of Mineral Resources predicted would be the case if there were steady 
exploitation of the oil in the ground, further assuming there to be no increase in the price of oil above the 
current frozen level, the level frozen jointly by the Federal Government and the Provincial Government 
under the provisions of Bill 42, and assuming that costs remain constant which is a reasonable 
assumption because Bill 42 allows that the $3.38 ceiling will increase with increases in operating costs, 
that is provided for in the Bill assuming that there would be a 15 per cent rate of return on the 
Saskatchewan oil and gas industry by the time it had exhausted current, proved reserves. In other words 
a realistic assessment of what will be the rate of return of the private oil industry on the investment it has 
made to date, is three times what has been the average for non-financial corporations in Canada. 
 
At this juncture it might be appropriate to read a quotation from Mr. Wilson, Vice-President of Shell Oil 
of Canada, talking in Louisiana, and I quote: 
 

We have chosen 9 per cent as representing a reasonable rate of return we like to expect on future 
invested capital for the exploration and production business. 

 
In other words we have a senior official of the private oil industry publicly stating what he considers to 
be a reasonable rate of return on assets, and that’s what these figures are giving, 9 per cent. We’ve got a 
figure of 11 per cent already which will amount to 15 per cent by the time, after 11 years all the current 
oil would be depleted, assuming no further investment, no discoveries. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1772 

Mr. Speaker, this was a third figure here, pardon me, the final figure, 1974 to ’84 is an attempt to 
calculate what will be the rate of return from there on in. If we call it quits on the 11 per cent from 1947 
to ’73 and we ask ourselves what is going to be the rate of return which the oil industry earns on those 
800 million barrels in place, known to be proved reserves, assuming the $3.38 price which is contained 
in Bill 42, assuming the costs figures remaining constant as was outlined on the first graph, making 
those assumptions, then for the period 1974 to ’84 during the 11 years for which oil could still be 
continued to be extracted from Saskatchewan, there would be a phenomenal 37 to 66 per cent rate of 
return on the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry in the province. That, Mr. Speaker, by any standards is 
excessive, exorbitant and should be stopped. In other words, the provisions as provided by Bill 42 far 
from being repressive allow, depending upon assumptions which are as wide as the range, give a range 
of 37 to 66 per cent rate of return on the oil in place, in Saskatchewan, evaluated at historical costs of 
discovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge both the Canadian Petroleum Association and the Provincial Government to 
dispute those figures. I think they have been adequately calculated based upon proper rate of internal 
return analysis, using a computer, and I think they will stand up under the queries that either the Minister 
of Mineral Resources or members of the Canadian Petroleum Association would like to direct towards 
them. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, you may recall that I put a question on the Order Paper a short time ago to this 
effect: Has the Government undertaken any studies of the rate of return earned in the Saskatchewan oil 
and gas industry? The answer I got back was, yes, the study is under way. And then a note was 
appended. The note states, even after these studies are complete confidentiality must be maintained 
under the provisions of The Saskatchewan Statistics Act, which prevents disclosure of information 
obtained from companies under the authority of The Statistics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like Members of the House to consider that response. A simple question, has the 
Government undertaken any studies of rates of return? Yes, a study is under way. Nearly three years 
after coming to power, with the oil and gas industry a central focus of resource policy and of provincial 
policy in the intervening three years, we learn that finally in March, 1974, the Government has launched 
a study to discover whether, yes or no, there is a high rate of return in the industry. In other words, for 
the intervening period the Government has gone by the seat of its pants without undertaking the 
elementary economics which are required to formulate new policy. I think that is shocking. 
 
But furthermore to compound the injury, the note is appended which implies that The Statistics Act 
would prohibit the publication of information. If the Members are willing to look up The Statistics Act 
back to the 1972 session, they’ll discover that under Section 11 (1) indeed there are restrictions on what 
the Director can publish, there are restrictions such that no individual identifiable person, business or 
organization can be identified from these results. However, The Statistics Act also explicitly states in 
Section 4 that under the authority of the Minister, the Director can publish statistical information relating 
to the commercial, industrial, financial, social, economic and general activities and conditions of the 
province. The Statistics Act in no way prohibits the Government from publishing 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1773 

an assessment of what is the industry wide rate of return. The Statistics Act merely restricts the 
Government from publishing information relative to one particular corporation. 
 
We have once again, the Government hiding behind a piece of legislation in order not to engage in 
disclosure of corporate, relevant corporate statistics in order that we can have an intelligent public 
debate about this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these figures have been produced, admittedly on spare time and part-time work and have 
been labored over and doubtless there could be additional refinements added, were there the staff of a 
government behind it. However, I repeat the challenge, I challenge the Government, I challenge the 
Canadian Petroleum Association to deny that cumulatively the experience will be 15 per cent on the 
investment already made and that from here on in there will be an outrageous 37 to 66 per cent rate of 
return if the oil industry is left to its own devices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time is running out. Oil is a wasting asset. We need to act now if we are going to preserve 
this asset for the better use of the people of Saskatchewan, if we are to assure that returns on this asset 
do in fact flow to the people of Saskatchewan. I used here an 11 year pay-out period, however, assuming 
some rate of growth it could be as short as 9 years. The life index of the conventional crude discoveries 
in Saskatchewan, if there are no new large discoveries. I was pleased to note when the Premier spoke in 
the debate in reply to the Speech from the Throne, that he discussed the problem of rapidly diminishing 
reserves and I quote: 
 

We must act to reduce the amount of oil leaving this province. We believe it is better to have 
more of our oil safe for use in Saskatchewan in the 1980s and 1990s than to have it shipped off 
to Chicago and Minneapolis to be used in the 1970s. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was a quotation from the Premier in the Throne Speech debate back in December. I 
can totally agree with his sentiments. In 1972 and 1973 we exported fully 50 per cent of our 
Saskatchewan oil production to the United States. One would have expected that following those 
statements of general policy there would have been attempts to reduce oil exports to the United States. 
However, come up to March and we have a release from the Minister of Mineral Resources, Mineral 
Resources Minister Elwood Cowley, today announced the National Energy Board has granted an 
additional allocation of 45,000 barrels daily of Saskatchewan crude for export to the United States. Mr. 
Cowley went on to say and I quote: 
 

He was pleased to hear of the National Energy Board’s decision. 
 
On the one hand we have the Premier talking about the problems of preservation of Canadian oil, 
Saskatchewan oil, on the other hand we have the Minister of Mineral Resources talking about the need 
to step up exports. In reply to a question in the House, the Minister of Mineral Resources stated it is with 
a view to increasing the production particularly of the sour crude. But what I might call an extraordinary 
allocation of Saskatchewan crude made basically to the American west. The Minister was there 
discussing in the House the National Energy Board decision to increase by 45,000 barrels daily, the 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1774 

allocations. 
 
A clear contradiction. On the one hand the Premier stating the necessity to conserve, on the other hand 
the Minister of Mineral Resources and the Department of Mineral Resources proceeding along with the 
ideology and the blinkers of years gone by of continental integration of resource policy of doing what 
ever the oil companies want, a mirage that seems to affect bureaucrats both on the National Energy 
Board and here. 
 
The question obviously arises who is to be believed. The Premier back in December or the Minister in 
March? I would argue the situation is not really a question of Saskatchewan crude oil, for after all 
Saskatchewan is only in the order of 10 per cent of Canada’s conventional crude. The situation 
nationally is serious. 
 
Here on this final simple graph taken from the Canadian Petroleum Association data and for that reason 
it may be suspect but we can question the figures. The black line gives estimated projected crude oil 
production in Canada. And according to the Canadian Petroleum Association there is going to be a 
levelling off this year and a decline here on in from conventional oil, that Canada as a whole is going to 
be facing the same situation as Saskatchewan and we are going to be approaching the end of our 
conventional oil reserves. 
 
In order to supplement conventional oil, it becomes logical, and I don’t question that logic, to proceed 
with some development of tar sands oil. The blue line gives an indication of projections with respect to 
tar sands development. Up to 1973 the only plant on stream is the GCOS, Great Canadian Oil Sands, 
producing at 50,000 barrels a day. The jagged lines indicate the size involved in any new production. 
Each of those jags indicates coming on stream in 1970, 1980, 1982 of one large tar sands operation. 
Each costing $1 billion. Each producing 100,000 barrels a day. Syncrude in 1978, Shell in 1980, 
Petrofina in 1982 are the tar sands projects currently under way at various levels of development. 
 
But even assuming that kind of development one is still faced with this distinct possibility that total oil 
production combining conventional and synthetic crude is going to decline. And the assumptions 
involved in this rate of expansion of Athabasca Tar Sands with three plants on stream by 1982, assumes 
incalculable environmental damage to northern Alberta, problems which have not been resolved and 
problems which very likely will not be resolved. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the red line gives an extrapolation of current Canadian demand for Canadian oil. In 
other words it separates out imported oil east of the Ottawa valley line. 
 
If we do a simple extrapolation of the rate of increase experienced during the 1960s we find that demand 
equal to conventional crude production by 1983. But, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian oil industry has not 
been developed primarily for the use of Canadians. The Canadian oil industry has been developed as an 
integrated item with the continental mid-west American demands. This figure, this blue-purple line 
gives to 1973 the level of exports of Canadian oil which have doubled in the last three or four years, 
have increased from something in the order of 200,000 barrels in 1961 to 1.1 million in 1973. Clearly, 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1775 

if that kind of continued extrapolated growth went on, we’d be in trouble a lot sooner than 1983. 
 
I think the argument can clearly be made and that is the assumption involved in the dotted lines we 
should be phasing out exports to the United States of all Canadian petroleum. We have only in the last 
two years achieved a situation in which Canada produces more than it consumes. But we have produced 
into such a situation that we are entirely dependent upon the United States market. We have constructed 
an irrational system whereby we cannot transport western Canadian oil to eastern Canada and we have 
locked ourselves in such a way as the Americans expect us to continue exporting our rapidly 
diminishing conventional crude reserves to them. It is one small example of the dependent mentality 
which exists in Canadian governments at the provincial and federal level that the Minister of Mineral 
Resources says that he is pleased in 1974, to have a 45,000 barrel per day increase in export allocations. 
I think any sane socialist ecologically oriented person who looks at the Canadian oil and gas situation 
cannot help but be alarmed at what are the projections into the next decade. Perhaps not coincidentally 
one decade away will be 1984. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in concluding my remarks, I hope that I have added some new information to this debate; 
information about objective calculations on what in fact has gone on in terms of dollars and cents and 
profit and losses and rates of return in the oil industry in this province. I would admit that the data 
involved in much of this is dubious inasmuch as it comes from the Canadian Petroleum Association and 
not from independent authorities. I think a case can well be made that we should have a great deal more 
concern than we currently do about continuing to export both from Saskatchewan and Alberta at the 
level that we are. What that means by the end of the decade is that either a large net importing of 
off-shore oil or developing the Athabasca Tar Sands in an unseemly haste with incredible damage to the 
environment to northern Alberta. 
 
Before I take my seat and formally move this Resolution I should like to take the opportunity to express 
a personal word to the seconder, Mr. Lange. Mr. Lange has agreed to second this Resolution, despite 
considerable misgivings about the decorum and proprietary of seconding a motion from a person sitting 
on the other side of the House. I should like to congratulate, personally, Mr. Lange for his step. I think 
that this is a debate which should have gone on within the New Democratic Party, the debate that I 
would have liked to have led as a Member on that side of the House, but exactly the same experience as 
I have experienced this year in trying to bring before the House this debate, I experienced last year when 
I tried to initiate a debate on potash policy when the Hon. Member for Albert Park was forced to second 
that resolution in order that we could debate potash policy. In other words the Government which claims 
to be interested in ending the resource rip-off is not even prepared to debate the issue in the Legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Richards: — Why, Mr. Speaker? Why, if this is the most crucial issue facing Canadian people 
about ending its resource rip-offs, potash and oil and forests, and water across the country, why, 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1776 

are Members opposite not prepared to have this debate? Why does it have to be myself who introduces 
this motion as an Opposition Member? Why is the Government opposite not prepared to take the lead in 
establishing a precedent for a sane national energy policy by nationalizing the provincial energy policy? 
Such a policy has been adopted by the NDP in conventions since 1971, it has been stated publicly by the 
Premier of British Columbia, it has been stated publicly by David Lewis, the Federal Leader of the NDP 
and even, on occasion, it has been stated by Premier Blakeney. When it comes to actually engaging in 
the guts of the debate providing the facts and the figures so that the people of Saskatchewan can decide 
rationally on this issue, at that time, Mr. Speaker, this fear about embarrassment, this fear about what 
that means in terms of the private negotiation with the Canadian Petroleum Association. In other words, 
there is an abandonment of the responsibility which a socialist movement or party has in 1974 to give 
the people the information so that they can decide to lead on this issue so that we can consider it possible 
in the 1970s to have an independent socialist Canada. 
 
With that Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Lange Resolution No. 13. 
 
Mr. L. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I want first of all to compliment the Member for Saskatoon 
University for the amount of work that he has obviously done in preparation of his presentation. 
 
I will agree with him that it is a very important subject. I will agree with him that his presentation as he 
has presented it probably sounds very logical. I would have been inclined to have gone along much 
further with what he is saying had he refrained in his closing remarks from attacking the Government, 
attacking the courage, attacking the principle, and attacking a lot of the general philosophy that he spoke 
of. 
 
I would remind him that this energy policy and energy crisis is a very important one that it has some 
very, very far reaching and important implications, not only for this Government but for the Government 
of Canada. 
 
He knows very well that the position of Saskatchewan is a very minor one in total production being not 
very much more than approximately 5 per cent. He is well aware that we have established Saskoil, that it 
has been fairly well accepted, that it needs considerable development to be workable. He knows very 
well that Bill 42 has been passed and again it has achieved remarkable acceptance. He knows very well 
that the Premier of this province attended the energy conference and made us all rather proud of the 
presentation that he made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Larson: — And he knows even better that at this very moment the Premier is again in consultation 
with the rest of Canada, not Saskatchewan alone, insofar as trying to work out and resolve something by 
way of a suitable energy policy for the future. Now that this problem is with us and that it needs 
resolving, I don’t think anyone on this side of the House will deny that the Resolution suggested by the 
Member for Saskatoon University is one way to resolve it. But I am not in position to reply and to 
adequately cover all the points the Member raised. This will require considerable research on my part to 
be objective. I, however, feel that it 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1777 

deserves objective research for reply, so I would at this point Mr. Speaker, beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, before adjourning debate would the Hon. Member permit a question. 
The question, Mr. Speaker, is, will the Member allow this motion to be debated at a later time. We have 
the unfortunate precedent with respect to potash last year that the debate was adjourned and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Once a Member moves a motion it is then the property of the House and 
the House must decide and the Member cannot press for special preference on any motion once he has 
moved it. It is now the property of the House, the House will decide. 
 

Resolution No. 15 — Control of Wild Oats on Prairie Grain Farms 
 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin) moved, seconded by Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada to 
properly recognize the serious problem of wild oats on prairie grain farms, and to consider 
methods of control and eradication. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, my main reason for introducing this Resolution today, is to draw attention to the 
magnitude of the wild oats problem on the western prairies. It is a problem of staggering proportion for 
all farmers, particularly Saskatchewan farmers. It is perhaps so common, so persistent that we have 
come to accept the wild oats problem as a fact of life on our farms. Unfortunately we have seemed to 
resign ourselves to accept the problem. It is something like the weather, there is a feeling in rural 
Saskatchewan that there is very little we can do about it. 
 
You will note, Mr. Speaker, that about 85 per cent of the cultivated acreage on the prairies is infested to 
some extent by wild oats. Almost no area of the western prairies is now immune from this problem. It 
has spread throughout the prairie provinces and now covers almost the complete area. It is by far our 
most costly weed. Infestations range from very mild in some cases with little effect on yield to so severe 
that crop loss can approach 100 per cent. 
 
Oil seed crops which have become very important in our province in the last decade are specially 
susceptible, even a minor infestation may be responsible for substantial losses. 
 
The annual cost to farmers due to wild oats is difficult to estimate. Research has been spotty and 
inconclusive. There have been various experts who have suggested that wild oats have been costing 
farmers over $100 million per year. However, these figures generally have been two or three years old. 
They are based on $2 wheat, $1 barley, and $4 flax. The chief cost of course of wild oats is a reduction 
of grain yield. At today’s prices, wild oats could well be costing our farmers $300 million per year in 
yield loss alone. Mr. Speaker, this is only part 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1778 

of the loss. 
 
Grain delivered to elevators in Saskatchewan averages about 2.5 per cent dockage, in most cases the 
largest percentage of this is wild oats, about 500,000 tons of dockage are delivered to the Lakehead and 
Pacific Coast terminals each year. This amounts to something like 10,000 carloads of dockage that has 
to be transported to our terminals. 
 
This would be serious at any time but when grain transportation is in its present critical stage it is a 
disaster. Cost of cleaning infested grain is borne by all farmers — those with dirty grain as well as those 
with clean grain. The cost of cleaning comes out of the Wheat Board funds and this is simply reducing 
the final payment that is made to farmers. 
 
There has been a reluctance in this country to penalize farmers whose grain contains a high percentage 
of dockage. This has been done in some areas but there is reluctance to do it here. 
 
I mention these points to give you an indication of the magnitude of the wild oats problem. We should 
ask ourselves: what is being done about it? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is very little in relation to the size 
of the problem. I don’t want to belittle the efforts of those who are concerned with the problem. There 
are some university people and some organizations who certainly recognize the problem. Regional 
meetings have been held around the province by the Wild Oats Action Committee and I understand a 
final symposium on wild oats is to be held in Saskatoon on April 5th. I congratulate the Department of 
Agriculture for supporting these meetings. But in relation to the size of the problem, efforts to date have 
been woefully inadequate. When I speak of inadequate I am thinking of governments at all levels, farm 
organizations, grain companies, researchers and all people involved. There is no indication at the 
moment that the wild oats infestation is decreasing. 
 
Because of erratic results, farmers have little faith in chemical control. This may be partly due to a lack 
of proper instruction or education in the use of the chemicals. But chemicals for wild oats control are 
expensive and a farmer wants some assurance of success before he invests heavily in them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perennially we have debates in this Legislature about the Port of Churchill, grain 
transportation, feed grain marketing, movement of wheat, boxcars, terminals and other farm problems 
over which we basically have little control. We discuss the Bertha Army Worms, or the plight of farmers 
hit by floods or crops being left under the snow. These problems come and go but across the prairies 
every year production losses due to wild oats are far greater than any of these. 
 
Many methods of control have been tried and most are in part successful. A number of farms use 
delayed seeding. This has been done for years. There are cultural practices such as rod-weeding after 
seeding that has some beneficial effect. Some farmers have cut infested crops for forage. It is 
recommended, of course, that people should use wild oats free seed. It is also recommended that grain 
trucks should be covered to prevent scattering of wild oats, which blow off quite readily. Barley is 
grown and quick maturing crops to try and control the problem; crop rotation, summerfallow and, of 
course, now we have new chemicals on the market. But in spite of these so-called control 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1779 

methods, strangely enough we are not winning the battle. 
 
The main problem, as most farmers realize, is that wild oats will remain dormant in the ground for years 
and only a percentage of them will germinate each year to reinfest the land. It is quite possible that you 
may control wild oats on land for two, three, four or five years; you could summerfallow it completely; 
grow absolutely no wild oats or even seed it down to grass, and five years later disc it up and the wild 
oats would grow. 
 
The question that we must ask then, is: what can be done? Obviously, I think, a bold new approach is 
needed. A few meetings around the country or a few thousand more dollars for research doesn’t seem to 
be the answer. Governments should co-operate in a massive campaign to eradicate this prairie scourge. 
 
Greatly extended research should evaluate and co-ordinate present control methods. I believe that what 
we need is some imaginative research to look into new and exotic means of solving the problem. I 
would suggest, for example, that could wild oats be somehow sterilized so that the seed would never 
grow or perhaps just as valuable, could the germination of the wild oats be so encouraged or enhanced 
that all the seeds would grow in one year. In either case we would have the problem pretty well solved. 
 
I may also ask if wild oats could be crossed with domestic oats to produce characteristics which would 
make them easier to control. We may even ask, could such a crossing procedure produce a product 
which would have some value as grain rather than the useless product which is now produced. Or 
perhaps there is yet some undiscovered chemical which would give complete eradication and be 
relatively simple to use. At the moment there doesn’t seem to be any of these on the market. 
 
In a world where many people are hungry, can we afford to lose millions of bushels of cereal production 
to wild oats every year? This problem must be given top priority by governments, grain officials and 
everyone concerned if there is any hope of success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suppose as is usual in Resolutions, someone will propose an amendment to commend 
someone for their efforts in wild oats control. I should like to remind you that we have in Saskatchewan, 
the world’s finest agricultural land and a very large acreage of it. But almost every acre of this land is 
visible evidence that wild oats control efforts until now have been ineffective. Perhaps a concentrated 
effort in a designated area of this province could serve as a pilot project to see if success is possible. At 
the present world demand for grain I don’t believe that we can afford to wait any longer. Some action 
must be taken immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this in mind I should like to move Resolution No. 15, seconded by my colleague from 
Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). 
 
Mr. I. W. Carlson (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to make a few comments about this 
very serious problem that is being brought to the attention of this Assembly. I am sure that any rural 
Member will be concerned about the problem. One of the Members next to me, the Member for Watrous 
(Mr. Cody) said that he is concerned about 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1780 

the problem but he doesn’t know very much about it. The only wild oat problem he knows about is the 
one he sows on Saturday night. 
 
Mr. McIsaac: — That’s a perennial problem. 
 
Mr. Carlson: — The Member for Wilkie says that is a perennial problem and I am sure that it is for 
some of the Members. 
 
I wish the Member who initiated the debate had remained as I wanted to make a few comments on his 
suggestions. Maybe the Member for Milestone will take notes and pass them on to him. He says that the 
farmers tend to take the wild oats problem as something very little can be done about and just accept it 
and carry on. Then he went on and spent 10 or 15 minutes listing the various chemicals that are available 
and the cultural practices that are used throughout the province and indicated that they are, in fact, 
serious about this problem and are attempting to do what they can. 
 
He also mentioned the seminars that are sponsored jointly by the federal and provincial governments 
and the chemical companies, that are being conducted this year in an attempt to familiarize farmers with 
cultivating practices and chemical control methods that can be used. I think the problem probably is not 
so much the lack of a solution as it is with getting it implemented, making the farmers familiar with the 
various kinds of chemicals that can be used on different crops. I think that if you go through the list of 
chemicals you will see that there is a chemical suitable to kill wild oats in almost every crop. Most of 
your oil seed crops can be sprayed, wheat can be sprayed. I think the only two that you cannot spray is 
oats and barley. I fully agree that there are problems but I don’t believe they are so much at the 
researchers’ end. I think the researchers have done a fairly good job on this and I am not suggesting that 
we should back off or not continue to push hard in this field. Maybe what the Member was getting at is 
that we need more civil servants, maybe we should include one wild oat patrol officer in each 
agricultural representative district. I am not too sure that something like this is not well worth looking at. 
 
A lot of farmers just don’t have the time and ability possibly to understand all the ramifications of 
various chemical weed control programs and a real concentrated effort by the Department of Agriculture 
may well help in this program. 
 
In dealing with chemicals I think another serious problem is simply the cost of the chemicals. A couple 
of years ago, when the prices of grain were half or less than half of what they are now, it was debatable 
whether it would pay to spray a crop for wild oats. I think that is changing but no doubt cost is certainly 
a real factor. Costs are increasing in all agricultural inputs, chemicals are no exception, fertilizer and all 
the rest of the inputs. Farmers are going to have to look very seriously at how much they spend on each 
of these inputs. Probably if their budgeting is done well in advance it may, in fact, prove that they can’t 
afford not to fertilize or not to spray for wild oats. I think what we really need is more information in the 
hands of the farmers, and possibly a program to reduce the cost of many of these chemicals. 
 
I think this is a serious Resolution, something that we do 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1781 

need to do a little more work on and Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 164 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin) 
for Return No. 164 showing: 
 

With respect to Land Bank Commission Lease allocations or Appeal Board allocations: (a) 
whether any leases have been granted to persons who did not have the greatest number of points 
under the lease allocation program; (b) If so, the names of persons who received the leases and 
the description of the land involved. 

 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment to propose with respect 
to this proposed Motion and I shall send a copy over to the deskmate of the Member for Moosomin. 
 
The amendment really, I think, will provide the information that the Hon. Member seeks except the one 
problem that the Government has. It has to do with the names of persons who received the leases. We 
get ourselves into this traditional argument or discussion of what is confidential or what isn’t 
confidential and I would argue that it would be unfair to those who did receive and to those who did not 
receive, to publish the names. Accordingly, what I will be proposing to do is that we amend Return No. 
164: 
 

By striking out everything after sub (b) and substitute the following: 
 
(b) (i) the total number of allocations made under competition; and (b) (ii) in each case where a 
lease was not granted to the person receiving the greatest number of points, what was the reason. 

 
So if the amendment goes through, as recommended, what we will have on this item No. 3, Return No. 
164, is an answer which will answer the question (a) whether any leases have been granted to persons 
who did not have the greatest number of points under the lease allocation program; and then (b) (i) the 
total number of allocations made; and (b) (ii) the reason why the allocation was not made to the person 
involved with the greatest number of points. 
 
This will allow the Government to protect the names of people who are really innocent in this operation. 
After all the Members want to know if there have been allocations made favoring people and their 
names who don’t have the highest number of points and this information will be granted to them by this 
amendment. 
 
I will move this, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1782 

Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I must say I don’t quite follow the arguments of the 
Attorney General. It is a little bit better provision, if you like, than the Government was prepared to 
make the last time this particular issue was debated, when the Minister of Agriculture I believe, 
indicated he was going to turn down or invite the House to turn down the entire Motion. 
 
The question now will ask, with respect to Land Bank lease allocations or Appeal Board allocations, 
firstly, whether any leases have been granted to persons who did not have the greatest number of points. 
And if so, the names of those persons who received the leases and the description of the land involved. I 
appreciate the Government’s situation with respect to respecting the confidentiality of people involved 
in these and other Government business. 
 
The fact remains, however, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Attorney General, there will be no instances here in 
my opinion where the names of these persons are not already known to other people in the area and in 
the district. Presumably the great majority of these, if not all of them, would have been appealed. There 
may have been some of them that didn’t result in an appeal but if, indeed, leases were awarded and we 
can presume there were some, the people in the area where the people who had applied, the other 
applicants, are certainly well aware of who got it, well aware of the fact that they perhaps qualified to a 
higher degree on the point scale. And what we are looking for here is to find out how many of these 
instances did take place. And may I suggest that to allow the Motion as it originally stands is not to 
reveal any confidentiality, because I am convinced that all of those parties involved are well aware of 
the names. What we are concerned about here is to get some specific instances as a result of asking this 
question and then proceed from there. 
 
So I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the comments offered by the Attorney General with respect to 
government confidentiality and I respect that must be maintained to a degree in certain cases, to a 
complete degree in other cases, but certainly not in this particular instance. It just doesn’t apply here at 
all. I think they are still trying to dodge the issue, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Land Bank. We have 
seen it so many times that any Motion dealing with the Land Bank is for one the Government Members 
automatically to try to amend or water down and just don’t want to provide the kind of basic information 
that we need, and that the farmers of Saskatchewan need, before they are able to assess the value of this 
program that the Members opposite continue to talk about. 
 
We have yet to see that value, we have yet to see for sure that it is being operated fairly. We are trying to 
get information to determine that and here the Government proposes an amendment that will prevent us 
from getting the kind of information I suggest, that this House and the farmers of Saskatchewan, really 
need. 
 
So I am going to oppose the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, the other day the Minister of Agriculture rapidly 
told us that he would provide no information whatsoever and we observed that the Attorney General 
very rapidly adjourned 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1783 

debate. His discretion was a little better than the Minister of Agriculture. But once we have received the 
amendment we find out that his discretion wasn’t even as good as the Minister of Agriculture’s, because 
simply by this amendment he isn’t telling us anything. 
 
For example, (b) (i) of the amendment, it says the total number of allocations made under competition. 
We can count, Mr. Speaker, in the annual report the total number of allocations made under competition, 
the annual report which presumably will be due after the 31st and all those pieces of land that are leased 
will be listed there so that information is already available. 
 
Now let’s look at the second part of the amendment he moved. “In each case when a lease was not 
granted to the person receiving the greatest number of points, what was the reason”, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
this is slightly helpful but once again it does not provide the name of the individual or the situation that 
we have been referring to. 
 
I think that the Attorney General doesn’t want us really to be able to check out and find out whether the 
facts that he has given us are correct or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — This is very obvious. If he had really a valid reason for being able to come and tell 
us in this Assembly a case where the point system, a person say getting 100 points did not get the lease 
and someone getting 85 points got the lease, then if he really and honestly believed that the lease had 
been given in fairness he could give us the reason, he could give us the name. We would check out the 
information and we would find out if what he is telling us is correct. But, obviously, he is hiding 
something because the above procedure would be extremely easy to do and he has chosen not to. 
 
I think that this is the type of thing that people in Saskatchewan involved with the Land Bank are 
extremely concerned about. I think that until the Government opposite is willing to come clean and 
provide the number of points that each applicant has received, the person being awarded the lease and 
they give a very valid reason why the person who had the most points does not get the land, a reason that 
will stand up in the public’s eye, the suspicion will always be there and will have good reason to be 
there. There is some hanky panky goings on in the Government in the leasing of land. 
 
Now it is obvious that there is some goings on because there have been far too many discrepancies 
coming to the Opposition’s attention where individuals receiving the land, who did not have the most 
points, that there isn’t a very good reason why the person with the most points, that there isn’t a very 
good reason why the person with the most points didn’t receive it. I think that if we were able — as the 
Attorney General well knows — if the Opposition was able to go out and investigate these things that 
they would be able to go out and investigate these things that they would be able to come back to the 
Assembly and say without doubt that some of the allocations being made are certainly not in accord with 
the fairness the Land Bank system would have to have in order to operate. 
 
I think that it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1784 

as presented to us does not satisfy the requirements of being able to determine if leases are totally fair or 
not, and, therefore I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No 16 — International Development Programs 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. D. L. Faris (Arm 
River): 
 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that: 
(1) the Government of Saskatchewan should match annually dollar for dollar the money raised 
for international development purposes by non-governmental agencies in Saskatchewan; (2) part 
of this money should be spent in international development education in the Province of 
Saskatchewan; (3) there be on-going consultation between the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the non-governmental agencies as to these international development programs. 

 
Mr. H. H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, the other day before I adjourned debate 
on this Resolution I had made a few comments in regard to the present situation and what I thought 
ought to be done in regard to the world situation when we compare the rich nations to the poor nations. 
 
One of the comments that I made was that we are not really that concerned about financial assistance 
that would be raised by this Resolution, but that we are more concerned about the re-education of not 
only our adults but also our young people. I had mentioned at that time, Mr. Speaker, that there were a 
number of reasons as to why there were shortages in the world. Some of the reasons for the shortages 
we, as human beings, have no control over situations and I refer to such things as drought and floods. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are certain things that human beings do have control over and I think these are 
the things that we would really like to have discussed. 
 
First, the sheer gluttony of the rich nations. We produce and keep on producing for the sake of having 
more and more. Mr. Speaker, it is this kind of selfishness, I think, that we will have to attempt to 
overcome if we want to salvage at all the poor nations in the world. 
 
I mentioned the other day also, Mr. Speaker, that I thought that it was very, very important that we 
re-educate and I referred to such things as the discrepancies that exist in the world today between the 
rich and the poor. We must, I believe, make our own people more conscious that this is a global village 
and that we in Saskatchewan cannot just look at our own situation, but that we have obligations and 
duties, moral duties, to the people who live in South America, in China, in India and the other parts of 
the Third World. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1785 

This is a global village and I think our schools must do something about making our young people more 
aware that they have these obligations. 
 
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, I think students should seek answers to certain questions. It is now that I 
wish to dwell on these questions. 
 
Students should ask themselves why do we continue to pay inadequate prices and allow exorbitant 
prices for basic agricultural commodities, such as, coffee, cocoa, rice and sugar, while millions of 
workers and their families in the Third World suffer hunger, illiteracy and disease. We, in the rich 
nations, profit at the expense of those who are poor. 
 
Another question, Mr. Speaker, our students should ask themselves is: why does one quarter of the 
world’s population, including affluent Canadians, control and consume three quarters of the earth’s 
resources and services? Are we prepared to do with less so that others can have more, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Another question that our young people should ask themselves is: why isn’t Canada more vocal within 
the councils of the rich nations? Shouldn’t Canada’s position be to share decision-making power in 
trade, in tariff, in monetary reform, with developing nations? 
 
In 1972, when UNCTAD III or United Nations Conference on Trade and Development took place, it is 
my understanding that Canada was one of the toughest nations to negotiate with the Third World. Any 
time that a question came up Canada was always asking, ‘What is in it for us?’ rather than looking at the 
other side of the coin, ‘What is in it for the poor nations?’ 
 
Another question, Mr. Speaker, that I think we should ask ourselves, and students should ask themselves 
is: why do we allocate only 0.5 per cent of Canada’s gross national product to foreign aid? Hopefully, 
Mr. Speaker, in this regard we do not follow the example of the United States as suggested by the 
Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod) because the United States in 1970, according to Mr. 
McNamara, the President of The World Bank, allocated only 0.34 per cent and he stated that if that 
would continue that by 1975, in his estimation, it would drop to 0.24 per cent. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have to reverse the trend. It has to go in the other direction. It is not what is 
given per capita but the percentage of gross national product. 
 
Another question, Mr. Speaker, that we should ask ourselves is: why do the rich get richer while the 
poor grow relatively poorer and more desperate? 
 
Studies made by The World Bank showed that in 10 countries with per capita income averaging $145, 
the poorest 40 per cent of the population received a per capita income of only $50. On the Indian 
subcontinent alone some 200 million people subsist on incomes which average less than $40 per year. 
At India’s rate of economic growth, it would take more than 30 years before the poorest one-third of the 
population could even afford an adequate diet. Third World countries are growing in gross economic 
terms, that is a fact, but their individual lives are stagnating in human terms. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1786 

Mr. Speaker, another question that we should ask ourselves is: have we ever seriously contemplated the 
effect of raising the price of wheat from $2 to cover $5 on the international market. What effect does this 
have on the Third World countries? What about the increase in the price of uranium, of oil, of meat and 
other exports needed by developing countries? Yes, increases in the prices of our exports is good for our 
country, and no one will argue with that, but it means that literally millions of people in Third World 
countries will starve and live in utter desperation. They simply cannot afford to pay these prices and 
must go without. This, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, is nothing more than international blackmail by the 
rich developed countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many prominent people who have pointed out the injustice of a situation whereby 
25 per cent of the people own and use more than 80 per cent of the non-renewable resources. These 
same people have warned us on the impending dangers and unless society grants greater justice to the 
poor their resentment will explode into revolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to go very far to see that some of these predictions have already come to 
pass. 
 
Let me just refer to a few of these prominent people — Mahatma Gandhi warned us that, and I quote: 
 

A violent and bloody revolution is a certainty one day unless there is voluntary abdication of 
riches, sharing them for common good. 

 
The Archbishop of Hyderabad, India, stated in the summer of 1973: 
 

The long ages of resigned fatalism and passive acceptance of poverty have ended. The poor are 
rapidly becoming intolerant and are already in rebellion. If they do not succeed in securing a 
change that leads towards justice, then that rebellion will become an explosion. 

 
Mr. Speaker, permit me to quote one more international figure, the Archbishop Camara of Recife, 
Brazil. He described very aptly the present situation when he said: 
 

Today 85 per cent of the people rot in misery to make it possible for 15 per cent to live in 
comfort. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what this Resolution is all about, to make our people more aware of the global 
situation, that we have an obligation, a responsibility to change the things as they are. They need not be 
this way for we have sufficient for all. 
 
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, unless we heed these warnings and share more generously from our 
over-abundance, there will be more revolutions, more explosions and much more bloodshed. The poor 
have everything to gain by being vocal and revolutionary and they have nothing to lose, because they 
have so little. In the meantime the tables of the rich have been loading up with new wealth but very few 
crumbs have fallen to the needy. In our pursuit of the good life, affluent Canadians have paid more to 
consume more, which has driven up costs for such basic necessities as food, clothing and housing. We 
have paid little regard to what effect this has on the budget of the Third World. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1787 

This is just one more depressing characteristic of a nation dedicated first to economic growth and only, 
secondly, to social justice. 
 
This trend to consume and to accumulate more must be reversed. We must become more conscious of 
our obligations to the poor. We, the elected Members in this House, have an opportunity to show our 
concern in a real tangible way by supporting the motion moved by the Member for Arm River. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it is not the money raised by the Resolution that is important because it is a pittance 
to what is really needed, but it may make more people aware of the discrepancies that exist in the world, 
and the need for all of us to cut back in the over-use of a limited amount of non-renewable resources. 
There is no reason why every person in this world could not have an adequate diet, but it will mean that 
governments of affluent countries must set aside a certain percentage of their budget for the needy. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this Resolution, if passed, will eventually lead to our Canadian 
Government advocating in the world councils and working towards a 1 per cent world income tax which 
could be used for people in the Third World. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support the second the motion as moved by the Member for Arm River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few comments to the 
Resolution of the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris). 
 
First of all I say very simply that no one in this Assembly or I suppose no one in the Dominion of 
Canada or in Saskatchewan particularly, would question the desirability of the sentiments expressed by 
both Members in moving and seconding this motion. 
 
This morning I picked up the newspaper and read once again about the great danger of the increasing 
spread of famine in Ethiopia. The problem is no longer under control and that the danger seems to be 
becoming more and more apparent. Every day we pick up the newspaper and we find that the world is 
no longer a national world but it is an international community. Of course we all agree with the 
sentiment that if we are going to solve these problems certainly we in the rich communities or rich 
countries of the world are going to have to recognize an international responsibility and recognize it very 
quickly. 
 
Traditionally, this has been considered a federal responsibility. Under the British North America Act, 
the Federal Government has been given the responsibility for international affairs or foreign affairs and 
therefore, most Canadians have looked to the national government as that agency or that jurisdiction that 
has the responsibility of passing on foreign aid to countries outside of the Dominion of Canada. 
However, perhaps this Resolution can emphasize to Canadians and perhaps to all jurisdictions that we 
can all do at least a little part and a little parcel in assisting in this particular area. I don’t see anything 
wrong with the Provincial Government or the Government of Saskatchewan making contributions, 
particularly with the 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1788 

wording of the Resolution in relation to educating the people of Saskatchewan about the responsibilities 
perhaps of the richer portions of the world towards the poorer nations of the world. 
 
I should like to emphasize that perhaps before we start looking abroad, look here at home. In Canada 
today, and in the Province of Saskatchewan, I suggest we should look in our own backyard. Before we 
start talking about looking beyond the borders of Saskatchewan, that perhaps a Resolution of this kind 
can turn our own eyes, our own minds and our own thoughts inward. We only have to go to a few of the 
reservations, a very few miles from the capital city, Regina, we have only to go into northern 
Saskatchewan to see the poverty, to see the poor housing conditions, to see perhaps the lack of 
educational opportunities or economic opportunity of citizens that belong right here in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think of the problems of drug abuse. How little we as Canadians and we as a government of 
Saskatchewan have contributed toward this very serious problem. 
 
I think of alcoholism. Certainly the greatest drug problem in Canada is right here with us in Regina, it’s 
in Saskatchewan, and we, with the Provincial Government that takes in millions and millions of dollars 
each year, refuse to give very little or nothing toward the rehabilitation and the control of this serious 
problem. 
 
We can think of crime, rehabilitation, and all the other problems that are at home with us. It makes us 
realize that not only do we have to sacrifice for those nations abroad but perhaps we have to make 
sacrifices right here at home. 
 
The spirit of this Resolution is charity. Charity is of course the number one quality or virtue in man. 
Certainly, I think all of us will support the concept, the philosophy and the spirit of the Resolution. I 
want to tell the Member for Arm River that I will be most happy to render my support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see this Resolution 
introduced in this Legislature for debate. 
 
Too often perhaps too much, in fact, daily we are preoccupied with our own immediate concerns. 
Preoccupied with our wealth and how we can become more affluent without looking beyond our noses, 
without looking at the poverty, disease, starvation of the emerging nations. 
 
While I agree with the Hon. Member for Milestone that we still have pockets of poverty right here at 
home, compare that with the poverty and starvation of the underdeveloped countries and there is no 
comparison. 
 
As a citizen of this country and of this world, I have always had a deep concern about the need for us as 
a wealthy nation to share our wealth and the need for us to help our neighbor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the main thrust of this Resolution is designed to provide funds for international 
development programs, 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1789 

and I wholeheartedly support this effort, I feel that the second part of the Resolution is in fact even more 
important. 
 
There will be a limit to the financial aid that we can offer to underdeveloped countries. But there is 
practically no limit to the human effort we can put forward on their behalf. Sending money is important 
but it is not enough, we must do more. I feel we must make a moral commitment to insure that our 
citizens realize and understand the plight of the vast numbers of the world’s population. 
 
Many things are occurring on this planet of which we may know very little about. For example, the Hon. 
Member for Milestone made a passing reference to a situation in Ethiopia, it is thought that over 
100,000 people died from starvation in that country before the government moved to meet this crisis. In 
Venezuela, oil resources are expected to run out in 25 years, yet 90 per cent of the population is not 
benefiting from the riches gained during the oil exploitation and exploration. 
 
The elaborate scale of food consumed in the rich countries of the world appears to be at the expense of 
the poor. If the Peruvian fish catch were used as food for Latin Americans, instead of food for animals in 
the United States, the catch would meet one-half of the annual protein deficiency of Latin Americans. In 
India thousands of people die annually from starvation with little or no knowledge of this tragedy 
relayed to the outside world. 
 
If we are to help solve the problems of the world’s poor, these conditions must be made known to the 
people. An education program must be developed which outlines the depth of the problems facing the 
people of the emerging nations. Through such a program could be created a growing consciousness 
among our people of the plight of the poor which would help to mobilize full support for programs to 
aid the world’s poor. Such a program could be handled through our own Departments of Education, and 
Continuing Education. I know, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Education staff are looking at the 
text books and curriculum now being used in our schools. Perhaps a program on world development 
could be included in the school curriculum. The Department of Continuing Education through the 
Extension Department of the University could make lectures and films available on these subjects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are our ‘brothers’ keepers’. While we live in a land of plenty, there are nations of 
people who daily face starvation. Many of the services we take for granted, such as medical care and 
education, are not available to much of the world’s population. Living in a country such as Canada with 
wealth and convenience all around us, we can quite easily become blind to the problems facing so much 
of the world’s population. 
 
In our schools we study countries such as Britain, France and United States, countries that are 
industrialized and which have realized high standards of living. We spend very little time studying the 
poorer nations of the world, such as Ethiopia, Kenya and India, to name but a few. In our homes we 
often may watch television programs which depict life as essentially rosy, occasionally troubled by a 
few minor problems which are usually resolved to everyone’s satisfaction with a concluding reassuring 
laugh, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Life is not that simple for most of the world’s population. We cannot gloss over the fact that many 
people die lacking even 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1790 

the bare necessities for sustaining life. As a nation we are isolated from the world’s poverty. We see it 
only briefly, as news items on television or a grim picture in a magazine or newspaper. We simply do 
not know enough about world poverty. 
 
The Resolution rightly speaks to the need for an education program to bring all of us an awareness of the 
depth of the world poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are concrete steps which can be taken to help them improve the standards of living 
for the world poor. One step is to provide development funds such as is being suggested here today. I 
feel that as well as providing such funds, we should strive to ensure that these funds are used to build 
labor intensive industries in developing countries. These industries should be structured on a 
co-operative basis to ensure that the maximum benefits can be achieved for the maximum number of 
people. Most nations which need aid have a large supply of labor, Mr. Speaker. The solution to many of 
their problems lies in full utilization of the labor forces. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a recent Ottawa project pushed on Tanzania, for instance, is a million dollar 
automated bakery which will destroy existing small bakeries in that country and do nothing for the 
overall welfare of the people of that country. This is the kind of a contribution that we are making. 
Canadians are quite capable of providing such needed expertise in many fields. In medicine, in 
agriculture and education to name a few. But I doubt whether this is the type of help, such as an 
automated bakery was a priority item. 
 
While I agree that we should provide such expertise we should also realize that our end objectives 
should be the self determination of the countries we are trying to assist. 
 
In the field of medical training we are witnessing some of the results of poorly defined objectives on the 
part of our country. Many medical students come to Canada from developing countries each year to 
finish their medical training. We provide the training facilities and expertise to upgrade their training. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, according to some spokesmen for the Canadian Medical Association what 
too often happens is the foreign students never return to their native lands to practise medicine. Many 
become enamored of the Canadian way of life and feel that they cannot face the poverty and the 
backwardness of their own country. In other cases the student returns home after his training has been 
completed only to find that his Canadian training really doesn’t equip him to practise medicine in a 
country where the latest medical technology is not available. It may well be asked whether this kind of 
assistance has helped or hindered developing nations. 
 
We seem to be operating a brain drain in the reverse, Mr. Speaker, taking some of the most skilled 
medical manpower from developing countries for Canadian needs. In fact, a brief from the Canadian 
Medical Association to the Canada Immigration and Population study made the following 
recommendation, let me quote: 
 

That foreign undergraduate medical students and foreign physicians in residency programs 
undertaking such training on a student visa not have the option of applying for landed immigrant 
status in Canada, thus depriving 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1791 

their country of origin of manpower, the education of which may have been borne by the mother 
country. 

 
We must not allow our expertise and affluence to rob the people we are really attempting to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I suggest as I have suggested before that we should be providing funds to develop 
their own medical schools, their own teaching hospitals. To provide their own medical technology and 
yes, we can provide some of the expertise to get them started. What is found to be true is also that after 
they return to the countries of their origin we have really not equipped them to treat the diseases caused 
from malnutrition, tropical diseases, diseases of the environment of those nations. Therefore, I think it 
would be better if we provided the kind of support necessary to train them on the scene in their own 
countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have a long tradition of helping our neighbor, of co-operation between 
groups and individuals. I recall that in the ’50s and early ’60s we had a student exchange program with 
underdeveloped countries. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that program was introduced, as many of you may recall 
by the late Woodrow Lloyd, the former Premier of this province. He himself was a person dedicated to 
the proposition that we as Canadians ought to do more to help the underdeveloped countries. 
 
All of us do recall that he was a man deeply committed to help the underprivileged and in fact, died in 
the service of the United Nations helping to upgrade and helping to resolve problems and assist the 
underdeveloped countries. 
 
Two Saskatchewan students were given grants to work and live in a developing country for a year while 
two foreign students came to live and work in Saskatchewan. Perhaps this program should be 
reinstituted again. 
 
That program that was introduced at that time was a modest project but it exemplified the kind of 
program we need to increase our awareness of what is happening in the developing countries. We must 
strive to build human bridges between ourselves and the nations we seek to help. Surely, there can be no 
greater challenge to the co-operative ethic than working to assist our brothers and sisters in other lands 
who are less fortunate than ourselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three years ago the United Nations called on the developing nations of the world to set 
aside 1 per cent of their gross national product as aid to the developing countries. Since that time only 
two nations, Sweden and Holland have matched or exceeded this percentage. Canada spends 
approximately one-half of one per cent of our GNP on foreign aid, but most of this is tied aid. ‘Tied Aid’ 
implies that the receiving countries are not free to use the aid money to shop around for goods and 
services, rather they must spend their aid money in Canada. They are tied by the conditions of the grants 
and in some cases, to loans, to purchase what they need in the Canadian marketplace at Canadian prices. 
 
Canadian aid should be given free of conditions which tie receiving countries to our economics. They 
should be allowed the freedom to use these funds for the betterment of their 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1792 

society, not for the benefit of the Canadian economy. While the spending of foreign aid should be 
supervised, these countries should not be forced to deal only with us. They should be allowed to 
purchase their goods wherever the price is most advantageous and where the goods will be the most 
valuable to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the Federal Government in Ottawa seems to attach a high priority to the 
defence spending rather than to foreign aid. According to the National Defence Report of 1973, the 
Defence budget will increase at the rate of 7 per cent per year over the next five years, starting from a 
base of $2,133 million in the fiscal years 1973-74. 
 
The Defence Department’s Estimates for the ’74-75 fiscal year is to be increased to $2.4 billion, this is 
as I understand using the last year’s constant dollar. Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand the rationale for 
such spending on defence at a time when defence equipment can and does become obsolete, almost over 
night. There is no known defence against the consequences of nuclear war. Regardless of how much 
money is spent on equipment like the Bonaventure or the Avro Arrow. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, Canada 
should follow Sweden’s lead by refusing to compete in the arms race. We could appoint a Minister of 
Disarmament, rather than a Minister of Defence as Sweden has done. 
 
The $2.4 billion say in ’74-75 along would more than meet our commitment to the developing nations, 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, it would be almost three-fold of what was proposed by the United Nations. 
 
You know the Federal New Democratic Party has committed itself to the one per cent allotment of the 
gross national product to the developing nations as called for in the United Nations. This means that the 
Federal NDP feel that at least $900 millions of dollars should be given annually as aid to the developing 
world. This, Mr. Speaker, shows once again the commitment of the New Democrats towards building a 
better life for all of the earth’s people. 
 
We, in the NDP, believe in support for the needy, not for the greedy. It has been said that we have two 
alternatives. We can help to feed the world’s hungry or we can prepare to fight them. Mr. Speaker, I 
have no doubt which course we must follow. I want and believe in a commitment to feed the hungry 
people of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally we as Canadians consider ourselves enlightened in the field of international 
development; well thought of in the eyes of the world. This is a myth which should not be encouraged. 
Under the guise of international aid some Canadian corporations are exploiting the labor and resources 
of emerging nations. Mr. Speaker, I want to read from The Financial Times, dated March 18, 1974, just 
a few days ago. It reads this way, the headline is “Asia Attracts Canadian Firms.” 
 

The head of CIDA’s business and industry division Dominic Sarsfield says Canadian firms are 
often interested in investing in Asia because they want to project and extend export markets or 
ensure sources of supply for vital raw materials. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same approach which, when practised by United States companies and Canada, 
is denounced as economic 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1793 

imperialism. Even the Conservative Party has adopted a policy to buy back Canadian resources. Yet 
some Canadian companies practise similar exploitation in developing nations under the umbrella of 
international aid. I suspect that people in developing nations do not distinguish between Canada and 
Canadian companies. Surely one of our priorities must be the eradication of poverty in developing 
countries. It is therefore important that Canadian companies contribute to this priority, not undermine it. 
 
The Canadian Government should influence the kinds of investments Canadian companies make. 
Denmark, for instance, does this with its industrialization fund for developing countries. It has a 
government institution that will jointly invest with Danish corporations overseas if the project meets 
certain established criteria such as providing extension of rural employment. 
 
Ottawa should stress the effect a project will have on the real poor in developing countries before 
allowing Canadian capital to be poured into these countries. Canada should also monitor the operations 
of existing Canadian companies abroad. We should assure ourselves that these companies are operating 
for the good of the people, rather than merely exploiting their labor and their resources. Co-operation 
should be extended by Ottawa to the joint supervision of some Canadian companies to see that they 
don’t transfer profits made in international aid projects to tax-havens like the Bermuda s, thus, escaping 
the tax payments to both Ottawa and the developing countries. 
 
These are some of the steps which I feel should be taken, if we are serious about helping developing 
countries, Mr. Speaker. Yes, as a province, we must make a financial commitment as recommended in 
this Resolution. As a nation we must make even a larger commitment for providing funds, providing 
food, providing health services, yes, and the technical expertise that we have and we can share. At the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, we must place a greater priority on education of our people respecting 
international aid as well. We must strive to control the actions of Canadian capital in developing nations 
so as to allow the people of these nations a chance for self-determination. 
 
As long as we allow our companies to exploit the peoples of the world without restraint by our Canadian 
Government, there will be little chance for a real development in the countries we are trying to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support this Resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly am not at odds with the Resolution as proposed on 
the Order Paper. I certainly don’t agree with some of the material that has been brought into the debate, 
particularly by the Minister of Health and some of the comments made by the Member for Nutana South 
(Mr. Rolfes). 
 
I think the real crux of our situation today is not how much shall, will or can the Government do. I 
would like the Member for Nutana South and the Minister of Health pose the question to themselves: 
How much can you, how much can I do? And talking about exploitation by the United States 
Government and by the Canadian Government, the Federal Government, today 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1794 

our Premier is sitting in Ottawa trying to wangle every dollar for the oil and gas that the country can 
bear. It will be sold to the poor people for our benefit. Then you criticize the Americans, you criticize 
the Federal Government. What does the Saskatchewan Government do? 
 
I can remember the day when we had our first session and the first item was: How can we increase our 
salaries? That was top priority. And then talk about the Government. I am telling you that the 
Government is not going to look after the poor people in other countries, it is whether you or I will look 
after the poor. There is no reason in the world why you shouldn’t contribute something from your own 
income rather than always run to the Government, because the governments have shown to us that they 
do a very poor job. 
 
Now in criticizing the United States, I believe that Gordon Sinclair, wrote an editorial, and I believe it is 
now on a record in the United States, where he mentions some of the things that the United States has 
done. How many socialistic countries in Europe, Sweden, Denmark, Norway — how many plane loads 
of medicine went over to Peru when they had the earthquake? How many plane loads of medicine and 
doctors did the United States, a capitalistic country that you condemn almost every time you get up, and 
yet they have done more for the world than any other nation that I know of. 
 
The Member for Nutana South said that Canada is a real hard nation at the bargaining table. That might 
be, but I don’t think they are half as hard as the Government of Saskatchewan is, when it comes 
particularly to the question of oil. We are one of the exporting provinces in oil. 
 
The Minister of Health said that the Federal NDP have committed themselves to one per cent of the 
gross national product to world relief. They haven’t done anything yet. They have never been the 
government and I hope they never will be. They will never be called upon to fulfil this pledge. 
 
Then you talk about industrializing the other nations and I am sure that you would be the first if Canada 
went to India and wanted to develop an irrigation dam, then you people, the socialists, would be the first 
people to stand up and say, Oh, you are spoiling the environment. Just like at the Churchill River. 
 
The former Liberal Government, I believe, would have gone ahead with the power development at 
Churchill, they would have gone ahead with the development of the second pulp mill, but what did the 
socialists say, when we tried to help a lot of the poor natives in this country? Oh, don’t you do that over 
there because you are going to spoil the environment. 
 
The Mackenzie pipe line that is suggested now by the Americans and the Canadians, the NDP Leader 
Mr. Lewis says that he is opposed to it because he doesn’t think that a deer will jump over a pipe line; 
they would not stay within a thousand miles; he doesn’t think that the birds will fly over the pipe line 
and he suggests it would spoil the environment. And the fact now will be, perhaps that we have 
thousands and thousands of barrels of gas, natural gas and fluid gas, in the North, but there is no way to 
bring that gas into the United States or if there was a real surplus that we could help the other 
underdeveloped countries 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1795 

get fuel — because we are going to spoil the environment. 
 
When we look at what you are preaching here in Saskatchewan we shouldn’t do anything for the people 
of India, or China, because we are going to spoil the environment. That is wrong! I think there are many, 
many areas, including the Protestant churches, Catholic churches as they have programs to help the 
underdeveloped. 
 
I suggest to the Members opposite and to Members on this side if you look at your church programs they 
are all for development. They will help these countries. You are always running to the Government and I 
am telling you that the Government won’t do it all. Don’t look at Ottawa for solving the problems of the 
poor; don’t look at the United States for solving the problems of the poor. 
 
I want to agree with the Member for Milestone that what you want to do first is to look whether you can 
solve the problem of the poor, of your neighbor. Don’t let the government do everything. Don’t take the 
cosy attitude that while I am paying income tax, I have no responsibility to the poor. I have no 
responsibility to the poor. I have no responsibility for the old, I have no responsibility whatsoever, let 
the Government look after them. Government, government, that is all you know is government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . here for. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — Yes, you are here to run some responsibilities that the Government has but there are 
certain responsibilities that you, as a citizen, have too. We are always running to the Government. At 
every corner we are running to the Government and we know that is an easy way out because we are 
paying taxes, we feel quite cosy about it. We are paying our taxes and we leave it up to the Government. 
And all the Government does, like the Minister of Health, he criticized the Federal Government and 
criticized the United States Government. And if there was some other government that he knew a little 
more about he would criticize them as well. 
 
I think the top priority that we have to consider as private citizens is: What can I do to help the situation? 
Let’s not always run to the Government. And there are many, many things that we can do as individuals. 
 
I shall support the Motion for its general intent. I certainly don’t agree with the arguments that were 
brought in the debate. I am not critical of the United States; I am not critical of Canada. And for us to 
say that we should have no initiative, I am glad that we have initiative; I am glad that we are a rich 
nation. In many of these areas that we are talking about the poor people, those countries are perhaps 
richer than Canada and the United States only the wealth is in a few hands. Most of the times these are 
socialistic countries, very socialistic countries. Russia, for instance, is one of the richest countries in the 
world and some of their politicians when they go to the United States and the United Nations they rent 
two or three floors at the Waldorf Hotel. They have the best services. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . about the Watergate hotel. 
 
Mr. Boldt: — I don’t know whether there is a Watergate hotel or not. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1796 

Maybe the Minister knows. But I think that there are many areas where the private citizen can assist the 
let’s not always run for Government help. We see the poor from our own back door. We see this in the 
city of Regina; we see it in our province, that the situation in many cases can be solved by individuals or 
local organizations. My argument is, let’s not always run to the Government. There are many areas 
where we as groups of people, individuals, can help and it will be much more effective and we will 
receive a far greater blessing from it, rather than always go to the Government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. Taylor (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, let me say at the outset that I intend to 
support the Resolution before the House. Let me say also, honestly, that I’m not sure of the mechanics 
that might be involved in the implementation of such a policy. I don’t think that this should be our 
particular concern at this moment. I must say that some of the notes that I had made and to which I had 
intended to refer have become almost redundant at this point, because the first thing I had written down 
was that I had hoped to know where every Member of this House stood on this question; know whether 
or not they supported the Government in taking action in this particular field, and that it would be done 
on a totally non-political basis. Because it seems to me that this is one of the issues that can come before 
a Legislative Assembly or a Parliament and on which we can express our own personal views, not just in 
terms of thinking about the question but also our views on the action that ought to be taken. 
 
I think it was Marshall McLuhan who some years ago wrote of the world as being a “global village”; 
who wrote of the world as being so small today with its modern means of transportation and 
communication that we can no longer think of the people of Saskatchewan as being our neighbors or 
fellow citizens without also thinking of the people in Africa being in the same category. 
 
We can look to the past and we can be very critical if we want to. We can criticize the Federal 
Government for inaction if that’s what we want to do. We can talk about the fact that we spend about 
seven-tenths of one per cent of our gross national product on foreign aid in one sort or another. We 
could talk about the fact that if we were to double our present defence expenditures of approximately 
$1.8 billion, it would only increase the total expenditure of the NATO countries by about one and a half 
per cent, but if we were to increase our net expenditures on foreign aid by the same $1.8 billion it would 
increase the total net expenditures of the wealthy white countries in foreign aid to poor countries by 33 
per cent, which would mean quite a difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the seven-tenths of one per cent that we now spend on foreign aid is a sad 
representation of our commitment. Recently, most Canadian political parties, major labor unions, the 
Canadian Chamber of Commerce, CUSO, and a vast array of church and voluntary organizations have 
favored a commitment equalling one per cent of our gross national product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that we could heap criticism for inaction in the past. Although I mention these things 
I don’t enter this 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1797 

debate to do so. Frequently governments reflect the views of those who have elected them. Maybe those 
who have been the electors in many cases, those of us who have been the electors, have not made our 
voices heard. There is no doubt, it seems to me, of the growing concern throughout our country at this 
point in history with the welfare of people overseas. One sees the indication of this in the growth of aid 
funds in charitable organizations and indeed in the churches. Even a few years ago when most of our 
farmers were suffering some hardships at least and economic distress, we saw the givings in the mission 
funds of the various churches continue to rise. They were expressing their concern. Many of the mission 
dollars were going strictly for development work. 
 
In my own community, I remember on one occasion, the time when farm income was extremely low, 
just a few years ago, holding a special canvas to raise funds strictly for world development. More was 
given on that occasion than had ever been given at any other time, in spite of the fact that less funds 
were available as disposable income in the hands of our people. 
 
So I think there is no doubt that people are concerned; concerned, not just about those who live close to 
home. The Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) pointed out that we have to look in our own 
backyard, and I agree with him. We do have to look close to home. There are many in our country and in 
our province who are not sharing in the growing economic wealth of our nation. In fact, the lowest 
percentage of our population find their share of our national income dropping steadily instead of 
increasing. So we do have to look close to home. But we cannot let our eyes stop close to home, and 
may I suggest that if this had been the case, in days gone by, we ourselves would never have had the 
chance to develop. We must always look beyond our own borders; beyond the people whose faces we 
recognize and know. 
 
In spite of the poverty in this country I would remind the Members of the House that 77 of the countries 
served by CIDA average a per capita income of $145 per year, which is far below even the poorest of 
our own people. The share of world trade by underdeveloped nations declined from 23 per cent in 1953 
to 17 per cent in 1970. So we see that there is a real economic argument. One of the Members who 
spoke before me, emphasized the fact that if we do not provide the kind of assistance that is needed in 
today’s world, the hungry of the world will eventually rise up and take the assistance themselves. And 
for this we cannot blame them. And this I think is probably very close to the truth. But I’d like to 
suggest that it is not for this reason alone that we ought to be providing assistance or aid to other nations. 
The economic argument of self-preservation is not the argument, which I at least, would use. 
 
Someone has said something about being their brother’s keeper. I ask those who are concerned about 
that question, ask it of themselves. Am I my brother’s keeper? And to that I have to answer a resounding 
yes. For if one looks at the story where this comes from, one finds that this is the answer that is given. 
Who is my brother? In the story or parable told by Jesus, it is not the matter of who is my brother, but if 
you read it carefully it is to whom am I a brother? And there is an amazing difference. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of our province do want to participate in providing the kind of assistance that is 
most needed, where it’s most needed. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1798 

Now the suggestion in this Resolution is that we use the non-profit or charitable organizations in order 
to carry out the intent. And it seems to me that this fulfils the statement made by the Member for 
Rosthern which was that we as individuals have a responsibility. Because a matching donation is only 
matching if there is something there to match in the first place. And so each of us has the opportunity, 
but the opportunity not only to give a dollar but to see that dollar doubled. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that in this way as a province, we are saying two things. We are saying to the people of the province that 
we want to work with you and reward you, in a sense, for your contribution and help your contribution 
to go further by doubling it. We are saying secondly, that by providing this doubling or matching 
contribution, “we encourage you to participate in world development and relief.” And I say this very 
seriously because I think, as I said earlier, we could criticize Federal action or inaction, but I don’t think 
that’s enough. 
 
I think it is time we decided our priorities. It is time, if we think more funds should be made available, 
that we start making some available from our own resources. I strongly believe in the validity of people 
to people aid, rather than government to government aid. It seems to me it carries with it a greater 
degree of commitment and a greater degree of good. 
 
Probably it has already been mentioned that the costs of various programs, the costs of administration, 
for every dollar reaching the needy, the cost is as follows. I’m told through Federal distribution, $3 in 
costs. Through voluntary charitable organizations, 27 cents and through our churches, 8 cents. 
Therefore, the distribution of income in this way would assist us to make sure that the greatest number 
of dollars gets to where it’s most necessary. 
 
But like the Minister of Health, I believe that just as important a part of the Resolution deals with 
education. Because somehow we have to help people to realize that those they see on their television 
screens, as we look at the horror of war or poverty or starvation, that those we see on the television 
screens are not actors, but are indeed human beings, our brothers, some place in the world. 
 
It is very easy to become insensitive today as we watch; and this happened to most of us during the 
horror shows from the Vietnam War and how we looked at these things over and over again and finally 
most of us did become insensitive and thought of them only as other news stories. We almost thought of 
them as plays being acted out on our screen. Education must somehow help people to see that they are 
all part of this world in which we live, and that we must all somehow share in the resources that are in 
the world. And that people, even though they live thousands of miles away share our desires and our 
hopes for their children. A few years ago, through a world development and relief poster it was brought 
to my attention that ten thousand people died in the world every day from starvation. Most of them 
children. No one in this nation wants that to happen; and yet it’s easy to read the poster, walk away and 
later forget it. 
 
It seems to me, that if we are serious as individuals, we will express our opinion. If we think that people 
to people aid is the best, then we will support this Resolution because it reinforces that kind of aid. As I 
said, the mechanics I’m not sure of. And if we believe that this is the way that we ought 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1799 

to be going as a country we will want to provide in our educational system and throughout our public 
life the opportunity which will help people to understand the needs that there are in the world. 
 
There are times, as one Member mentioned, when one need may conflict with another. The need for 
development versus the need for ecological preservation. I don’t know the answers to these. But the 
answers must be found, and it is only working together with those in other countries that we can find 
these answers. Not working through the bureaucrats here in Saskatchewan, or over in some other 
country; but working through the people who care here and the people who need, overseas. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this Resolution. I would ask leave to adjourn the debate at this 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 5 — Construction of Additional Facilities for Grain-Handling 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. K. Comer (Nipawin): 
 

That this Assembly urges that the Federal Government take immediate steps to provide for: (a) 
construction of additional facilities for grain-handling; (b) the dredging of Churchill Harbour to a 
depth of 40 feet; (c) the provision of bulk loading facilities for sulphur, potash and ores; and (d) 
immediate construction of sheds and cranes for the import and export of general cargo, in 
particular containers. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Grant: 
 

That the words “commends the Prime Minister of Canada for indicating willingness to upgrade 
the Port of Churchill and” be added after the word “Assembly” in the first line and the words 
“and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Manitoba be urged to 
lend every possible assistance to the development of Churchill as a first class Port” be added 
after the word “containers” in the last line. 

 
Mr. E. F. Gardner (Moosomin): — It seems that each year we get a little chance to debate the problem 
of Churchill. We would of course, agree with the Motion that not enough is being done in the Churchill 
area. We know that Churchill has been plagued with problems over the years. Most recently it has been 
plagued with problems of transportation because of its location and it is certainly especially vulnerable 
to transportation problems. 
 
Much of the 1973 problems at Churchill were due to the rail strike that we had in the late summer and 
because the season is relatively short, in fact very short at Churchill, there just isn’t a chance to recover 
from these set-backs. We could have all of the improved facilities in the world at Churchill, we could 
have all of the things that have been suggested in the Resolution and by Members opposite, but it’s not 
going to help us in a situation that we had last summer. The Port manager at Churchill and grain officials 
agree that the rail strike seriously 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1800 

reduced the handling at Churchill. Now, those of you who will recall the rail strike of last summer, will 
remember that the union bosses promised that there would be no restriction in grain traffic. Mr. 
Atkinson of the National Farmers’ Union promised that there would be no restriction in the grain traffic. 
And if you will recall also, Mr. Speaker, these promises were not kept. I think that if you will take a look 
at the Press reports from last summer, and I would like to quote for example, from the Free Press 
Weekly Report of Farming, August 25, 1973 an editorial and it says: 
 

The most disturbing news on Monday for western Canada coming out of the series of rotating 
rail strikes was the announcement that grain supplies are running low at Churchill and the 
Lakehead as a result of the non-movement of grain trains. 

 
And it goes on to quote the Port manager at Churchill saying the problems they are having. It says: 
 

A meeting of railway unionists at the Pas on Monday rejected requests from rail officials that the 
grain train be moved. All of this is strangely at odds with the promise given by the unions before 
the strike started, that grain would be kept moving. Roy Atkinson, President of the National 
Farmers’ Union said last July, that Dick Smith, Secretary of the Association of Non-operating 
Railway Unions had given him assurance that grain shipments would continue in event of a 
strike. Mr. Atkinson, called the decision most responsible and representing a major improvement 
in farmer-labor relations. Mr. Atkinson it seems was a trifle optimistic in his assessment of the 
railway unionists. 
 

Further down it goes on to say: 
 

The improvement in farmer-labor relations so hoped for by Mr. Atkinson, will be non-existent. 
The unionists will be blamed and rightly for the farmers’ loss. 

 
I just wanted to bring this to your attention, Mr. Speaker, because as I said, we get into an annual debate 
on Churchill, we talk about all of the improvements that should be made in the Port and rightly so, we 
agreed that not nearly enough is being done, but the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Comer) and others who 
have talked on this, if they are really sincere about the problem at Churchill should talk to some of their 
friends in the labor movement, the union bosses who are involved, and see that grain traffic will not 
again be tied up to the Port of Churchill. I think that this is one of the most useful things that could be 
done to encourage the use of Churchill and to guarantee that ships coming into that area will not have to 
wait again because of labor problems as they did last summer. 
 
I should like also, Mr. Speaker, to remind the Members that the Hudson Bay Route Association 
convention is being held in Lloydminster on April 29 and 30th and I know there were a few of the 
Members from both sides who were there last year and I would hope that if it’s possible that some of the 
Members again take advantage of the opportunity to attend the convention because we all realize that 
this is a very worthwhile project. It should also be pointed out, I believe, that most of the activities of the 
convention in the past have been directed at trying to 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1801 

get the Federal Government to take more responsibility for improvement to Churchill. But we are well 
aware that with the buoyant economy in Saskatchewan and also in Manitoba that it is perhaps a good 
time for the provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba which have chiefly used this Port to accept a 
greater deal of responsibility as far as use of the Port and improvements at the Port are concerned and I 
would hope that the Province of Saskatchewan would give this some priority. 
 
I just might comment in this regard, Mr. Speaker, that a few months ago our Premier was at Ottawa 
bargaining with the Federal Government at the Energy Conference and he is again down there now, I 
would hope that points such as the improvements at Churchill would come into the discussions. I feel 
that if we have concessions to make as far as energy and oil are concerned we are in a bargaining 
position where the rest of Canada wants something that we have, we should also put on the table such 
problems as the improvements at the Port of Churchill. And if this isn’t being done, if in fact our 
Premier is going to Ottawa and is neglecting to point out to those people that in exchange for some of 
the advantages they are going to get we want improvements in transportation, we want better freight 
rates, we want improvement in facilities in places such as Churchill. If he is not doing this then he is not 
doing the job that he should be doing for this province. 
 
The Resolution, that we are debating should originally have called on Saskatchewan and Manitoba to 
take some additional responsibilities and some action. The amendment has now included that, and I will 
support it. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 until 7:00 p.m. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words with respect to 
Resolution No. 5, the Resolution proposed by my colleague from Nipawin (Mr. Comer). 
 
Before I get into the main thrust of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I must make one or two references to the 
statements made in the course of the debate this afternoon by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). 
The Member for Moosomin I must say really didn’t have his heart in the intent of the Resolution. In fact 
I rather suspect that the Members opposite don’t have their hearts behind the intent of the Resolution for 
support of Churchill. Because, if you really analyze what the Member for Moosomin said, you’ll note, 
Mr. Speaker, that he really made three points: (1) He referred to a strike that took place about a year ago 
if not more and somehow tried to tie this up to Churchill and even yet somehow tried to tie this up to the 
NDP. (2) He referred to the provincial responsibility. (3) He referred to the fact that the Premier should 
be using Churchill as a bargaining lever with respect to the talks that are now proceeding in Ottawa in 
the use of oil. That’s a kind of an unusual position for the Member for Moosomin to be in because in 
order for the Government to have a bargaining lever, we had to pass Bill 42 which of course allows us 
the bargaining lever, it allows us to control the oil and allows us to say to the Government of Canada 
that we are going to be able to provide for the rest of Canada oil on certain terms and conditions, on a 
quid pro quo basis. That’s the bargaining lever. Now the Member for Moosomin, if I understand the 
Opposition’s on Bill 42 is very confusing and almost contradictory, 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1802 

if I understand his position, he argues, nevertheless, that we should be using Churchill as part of the quid 
pro quo, to use the jargon of today, with respect to oil. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the only three points that were made by the Member for Moosomin and I 
might say, with all respect to him, I thought they were very weak points indeed. When he talks about 
union strikes, for example, and their effect on the Port of Churchill somebody should tell the Member 
for Moosomin that the biggest possible negative impact on the lack of development on Churchill to date 
has been the actions of the railway companies. I think that, as much as strikes are disruptive and as much 
as strikes are not wanted by any of us, when one looks at the whole transportation system. If one looks at 
what’s been done over the last three or four or five years by the railway companies, one will see readily, 
Mr. Speaker, that the impact of negative and destructive policies by the CPR and CNR have done far 
more to harm the development of the Port of Churchill than anything by way of a union dispute. I need 
not repeat at length that which has already been documented in support of my argument, documented by 
the National Farmers’ Union and documented by the Wheat Pools and by pretty well every responsible 
farm organization in western Canada of the railways’ refusal to buy boxcars, the railways’ refusal to 
repair boxcars, the railways’ refusal to maintain tracks, the railways’ refusal to use the Port of Churchill 
as a shipping mechanism, refusals, absolute refusals to correct the transportation system. Now Members 
may not like that but those are the facts. And while I deplore strikes and while I wish that somehow I 
could find the mechanism around strikes, while I think that strikes are disruptive, to bring up a strike of 
over a year ago at least as evidence that this is a negative impact on the development of the Port of 
Churchill really boggles one’s imagination. Only the Liberals opposite and only the Liberal from 
Moosomin and the Member for Moose Jaw could in their wildest anti-labor position adopt that type of a 
stance and somehow relate it to the Port of Churchill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment if I may on the question of this business of 
using Churchill in the bargaining with respect to the talks on oil. Well, all I can say to the Members 
opposite, having been involved in one or two of the meetings, that there are a number of matters which 
the people of Saskatchewan are urging upon the Government of Canada in these current negotiations 
and talks with respect to the use of western Canadian oil. Freight rates, a proper national transportation 
policy, industrial development, a proper ports policy. I don’t think that we can single out for example, 
the development of ports in isolation, when we are discussing the tools to revamp western Canadian 
opportunities. 
 
We’re not looking at something in total isolation. Ports after all have to be an integrated part of a new 
transportation scheme. It is very little good to the western Canadian farmer to have a good port in 
Churchill or in Vancouver if the grain gathering transportation system is allowed to be frittered away by 
neglect as it has been by the railway companies to date. We have to look at it as an integrated approach 
and the position the Government of Saskatchewan is taking and has taken with respect to the Port of 
Churchill, the Port of Vancouver and the Port of Prince Rupert, the entire transportation fabric is one 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1803 

of a totality with a view to improving the situation for western Canada. I can tell the Hon. Member for 
Moosomin that the interests of the Port of Churchill are uppermost in the mind of this Government. I can 
tell the Member for Moosomin that probably there has been no Government in recent years that has had 
more concern for development of the Port of Churchill than the Government of Premier Blakeney and 
this Government that occupies the Treasury Benches now. 
 
Well, I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that there is a third point that was made by the Liberal Member 
opposite. It’s embodied not quite involved in terms that I can totally reject but the intent is there and it is 
repeated again by the Member for Moosomin that somehow the provinces of Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan should be involving themselves in financial assistance in the development of the Port of 
Churchill. The amendment does not say financial assistance. It is sort of cleverly worded and says that 
we should be making sure that we give assistance and I think that that is a very nebulous term. I would 
argue that assistance has been given and is being given but when the Members opposite rise to speak on 
this motion, everyone of them invariably says that the treasury of the province is now very bulging and 
we are very wealthy and that somehow we should be contributing to the financial development of the 
Port of Churchill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask when was the last time that the Province of British Columbia helped 
Vancouver, for example, or better yet when was the last time that the Province of Quebec gave financial 
support to the development of the Port of Montreal? When was the last time that the Liberals in this 
House or the Liberals in the House in Quebec said they were going to or that they should be giving 
financial support for the development of the St. Lawrence Seaway or the Port of Montreal or the Port of 
Vancouver or the Port of Prince Rupert? Would the Members opposite seriously suggest that the federal 
responsibility of harbors and ports, a federal responsibility they have been up to now, unwilling to share 
even with us, even to talk about sharing with us, forgetting about financial sharing. I am talking about 
just some form of input, Mr. Speaker, up to now they have been absolutely reluctant to discuss this with 
us. Do the Members seriously suggest now that the Provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba should be 
putting in financial contributions to the development of the Port of Churchill? Do the Liberals say that 
the Province of Quebec has contributed a cent to Montreal or the St. Lawrence? Do the Liberals opposite 
suggest that the Social Credit Government has contributed a cent to the Port of Vancouver? Of course 
not. Why even the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) knows that the Member for Moosomin’s 
proposition is totally ludicrous and certainly can’t be accepted by the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. Anybody who realizes and understands the national transportation system and accepts 
that this is a federal responsibility would reject out of hand as I am sure the Member for Athabasca 
would, the suggestion made irresponsibly this afternoon by the Member for Moosomin about financial 
support for the development of the Port of Churchill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, all of these remarks that have been made this afternoon lead me to the conclusion 
that the Members opposite really don’t have their hearts in this Resolution as tendered by the Member 
from Nipawin (Mr. Comer). They don’t realize the hard work that it has taken up to now to get what 
small advances that have been gotten with respect to Churchill. I don’t think that the advances that we 
have made at Churchill are all that great. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1804 

I think many more can be gotten. I tell the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone) that at least we 
got $12.5 million more after the Calgary Conference as a result of the actions of the three western 
provinces than we did before the Calgary Conference. And I can tell the Member for Regina Lakeview 
that the Liberal Government federally when you people were in power from 1964 to 1971 didn’t even 
pay attention at all to the Premier of the day or the Liberal Government of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so I am the first one to recognize and acknowledge that perhaps in the minds of 
the big spenders opposite that $12.5 million that we were able to pressure out of the Federal 
Government, maybe that’s not enough. Maybe it’s not enough. Maybe it’s inflation. Maybe we can sort 
of say in an inflated way to repeat that old famous Liberal slogan, “What’s a million?” maybe we can 
sort of say, “What’s $12.5 million?” I guess that’s the position that is taken by the Liberals opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a word or two about the remarks made by my colleague and 
friend, the Member for Regina Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). I must say that I am pleased to note what is 
apparently a Member’s change in approach, or his attitude. He now indicates that he feels 
encouragement, I think that was the word he used in his remarks and not criticism, is the best approach 
to be taken if we are going to develop the Port of Churchill and similar operations. I must say that I 
would welcome this departure from past performance by the Liberals and we would look forward I 
suppose to some form of encouragement and praise rather than the total pressure tactics that the 
Opposition adopts in everything this Government does. 
 
However, leaving that aside for the time being, I want to point out that in my view the product which 
this amendment that the Liberals have tendered really is misdirected. Mr. Speaker, you will recall that 
the Hon. Member for Regina Whitmore Park has described how in the 25 years intervening his own trips 
to Churchill and how despite endless talks by governments of all political stripes, very little if anything 
has been done to promote or expand the port facilities at Churchill. And you will recall, Sir, that the 
Hon. Member has suggested that in view of past inaction we should, to use his words, “butter up” the 
Prime Minister because of his statement at Calgary last July at WEOC. 
 
Let’s review that statement of the Prime Minister. I have the quotation here and if I may say Mr. 
Trudeau stated in answer to comments made by Premier Schreyer of Manitoba, the Prime Minister said 
this: 
 

There is agreement to the extent that we don’t want to see the port disappear. We have 
undertaken to ensure its continuance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, permit me to say that that is hardly rhetoric that one would build a nation on or for that 
matter build a port on. The Prime Minister says that there is an agreement to the extent that we won’t let 
the port disappear. He says that, “We have undertaken to ensure its continuance,” Mr. Speaker, I would 
say and I am sure all the Members opposite agree that those are hardly the type of flaming words of 
commitment that one would build a nation on let alone a small little port like the Port of 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1805 

Churchill. Surely this sort of concern by the Prime Minister, or lack of concern, should this be the type 
of willingness that the amendment calls us to co-operate on? Should this type of a stirring call to arms to 
protect our western Port of Churchill by the Liberal Prime Minister from Quebec, should this be the type 
of matter that is the proper subject of praise or the proper subject of ‘buttering up’, to use the words of 
the Member for Regina Whitmore Park? Mr. Speaker, let there be no mistake I am fully in favor of 
giving credit when it is due. We all say that as politicians we do give credit on occasion to each other 
and I have done so to the Liberals in the past when I think they are going in the directions that I think we 
should be going in transportation. Let me call to witness — well, of course, when I do something that 
you think is in your right direction you also will applaud presumably — and I applauded a few days ago 
the statements made by the Minister of Transport, Jean Marchand, Federal Minister, when he 
acknowledged the total failure of the present National Transportation Act. We applauded when Mr. 
Marchand said that there is a need for a new government policy in this area, a totally new government 
policy from top to bottom. And we applauded again his statement made the other night when he finally 
said about the Canadian Pacific Railway that there may be no other alternative but to nationalize the 
Canadian Pacific Railway. Now I think those are good transportation statements. I think those are 
excellent transportation statements and I want to tell the Members opposite that where credit is due, I am 
the first one prepared to give credit, and I give Mr. Marchand credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now I would really be prepared to give credit if I felt that the Saskatchewan Liberals 
would be prepared to walk side by side with Mr. Marchand on the CPR nationalization. But I don’t think 
that the CPR is the favorite target of the Liberals opposite and, therefore, I regret to advise, Mr. Speaker, 
that I can’t give credit in this quarter. But I am afraid that I cannot accept from the Hon. Member for 
Regina Whitmore Park the quote that we should “butter them up,” the old “butter them up” philosophy, 
which I see no different than giving the Federal Liberal Government a pat on the back. It is a philosophy 
of giving them a pat on the back, crossing your fingers and closing your eyes and hoping for the best. 
That is the Liberal policy when it comes to the amendment with respect to the Port of Churchill. 
 
Well, fortunately, I can tell the Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) and the Hon. Member 
for Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac) that the western provinces of Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta have not 
adopted this attitude of “ buttering them up.” It appeared to us that Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta 
agreed that the Federal Government had really no serious intentions towards development with respect 
to Churchill. In fact they had no intentions at all. 
 
The $12.5 million, while welcome, appeared to be ill thought out and not part of a comprehensive 
transportation program. In fact they have, as I said, no major or serious intentions. From the Federal 
point of view Churchill was like the weather. In fact I think it is the same attitude the Liberals opposite 
have. They said so in this debate, that Churchill is like the weather. Everybody, they say, in this House 
talks about it, but nothing is done about it. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1806 

It was apparent that the promotion of the port would have to be done on a provincial or regional basis. It 
was apparent that we couldn’t adopt the good old fashioned “butter them up” policy, that we had to put 
the pressure where the pressure should be placed, on the Federal Government in order to develop the 
port that belongs to western Canada and western Canadian people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We had to do the job of some development in this area. Therefore, Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba with the assistance of the Province of Alberta, decided to utilize the Port of Churchill 
Development Board as a new agency to accomplish these objectives of development and port 
development promotion. 
 
To this end, in the past year, Saskatchewan and Manitoba contributed each $15,000 to the Development 
Board and Alberta provided another $5,000. This has enabled the Board to hire an executive director and 
a very small staff, who have in turn been able to do something positive about the Port of Churchill and 
not just talk about it, as sometimes all politicians in this House are wont to do. 
 
This Development Board, coupled with the continued efforts of provincial officials, have met regularly 
with federal officials, the National Harbours Board, with industrialists, met regularly following the 
Western Economic Opportunities Conference. They have made direct proposals to the Ministers from 
the prairie provinces and to the Federal Government. They have kept up continued pressure and not 
butter on the Federal Government with the view to developing the Port of Churchill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was pressure, not butter, by the provinces, supported by research and promotion from the 
new Development Board that finally forced Mr. Marchand to publicly commit the Federal Government 
to making the Port of Churchill a port of Arctic resupply. 
 
The Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) said to me, “What have they done?” One thing that they have 
done is they had the Port of Churchill designated as the Arctic port of resupply. Some might say, some 
Liberals opposite might say, “What effect does that have?” Well, I will give you one example. People 
will know that there is a manufacturer in the Province of Saskatchewan called Nelson Homes, out of 
Yorkton. Up until now, in order to get prefabricated homes, up to the high Arctic, they had to ship them 
to Montreal, out of Montreal and around to the north. Through the designation of the Port of Churchill as 
a port of supply, there are lower freight rates and it enables businesses like Nelson Homes and others, to 
be much more competitive on the freight rate, to get their commodity to the port of resupply and then to 
the high Arctic. That is a positive accomplishment for the Port of Churchill which will develop and 
promote it. 
 
One could go on and cite other examples similar to that. I can say this, Mr. Speaker. It was this pressure 
that got the Port of Churchill designated as the port of Arctic resupply. That was in late 1973, sometime 
after the Western Economic Opportunities Conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that it was pressure, not butter, from Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta and 
from the Development 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1807 

Board, that literally squeezed a federal expenditure of $12.5 million from the Federal Government to 
improve the Port of Churchill’s facilities. The sum is much less than what was asked for, much less than 
is needed. But, in fact, it has been allocated by the Federal Government. 
 
I criticize the $12.5 million because it basically only provides for the maintenance of the port. It is 
certainly not sufficient to provide for the necessary expenditures which the Hon. Member for Nipawin 
(Mr. Comer) is referring to. It is a start, nevertheless, a start for which we must commend the Federal 
authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that it was pressure from the Provincial Ministers of Transport on Mr. Marchand in 
Winnipeg, December 1973, that forced the Federal Government to reduce the time for the expenditure of 
this $12.5 million from five years down to three years, so that the impact is a little more immediate. 
 
At present, provincial pressure is being applied to have the Federal Government alter the focus of the 
$12.5 million expenditure. For example, to refit existing tugs rather than purchasing new tugs; to limit 
proposed work on the north end of the wharf; to that area above the water line, thereby reducing costs 
and not losing a season’s operations as we would under the federal proposal. 
 
The money saved through these changes could then be applied to construction of a 1,200 foot 
breakwater at the south end of the wharf, which would provide extra space for berthing and for storage. 
The extra money could also be supplied to some form of limited dredging in order to allow the deep port 
ships, the large containers, the large hulks, to come into the Port of Churchill. 
 
This is what we are proposing to the Federal Government, how to use the $12.5 million. I think those are 
positive suggestions not only in the interest of the Port of Churchill, but in the interests of all western 
Canadian people who are concerned about the development of this particular port. 
 
As the Member for Regina Whitmore Park has stated, the best commitment that has ever been obtained 
from the Federal Government to this point are statements such as that of the Prime Minister and that of 
the Hon. Minister of Justice, Mr. Otto Lang, which the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park cited, and that 
is to show us that there is demand for Churchill and then there will be an expenditure. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that those types of statements are the old chicken and egg approach that we are used 
to hearing from the Liberal Government in Ottawa for all these years. Show us that there is a demand 
and there will be an expenditure! It’s the old chicken and egg approach. It is almost the old shell game. 
Now you see a demand, now you don’t see a demand. Maybe you will see $12.5 million and maybe you 
won’t. 
 
I say that this type of an approach by the Federal Government is not in the best interests of western 
Canadians. Up until now we have not been able to get a demand. How can you get a demand when you 
don’t have the boxcars, and you don’t have the expenditure for the port, when you have the bureaucrats 
in Ottawa — at least some of them — determined to close the port? How can you 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1808 

then say there is going to be a demand developed under those circumstances? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Liberals opposite in the Province of Saskatchewan just accept those words by the 
Prime Minister and by the Minister of Justice, show us the demand and there will be an expenditure, I 
say to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan that the Liberals really are saying that the Port of 
Churchill has no future and that they are part and parcel in closing the Port of Churchill in the Province 
of Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I should like to tell the House that the executive director of the Port of Churchill 
Development Board has received a commitment, for example, on this matter of demand, has received a 
commitment from the sulphur industry in Alberta and Saskatchewan, but Alberta primarily, to ship 
350,000 tons of sulphur via Churchill. This is a firm and positive commitment. But does the Port of 
Churchill have the facilities to provide it? That is the question. 
 
We have the 350,000 tons, but we don’t have the federal authorities committing the expenditure of funds 
in order to have the facilities to handle it. This is just the sort of demand that the Hon. Member for 
Saskatoon-Humboldt, the Minister of Justice, and other Members of the Federal Government have been 
asking for. I say that is what they have been looking for and we have given it to them. It is now time for 
them to honor their commitments to the people in western Canada. 
 
The same facilities with the addition of covered storage bins can be readily utilized to export potash, to 
export coal, to export lumber products. This is an expenditure which now must be made by the Federal 
Government in view of industries showing willingness to ship via the Port of Churchill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I think it is obvious that things are changing at Churchill and changing for the 
better. I think it is equally obvious, Mr. Speaker, that it is the provinces — the western Canadian 
provinces — which are making things happen in bringing about these changes. I want to say also that I 
think it is even more obvious that this is being done with political pressure, the proper political pressure, 
and not Liberal butter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this amendment seeks nothing more than cheap political advantage to pat the 
Liberals on the back, federally, for nothing done on the Port of Churchill; because this amendment, if 
adopted, might be misinterpreted by the western Canadian farmer who wants yet to see much more 
development done, I can’t accept it. 
 
I urge all Members of the Legislature to reject it. I don’t believe that the Members opposite really 
support the Member for Regina Whitmore Park in his statement that everything is done and everything 
is in readiness and happiness at the Port of Churchill. 
 
I don’t believe that the Member for Rosetown (Mr. Loken) who is concentrating on this problem with a 
great deal of seriousness, that he believes in that amendment. I don’t for one moment believe that the 
Member for Regina Albert Park (Mr. MacLeod), 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1809 

although he has no involvement in agriculture and the Port of Churchill, that he believes in the 
amendment. I am urging all Members of the Legislature to reject the amendment and to support clearly 
and in a united voice, the Resolution from the Member for Nipawin, so that we can get on with the great 
task of building western Canada’s own port, the Port of Churchill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to take part in this debate, but 
after listening to the Attorney General I cannot resist making a few comments. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, he started off that discussion of his about totality of the system. And per usual 
he started off with the whipping boy, the railways. You know, Mr. Speaker, it is rather interesting that 
there is no question that in considering transportation problems the Attorney General is correct, we must 
look at the totality of the entire transportation system in Canada. But don’t you think that it is about time 
that the Attorney General did look at the totality of the system? He certainly hasn’t yet. He blames the 
railway, oh, that terrible CPR and perhaps even the CNR. But he never mentions the delivery system and 
the handling system in western Canada. 
 
Why should we ask the railways in this country to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to modernize 
their system and then ask them to operate in a system that is built for the horse and buggy days, the 
delivery and handling system in western Canada? It is about time the Attorney General started to call 
upon the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Alberta Wheat Pool and the Manitoba Wheat Pool and all 
the elevators to bring their handling systems up to a modern transportation system. It is time the 
Provincial Government started to promote inland terminals in western Canada, where we clean and put 
together solid or unit trains. We have trains in the transportation system that take a 21-day turnaround to 
go to Vancouver or to Thunder Bay because of the antiquated delivery and handling system in this 
country. Get off the railways and join in and start calling upon the delivery and handling system in 
western Canada to modernize, get out of the horse and buggy days, as well as the railways, and I agree 
with you about the railways. 
 
Let me tell you also that I have absolutely no sympathy for the Federal Government’s position on the 
Port of Churchill. Every year since I have been in this House, this Legislature has called on the Federal 
Government to take some action. I am going to tell you that I have a lot less sympathy for the Provincial 
NDP’s position on the Port of Churchill than I have the Federal Government. 
 
All that we have ever done since 1971, since you became the Government, for the Port of Churchill is 
stand in this House once a year and talk and talk and talk and do absolutely nothing else. It boggles the 
imagination, in the words of the Attorney General, to turn around and blame the railways and say that 
the railways have a responsibility for the Port of Churchill and the Province of Saskatchewan has none. 
Can you imagine that! The CPR has the responsibility for the Port of Churchill, but the Province of 
Saskatchewan has none! 
 
The Province of Manitoba has none. Of course the Federal 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1810 

Government has a responsibility for the Port of Churchill. We endorse and support any opportunity to 
get the Port of Churchill improved. The Attorney General said, “Why, we gave $15,000 in grants.” Oh, 
you know out of that slush fund. I figured out today what the Attorney General’s costs to promote that 
subsidy to the AAIA program, on the news broadcast in the Province of Saskatchewan for one day, to 
promote and justify the Attorney General’s action in the AAIA fund, is more than $15,000 that he gave 
to help out the Port of Churchill. 
 
You are selling out. You have done absolutely nothing Mr. Attorney General. Now let’s be realistic. He 
said that they went to Calgary and the three western provinces pressured the Federal Government. I 
thought it was Prime Minister Trudeau who called the western conference. I thought it was Prime 
Minister Trudeau who announced in the Throne Speech that he was calling it. I thought it was Prime 
Minister Trudeau who went out and laid on the table some concrete proposals for the first time. I agree 
with Mr. Marchand that the CPR and the CNR — don’t point your fingers at the CPR, it is about time 
that we got the CNR to pull up its own bootstraps, shine its own little boots. And don’t talk about 
nationalizing the CPR until we can demonstrate in this country that a nationalized railway can do the job 
because I think the CNR is just as bad, or worse than the CPR and so will most farmers in this province 
tell you that. 
 
So if you are going to talk about nationalizing the railways let’s demonstrate that the one railway that we 
have in this country, the CNR, can operate an efficient transportation rail system in this country, before 
we start talking about putting another burden on government and spending millions and millions of 
dollars. Nobody is going to defend the fact that today the railways, both CNR and CPR, are getting out 
of their traditional responsibilities in Canada, in the idea of passenger service, in the idea of rail line 
abandonment, and so forth. No one denies that and it is time that all of us — but let’s get off the back of 
the CPR, let’s quit calling for the nationalization of the CPR until we demonstrate that the CNR, that one 
nationalized railway can do as good a job by cleaning up its own backyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about another subject. There is only one Premier whom this province has 
ever had that was really the friend of the Port of Churchill and his name was Ross Thatcher. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — You go and ask the Minister of Industry, the best year that the Port of Churchill 
ever had other than wheat, was in the years when Ross Thatcher was Premier. He appointed a man from 
the Department of Industry as a full time co-ordinator. He went to Volkswagen in Germany, he went to 
all kinds of European countries to bring and promote traffic and trade into the Port of Churchill. He 
worked day and night to promote it and that is the responsibility of the Provincial Government. You can 
give $500,000 to a Hog Commission but you don’t give five cents to promote trade. The Provincial 
Government has got all kinds of Crown corporations, you got 30 per cent of the Saskatchewan pulp mill, 
or the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. You have got the Saskatchewan Timber Board, you have got potash. You 
could be promoting potash out of the Port of Churchill. All your other Crown corporations including 
Sask Timber. All kinds of purchases. How 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1811 

many purchases — Ross Thatcher, for goodness sake, demanded an accounting about the purchases that 
came in through the Port of Churchill. What has the NDP done? Nothing but talk, talk and whine to 
Ottawa and nothing but a resolution once in this House. It is about time that the NDP Government in this 
province took some real action for the Port of Churchill and gave some leadership by showing some 
example. But if we are going to get trade to go out of the Port of Churchill then the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Manitoba have got to show leadership. 
 
When Ross Thatcher was the Premier of the province he said to the small car manufacturers if you bring 
the cars in through the Port of Churchill the Saskatchewan Government will buy some. Any equipment 
that SPC needed he said you have got to bring it in through the Port of Churchill. He went to Dalgleish, 
he went to the European manufacturer, he did everything to promote it. That is the kind of responsibility 
that the Provincial Government should take. 
 
You can promote hogs, you can control the farm economy, you can do everything but you can’t do 
anything for the Port of Churchill and you haven’t done anything for three years. 
 
Let’s not kid ourselves. There are three problems with the Port of Churchill. 
 
1. It needs improved facilities. No one denies that. That is a federal responsibility. I am glad to see the 
$12.5 million being expended and I give the Calgary Conference full credit, not the NDP in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. Credit goes to Prime Minister Trudeau who for the first time called a regional 
conference to look after regional difficulties. I say it takes a lot more than $12.5 million. The Liberal 
Party when they were the Government of Saskatchewan asked for far more than $12.5 million and we 
will continue to support any resolution that demands millions or whatever expenditures are required. 
 
2. The Port of Churchill requires a longer shipping season. You and I know that one of the major 
problems today is with the modern ships, modern icebreakers, that the Port of Churchill can be used for 
many, many months. It can have a much longer shipping season. One of the major problems is insurance 
rates. Maritime people get better Maritime insurance rates in order to have a longer season. A good 
shipping company will tell you that the Port of Churchill is only being used to 50 per cent of its capacity 
in the season itself. Because it can’t get good insurance rates and that many of the Maritime insurance 
companies won’t insure their ships if they come in beyond the limit of the present insurance rates. 
 
I think SGIO and the Saskatchewan Government could take some leadership in this field. I think you 
could. 
 
3. I think also we need some expanded cargo out of the Port of Churchill. I don’t think the Port of 
Churchill will ever be a major port for western Canada if the major commodity that’s being transported 
out of that Port of Churchill is wheat. 
 
We have to work with the potash companies, with the pulp companies, with the timber resources in this 
province and western Canada. We have got to convince them that we can use that Port of Churchill to 
export the commodities that are produced in 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1812 

western Canada. 
 
We have got to convince people, suppliers in Europe and other parts of the world that supplies that are 
required in western Canada can be brought in through the Port of Churchill. And that is a major 
responsibility of the provincial NDP and this Government to go out and promote that — first of all to 
ship out of the Port of Churchill for commodities manufactured or produced in western Canada, and for 
supplies that come into western Canada from the European countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few other comments I wish to make on this Resolution, I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 9 — Policies and Operations of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Guy (Athabasca): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Saskatchewan Government to immediately convene an 
independent or judicial commission to inquire into all aspects of the policies and operations of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. D. Cody (Minister of Co-operatives): — Mr. Speaker, Resolution No. 9 is one of the kinds of 
resolutions which I don’t think merit very much debate. However there have been things said in this 
House previously that certainly brings one to his feet. And it is for that reason that I want to say a few 
things with regard to this Resolution. 
 
I particularly want to say these things because of the fact that I think the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan is doing the kind of job that the people of northern Saskatchewan want it to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Now I know that the Members across the way are totally against DNS. We know that. 
They are committed to any campaign at all which would bring down the Department even if it were 
given a chance. 
 
I also realize with such a small group over there, thanks to the people of Saskatchewan, it is necessary to 
follow the leader, however, blind devotion to their leader’s insincerity is truly regrettable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, there is however one dim flicker of hope over there. And that is the new 
Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone). I say to him — he is out politicking with the Leader of the 
Opposition, with the Member for Moosomin, with the Member for Lumsden who hasn’t been here all 
day, they are all out politicking. But I say there is one dim flicker of hope for this Member. I should 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1813 

like to tell him that he should start thinking on his own. Don’t be swayed, Mr. Member for Lakeview, 
don’t be swayed by your leader’s lust for attention and don’t be fooled by your leader’s politicking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I issue this challenge because I think the people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to know the true motives of the Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — I won’t spend very much time this evening recalling their gaunt track record nor will I 
spend time recalling their disorganization and confusion when for expedient reasons they choose their 
Party’s alignment on many of the important public issues which may have arisen during the legislative 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that after the Member for Prince Albert West, the Leader of the Opposition 
said he would destroy DNS, if given a chance, the remaining Members of the fearless 15 or fearless 14 
or however many there are over there had to fall in line and react in the same dismal fashion. When the 
Liberals started criticizing DNS, I patiently awaited an alternative. But did they present one? Not a 
chance. Do they have a better approach, Mr. Speaker? Obviously not. I am convinced they are having 
considerable difficulty comprehending the magnitude and the comprehensive nature of DNS after 
comparing their northern record. I can understand why they are miffed about it. Little question about 
that. Day after day they file questions on the Order Paper in attempts to find out what the department is 
all about. 
 
We won’t oppose that and we haven’t opposed that. In fact, we welcome their new found interest in the 
northern people. However their admitted lack of information about northern Saskatchewan shows they 
don’t have one bit of backing in support for their call for an investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members on this side of the House and the people of Saskatchewan recognize the fact that 
what the Liberal Party Opposition is really attempting to do is to disguise their politicking and 
window-dressing by all the frightening things that they have said about this department. 
 
Members opposite can snicker and cat-call all they want, however, if they cast aside their political 
motivations and constructively assess the department, its program and policies, surely, Mr. Speaker, they 
will recognize the motives of their own leader in condemning DNS. 
 
The Member for Pelly just recently said in this House, in fact, I think it was during one of the recent 
debates, he expressed his frustrations that arise from listening to some of the old tired Liberal speeches 
that he has heard in this Assembly for years. I too share that frustration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us examine the crux of the matter. Admittedly there have been problems in setting up 
this new department. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1814 

There have been minor set backs and certain obstacles which the department has had to deal with. But it 
is not unusual that this would happen with a department such as this. Certainly no one, especially 
Liberals, would expect to embark on a new program and expect smooth sailing all the way. However, 
even with the realization by our Government of the pitfalls ahead this has in no way detracted from our 
commitment to bringing a new sense of economic and social justice to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The New Democratic Government sitting on this side of the House plots its legislative course using 
economic and social needs as the barometer to follow. Liberals on the other hand use political 
expediency and corporate allegiance in determining their stance. We have seen this time and time again 
as the Liberal Opposition will spare no energy in defending such entities as the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange, Imperial Oil, Parsons and Whittemore, Simpson Timber, Canadian Pacific Railway and so 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have committed my fullest support to this department because it will reinforce the 
confidence of this Government in the department and will be public witness to the department’s many 
employees that we back and back strongly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — If there are sincere concerns, Mr. Speaker, and I repeat, sincere concerns, let’s get them 
out into the open. But I hope that Members opposite will be honest with the public and honest with 
themselves when they enter into this debate. Certainly a lot more honest than the Leader of the 
Opposition was last week when he entered into this debate. The shell shock of the 1971 election 
apparently is still with them. I am sure that they won’t forget it for a long time. And that is the kind of 
thing that we see in this Resolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problems in northern Saskatchewan are not few. They have been there for over 200 
years. Governments of the past have either failed or ignored the major commitment which DNS 
represents. 
 
Initially the Member for Prince Albert West plotted his Party’s position with respect to DNS. He said he 
would like to see it abolished. But recently I detect just the slightest shift in Liberal thinking. Now they 
are telling us, slow down, you are moving too fast. Maybe I am over optimistic when I sense a minor 
degree of philosophical acceptance over this major program. But before this debate concludes I am 
confident my sense of anticipation will either be confirmed or discounted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we must consider the reasons behind the stand that the Liberals have taken. 
Predictably, they oppose our energy legislation because of their allegiance to our multinational oil 
corporations. Predictably they opposed our amendments to The Forest Act because of their allegiance to 
Parsons and Whittemore and Simpson Timber. Predictably they would not support our stand on the 
rapeseed issue because of their allegiance to the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange. But what corporate 
interest are they defending in opposing the Department of Northern Saskatchewan? For once there 
doesn’t appear to be any corporate interest waiting in the wings pulling the strings for the Liberal Party 
but rather they are attempting to capitalize on the theme that this defence is a good offence. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1815 

That’s right, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal caucus feels that by rumor, innuendo and vicious criticism they 
can distract attention from their northern economic and social programs when they sat on this side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend this Government and I particularly commend the Hon. Ted Bowerman . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — . . . for the determination and leadership in the past few months in setting up this new 
department. In less than two years a new confidence has emerged in the North. And the credit must go to 
the many new programs which are being carried out at the department level under the capable leadership 
of the Hon. Ted Bowerman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — The Liberal Party is in no way impressed with his progress. Members on this side of the 
House and the people living in northern Saskatchewan are impressed. I am fully confident that in the 
years ahead confidence and pride will be reinforced many times. For the first time ever northern 
residents have an opportunity to be rewarded for their initiatives. In the past piecemeal programs have 
met with frustration and despair. Northerners had only the prospect of welfare cheques to look forward 
to but that is all changing now. 
 
I am sure — the Member for Meadow Lake — he snickers and laughs. Why would he laugh? Why 
would the Member for Athabasca want to laugh? They are too afraid to stick around their own 
constituency to try and change anything. Mr. Speaker, I am sure we will all recall the excellent account 
given in this Legislature just a while ago by the Minister as he detailed many of the programs which he 
has undertaken. At that time, Mr. Speaker, it was very interesting to note the reactions of Members 
opposite. The Member for Prince Albert West couldn’t take it as he left the Chamber. A few minutes 
later the Member for Athabasca left. I should say the Member for Athabasca-Rosthern left. He was 
followed by the Member for Meadow Lake. Not a one of them will sit here and listen to the great things 
that are being done for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why did they leave? They left because they didn’t want to face the music. They 
hated to hear of the progress being recorded in the North. And they choose rather to retire in their 
lounges where they probably continued their conversation on DNS without the benefits of the facts and 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say a few things about the programs which have been going on in the North. A 
five-year housing program during which time 625 housing units for northern residents will be 
constructed. Substandard housing in the past has been the order of the day. Very few families had 
adequate accommodation despite the glaring need. What did the Member for Athabasca do? Nothing. 
What did the Member for Meadow Lake do? Nothing. The Liberal record was spotty to say the least. 
I’m not suggesting that our program involving 125 housing starts annually for the next five years will 
satisfy the housing needs of northern people, however, it certainly contrasts the record 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1816 

between 1964 and 1971 when the Liberals averaged only 35 housing starts per year. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what I call a dismal record. 
 
Every person has a right to expect decent accommodation for himself and his family. This Government, 
through the Department of Northern Saskatchewan recognizes the right and is doing its best to honor 
that right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also commend the Department for initiating sewer and water programs in four northern 
communities. Planning and design systems are being completed and construction will begin this year in 
the communities of Buffalo Narrows, Cumberland House, Weyakwyn and La Loche. In addition to this 
the village of La Ronge received a $220,000 provincial grant towards a sewer and water system which is 
currently under construction. In addition to these programs, new wells have been completed at Jans Bay, 
Cole Bay, Beauval, Buffalo Narrows. Wells are being attempted at Green Lake and Sandy Bay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the Liberals are upset. I can understand why they are upset that we 
are going so fast. They recognize the writing on the wall. And it’s obviously on the wall for them, 
because already the Member for Athabasca has left. They know that because of the fact the Provincial 
Government has followed through on its word and kept its promise, that the people will readily support 
that Government in its efforts to improve the quality of life for northern residents. 
 
In fact, the progress being recorded by DNS is so profound, Mr. Speaker, that already the two northern 
residents, or two northern MLAs as I said, have given up and are running to the southern ridings. As my 
colleague, my seatmate just said, they’re running for the short grass country. They do not like the odds, 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t like the odds of seeking re-election, because they know they do not have much 
of a chance in attempting to discredit and distort the operations of the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our friends in the Opposition have also attempted to drag out the old Liberal bogey man. 
The old Liberal bogey man argument and claim that according to the Member for Prince Albert West the 
instances of a dictator. I asked him, has he ever, Mr. Speaker, has he ever in the history of this province 
seen such a degree of local authority and decision. Did his government afford northern people the right 
of self-determination and grass roots decision making? No they didn’t. Never before has there been such 
an opportunity given to northern people, to have the power to effect changes based on decisions made at 
the local level. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the election of a Northern Municipal Council, some months ago, supports the 
promise of local involvement which was made to the northern people prior to the establishment of this 
department. The election of the five-man council attracted a tremendous number of candidates. 
Thirty-one to be exact, twenty-eight of whom were natives. No wonder the Liberals don’t want us to talk 
about decision making at the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following the demonstration by natives at the Legislature, last fall, several Members of the 
Opposition started pointing fingers at us and using the demonstration as all the proof which was needed 
to condemn what our Government is doing in the North. I can recall what the Member for Milestone 
said. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1817 

Mr. MacDonald: — What’s that? What did I say? 
 
Mr. Cody: — You said all the dirty, nasty things that you could about the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and about this Government for not listening to the northern people, that’s what you said. 
 
What they failed to understand, Mr. Speaker, either deliberately or otherwise, were the commitments of 
one of the leaders who viewed the demonstration slightly different. He said for the first time ever, 
northern people have the opportunity and have been given the right to bargain for their local rights. For 
the first time they have been given a decision making responsibility. He said they are for the first time 
pressing their demands without fear of retaliation. And, Mr. Speaker, this confidence represents a 
complete reversal from the Thatcher-Steuart days of government when northern people were given no 
chance. No chance at all to effect change at the local level. And I say to the Members opposite and to the 
Members of this Assembly thank goodness the days of heavy handed government, heavy handed rule in 
the North is over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also commend the broadly based economic program which is being carried out in the 
North. Last fall the Minister spent close to half an hour outlining the many economic developments 
which were being carried out. The results to date have been gratifying in my mind, despite attempts by 
some of the Opposition to discredit this part of the northern program. 
 
When the truth squad, the great truth squad from Cannington and I forget who else there was, 
Cannington I imagine, and Moosomin, the northern Members. When the truth squad went to the North, 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Athabasca, condemned the department for not providing assistance to 
small businesses, already in operation. This, of course is ridiculous. Some employees, as an example, 
who have been overworked and underpaid for years in private tourist camps, now for the first time have 
the opportunity, through the Economic Development Fund to get started in their own business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — But what does the Member for Athabasca say? Does he like it? No, he doesn’t like it, 
because for the first time some competition has been created for his Liberal camp owners. For the first 
time some competition for his Liberal camp owners and this reduces their source of camp labor and 
cheap labor. 
 
They say there is no economic development in the North. Why didn’t the truth squad visit Beauval? The 
reason is obvious and it was because they didn’t like what they would see when they got there and they 
conveniently drove by. They conveniently drove by, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Have they mentioned that this single post cutting operation, Mr. Speaker, employs more native people, 
more native northern people than the pulp mill at Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Economic Development Program 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1818 

is effecting positive change and the Budget is further evidence which will improve the economic outlook 
for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that by even selecting a very narrow cross section of northern 
Saskatchewan the Liberal tour was unable to uncover their allegations that welfare is rampant in the 
North. They weren’t able to uncover that either. They chose rather to blame civil servants who according 
to the Liberals didn’t co-operate and refused to provide them with information. I’m sure they were most 
disappointed when they couldn’t get their fingers onto some of the information. 
 
Have they forgotten we are using the computer in Regina? I guess not. They probably don’t know we’ve 
got one. The same only to be used while in Government to tabulate and calculate all costs of social 
assistance, but no, not much more news worthy is it to blame unco-operative civil servants. I think what 
ranks the worst of their tour is to say that the civil servants in the North wouldn’t give them any 
information when they could have just slipped down to the computer room and got every bit of 
information they wanted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who would be over there? 
 
Mr. Cody: — There are a few computers around, there are a few civil servants around, thousands by 
your numbers and I’m sure you would have got the information by just asking. You wouldn’t have had 
to rampage all around the North, tramping the bush and finding nothing. 
 
Then, of course, the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), the great expert from the North, said there 
are many jobs, but because of the fact that welfare is so easy to get, employers can’t find workers. Mr. 
Speaker, again that is rubbish. And I back . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Somebody wrote his speech. 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, you know something funny just occurred to me that I was going to say 
about the Member for Athabasca, but I decided I better not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, the rubbish I speak of, I was going to say, I back it up by quoting from a 
press release which four civil servants and social workers in the North, in northern Saskatchewan 
released following the Liberal romp in the North. Let me quote: 
 

The recent tour suggested that employers could not find employees due to welfare. Here are 
some hard, cold facts. Due to miserably low wages being paid by the hospitals, missions, stores 
and other employers, 222 people must have their earnings supplemented so that they have as 
much income as they could get on welfare. 

 
It’s certainly obvious, Mr. Speaker, that what they are trying to tell us about welfare is absolutely 
incorrect. I 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1819 

certainly wouldn’t want to call them liars, but I’d call them strangers to the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as of November 1, 1973, 85 people who can work were receiving assistance, while looking 
for work and 41 were undergoing retraining. This is out of approximately 1,500 employable people in 
the area or 5.6 per cent unemployment rate. Not a bad record. What was the record when the Liberals 
were there? Would you believe ten times as high? If anyone will come to the Social Services offices, 
any time you want, outline a job at even minimum wage, we will always notify people of it and attempt 
to bring those looking, all those seeking, together. 
 
In summation, there is a lot remaining to be done, however, we challenge anyone to show a better track 
record over twice the period of time, Mr. Speaker. We challenge you to print these facts and to refute 
them if you think you can. And ‘m sure the Member for Athabasca will try, but I’m sue he can’t. We 
submit that if some groups would quit wasting our time with their petty political games, Mr. Speaker, we 
could achieve much more and we could achieve much more of the things which they are talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things are not bad in northern Saskatchewan. People are certainly not crying out for help. 
They do not find DNS overbearing. They are not being exposed to dictatorship. DNS is not employing 
radicals who are opposed to the church and the RCMP. There certainly is not mismanagement within the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. People are certainly not refusing to work. DNS employees are 
not unco-operative. DNS secretaries do not all drive government cars, as is indicated by the Member for 
Moosomin and Cannington. DNS is deliberately destroying existing tourist camps according to the 
Members. That is certainly not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can any serious person even take the Liberals seriously any more when they are trying 
to peddle such tripe in this Legislature? There is no basis to the allegations and innuendo as the 
Members opposite are trying to peddle to us. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan is providing 
new hope for the people of the North. It is making progress and the majority of the people in the North 
are happy with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just recently I was at a convention in Prince Albert, at the Co-operative Fisheries 
Convention and I spoke to a lot of northern people and everyone of the northern people whom I spoke to 
was satisfied with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. It was not an NDP convention, it was a 
Co-operative Fisheries Convention and I can tell you, Mr. Member for North Battleford or close to 
North Battleford, that one of your very close friends was there as the Chairman and he is not a supporter 
of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke to people like Father McGrette of Wollaston Lake. I spoke to people like Ray 
McKenzie of Stanley Million, I spoke to people like Oscar Beatty of La Ronge, and I spoke to people 
like Freddy Thompson from Buffalo Narrows and all of these people, including dozens more, said that 
Ted Bowerman was doing the kind of job that the northern people wanted him to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1820 

Mr. Cody: — And, Mr. Speaker, because of the things that the people told me, when I was up there and 
because of the kind of people that I saw when I was up there and because of the kind of job that I think 
Ted Bowerman is doing with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan I just can see no reason why we 
should be any where near supporting Resolution No. 9 and I ask everyone in this House to defeat it and 
defeat it soundly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H. E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of this Resolution. 
 
You know it is always amazing to listen to the fellows over there accuse the Member for Athabasca for 
running out of the North and the Member for Meadow Lake leaving the North and it’s strange because 
you know, I still live in Meadow Lake, I still intend to run in Meadow Lake, but for the last three 
elections you people have tried to beat me in elections in the North, but so far you haven’t been able to 
do it. You know I made a prediction, after the election in ’71. I said to my wife, I’ll bet you that I don’t 
get a chance to run in this seat in the way the boundaries are now. And sure enough it wasn’t long, either 
the first session or the second one that you people legislated me out of the seat, or at least you took off 
the north part of the seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — I’m still running in Meadow Lake but instead of having the north and I can tell you 
that I’d be happy and proud to serve them. I would be elected again if I had the same boundaries I had 
before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — You may not know what the situation is in the North, you’ve never been up there. 
But you know the people in the North don’t trust the NDP because they’ve had a record of being 
swindled by the former CCF. You fellows had twenty years up there, before we went in for seven years. 
It was a pretty sad situation up there in those twenty years. 
 
And how did you use those people. Well, my experience in 1960, the first time I ran, the Government 
would if there was a place that might vote Liberal, open a lake 20 or 30 miles away where the fishermen 
all had to go and fish. If you know what commercial fishing is, where there is a 100,000 pound limit, the 
fishermen have to be out there when the season opens in order to get their share. So that come the day of 
the election, the men are all away from the settlement. In 1960 I had fellows come to me after the 
election who said, “Mr. Coupland, if the wind had gone down for two hours we would have had 100 
votes across for you.” This is how the CCF beat me in 1960 up there, and the people know this and they 
don’t trust you fellows to take over in these places in the North. 
 
You know he talks about us not stopping in Beauval. We stopped in Beauval and it was funny to hear 
the fellows laughing because just as we came into Beauval the Minister was taking off 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1821 

with the Government aircraft. He dropped off there to pick up a plaque, he was afraid to go up for the 
opening, they invited him but he never showed up for the opening. He comes in a couple of weeks later 
to pick up a trophy. So don’t tell us about not going into Beauval. 
 
I want to say a word of praise for those fellows in Beauval for setting up an operation as they have. Just 
ten miles out, you go and see that nice place that’s cleared for the pulp mill mostly by those fellows 
from Beauval. They would have had a lot more today had the Government not cancelled the pulp mill. 
They were willing to settle for second best and I compliment them on setting up that deal and making it 
operate the way it is. They are a good bunch of fellows. 
 
Here is one of the reasons we need this Resolution and inquiry into DNS. Just last week I was home and 
when you hear rumors around Meadow Lake — such as, we were able to buy plywood at $2 a sheet up 
there, it was shipped in by the DNS and somebody was picking it up. You hear rumors of fellows sitting 
in Buffalo Narrows waiting for orders and something to do. These are the kind of things going on. I’m 
not saying they’re true. That’s why we want this inquiry. I don’t know whether the rumors are true but 
there shouldn’t be those rumors and where there is smoke there is fire. That’s why, if you people aren’t 
afraid, set up that commission and go look into what is going on in the North. A lot of people are happy 
there, they are going up and making good money on some of the money the DNS is spending. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Hal, how far back do you want us to go? 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Well, I don’t care how far back you go. In fact go back to 1960 and the day of the 
election find out how many emergency orders were handed out in 1960, the day of the election. Go to 
some of the stores and find out how many emergency orders were handed out to try and win the vote. 
Don’t tell me anything about the North. I tell you that I’ve had quite a few groups of Metis down from 
the North that want me to leave Meadow Lake and run there. But I live in Meadow Lake, why shouldn’t 
I run in Meadow Lake. You call an election tomorrow and we’ll see who will get beaten. I challenge 
you. 
 
It is just for some of these reasons I have pointed out that the people in the North are going to be a long 
time trusting the NDP because they know they are tied to the former CCF. I wholeheartedly support this 
Resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Would the Member permit a question? In your initial remarks you seemed to 
bewail the establishment of constituency boundaries by an Independent Boundaries Commission. Are 
you saying Mr. Member that you oppose the recommendations of the Independent Boundaries 
Commission? 
 
Mr. Coupland: — All I am saying is that you legislated half my seat away, the people I am 
representing. It wasn’t me moving out of a constituency it was your Government that took that away 
from me. I would be happy to have it. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1822 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I think since he is the Cabinet Minister it would 
be better if he caught up on a little of the news. It was the Attorney General who drew that line not the 
Boundary Commission. Everybody up there knows that and the Member for Meadow Lake would like to 
inform you that he lives in Meadow Lake and he has always lived in Meadow Lake and that has nothing 
to do with the new constituency. He’ll be running where he lives — I’m not too sure where it is, is it 
Qu’Appelle or Watrous? Well it won’t be anywhere for another year or so, so it hardly makes any 
difference. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was a real pleasure when I went up North with the Member for Meadow Lake. In 
fact when we came back I said to the Member for Meadow Lake, you are so popular up here that you 
should start a bank because he could lend so much money . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — . . . from the time I was there he could have lent so much money to so many people 
that I think he should go into business up there. It was a real pleasure for me to be there with him. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Did you say lend or give money? 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — Either way. You can give it away or you can lend it, whichever. If I was on your 
salary I’d give it away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in any event I do want to say a few words on this Resolution because since we made our 
trip to the North and I might say that I wish the Minister of Natural Resources were here because that 
was the latest of many trips I’ve made over the last 20 years to northern Saskatchewan and northern 
Manitoba and it may sound strange to some Members opposite, but the two are extremely alike. Whether 
you go into northern Saskatchewan or northern Manitoba, the country is similar and the people are 
similar. So much for the accusation which I never considered worth answering, that of being a southern 
expert. We didn’t feel that it was much worth answering because it shows a man is pretty bankrupt of 
any ideas of his own to have to give that type of answer. In fact I was quite interested in Jim Sinclair’s 
view when he said of Mr. Bowerman only about two weeks ago, that it would have been very good if 
they had had a Minister who did not think that he knew all the answers of the North. This is one of the 
types of accusations made against the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Simply because he worked as 
a conservation officer and a few other jobs and I might say that he never distinguished himself too 
greatly in the department to any great extent, I don’t think he became an outstanding member of the 
staff. But apparently he left with the great convincing thoughts that he knew just about all the cures for 
everything and this, of course, is what is of grave concern to the people of northern Saskatchewan. All 
of a sudden when you become a general, you know everything, even if the advancement from lieutenant 
was rather rapid. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to review again some of the things that we said at that time which I think are 
still valid. First of all I want to say that the Government has been guilty of some very poor hiring 
practices in northern Saskatchewan. This is 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1823 

obvious. We have had denunciations coming from civil servants, we have had retirements, we have had 
firings, we have had total upheaval in the civil service ever since this Department started. And the 
reason is obvious. The government has hired many social activists to go into northern Saskatchewan and 
I think this has been extremely unfortunate. If you look at some of the Press releases and I’m not going 
to go over them all tonight. I could but the Member for Athabasca has read them to the Assembly 
already. Some of the statements made by the social activists, hired by this Government, hired by the 
people opposite, the Cabinet Benches. You can’t blame that on to somebody else, you can’t blame that 
on the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, those people had been hired by this Government, that Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan did the hiring and he takes the responsibility for the people he hired and sent 
them to northern Saskatchewan. Many of the people he has been sending to northern Saskatchewan have 
been the cause of many of the problems that exist there today. 
 
We illustrated when we came back, Mr. Speaker, some of the situations that we found in the time we 
were there. The firing of all of the teachers or at least if it wasn’t firing it was the telling of them to 
leave, more or less, at a public meeting in Ile-a-la-Crosse, despite the fact that they were legally there. 
They were awaiting the legal election of a school board which I, as a matter of fact, support. But 
nevertheless it was this type of social activist that caused the creation of the difficulty that existed in that 
area. And, as I already said, if you read the Press releases of the hirings and the firings of many of the 
people in the last year that have been in northern Saskatchewan, it is not hard to understand that only the 
surface of the iceberg has been shown in the news media and has been presented by the Opposition here 
in this Legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — So that is the first instance, Mr. Speaker, where I say the Government has been an 
utter and total failure. It has been in its hiring practices of personnel and sending them to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan is a remote, isolated area. It is inhabited by many people who are not familiar 
with so-called sophisticated ways. I say so-called because that is a relative term. They are people who do 
not have in many instances a great deal of education. They are people who can be manipulated by 
people who are social activists. I call them social activists because many of them are of a very strong left 
wing bent. Mr. Speaker, this has been a great social experiment for people wanting to go into northern 
Saskatchewan. There is probably nowhere else in North America that you can carry on this type of 
experimentation on a group of people who have not much education and do not have much access to the 
news media at any one particular time. 
 
Let’s take up some of those areas like Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo Narrows — 200 miles, Mr. Speaker, 
by a gravel road from Meadow Lake. No television, one radio station. Mr. Speaker, obviously a place if 
you are a social activist you can get away with a lot of things that you couldn’t anywhere else in North 
America. This has been a perfect opportunity and the Government opposite has deliberately allowed 
many of these people to go there to use their experimentation. I think this is one area in 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1824 

which they can be soundly and roundly condemned and it is one area, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Government by firing people who already were there, they have pushed out many responsible, hard 
working people who tried to do a good job in that area. They were not white supremacists, they were 
people who did the best they could with the circumstances they had and for all intents and purposes did 
a fairly good job. 
 
I want to talk for a few minutes about what the Government is doing. I listened to the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan and in fact asked him to tell us what they have done in an economic 
development way. Now we were in Beauval and we said, I believe, at our Press conference when we 
came back that this was a good and viable operation which I will say again now. And of course, this is 
the one that the Members opposite trot out before the Assembly and that’s fine because it is an 
economically viable operation and it is one that has been worthwhile. But if you look further than that 
you will not see one single economic operation that has been developed by the people themselves, 
without the Government pouring in huge quantities of money. Essentially what the Government is 
saying in their Estimates Book this year is that if the people in southern Saskatchewan invest enough 
money in northern Saskatchewan we will get some people off social welfare. It is really a transfer of tax 
dollars. We have no objection to that, certainly it is a good idea and a necessity that we develop water 
works, town halls, develop all of the auxiliary services. The key services cannot be of lasting benefit or 
an economic benefit to the area if we cannot provide long term, job creating enterprises for the people 
that live there. Because we can build houses and that will create jobs for this year. We can put in water 
sewage systems but the people who live in those houses near the water sewage system have to have a 
job next year. There is nowhere in this Department and nowhere in this Government’s operation that 
those jobs are being created. 
 
Let’s take a look, for example, in the Estimates. On page 64. Grants for Economic Development out of a 
total budget of $22.6 million are $500,000, Mr. Speaker. Obviously most of the expenditures that are 
going into northern Saskatchewan are for housing, they are for water works, they are for schools, they 
are for hospitals, and all of those in themselves are worthwhile and they are good and they are obviously 
needed in the area. But we have to be doing something that provides jobs for the people that live there, 
rather than just the services that will make life better for them. 
 
We have also said when we were there that a number of jobs were in existence and this was true. I could 
have got a job which would have not reflected education or skill or anything I think within the first two 
hours I was there. I would say that it would have not been a high paying job but I presume that it would 
have paid the minimum wage, presumably the minimum wage applies equally there and it would have 
brought me a level of living at least equal to or better than social welfare. There was apparently no effort 
whatsoever to channel people who were obviously available for work into this type of work. And I think 
that this was a disappointment. 
 
The Member and the Minister of Co-operatives says we should have gone to the Department of 
Co-operation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have yet in my constituency or anywhere here in the city of Regina 
to go in and receive the type of treatment we received from 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1825 

civil service workers in northern Saskatchewan. We walked in, we shook hands with them and we asked 
them a simple question like, what was the level of payments on social welfare? We got the answer he 
didn’t know and he had been there for six months, Mr. Speaker. We got an answer when we asked if the 
sawmill was working in that town from a man who lived there for six months and he said, he didn’t 
know. And the sawmill was operating 200 or 300 yards across the street. Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously 
the civil servants who are being hired in that particular area are not very well qualified for the job or 
they are obviously so politically scared and I suspect that they had received a phone call from right here 
in the Head Office in Regina. Because the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan had heard that someone 
was going up there for information and I rather suspect that everybody had been put on alert and told 
don’t talk to anybody who appears at the office. 
 
Well, my understanding is that all have access to civil servants and I think that such fundamental 
questions as what is the level of social welfare should be answered by any civil servant and I don’t think 
this is expecting too much. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that besides the lack of any co-ordination of jobs and the fact that I think the 
hiring policies have been at the root of much of the trouble in northern Saskatchewan, that I think the 
Government itself has been attempting to do something which I think will be extremely difficult in the 
sense of co-ordinating departments. The Government itself, I think, if it had a streak of honesty or a 
sudden whim of honesty would be sure to admit that the co-ordination of all departments into one 
department such as Northern Saskatchewan is not exactly nearly as feasible as it seemed prior to the last 
election. I say this because it was obvious that many of the departments that were experiencing problems 
had to come back to Regina to be able to come up with solutions to problems. There is simply no way 
that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan can have all of the back-up personnel that can cope with 
problems of water works, problems of hospitals, and problems of schools, and this results in many of 
their requirements coming back here to Regina and simply without a fantastic civil service in La Ronge 
it is an impossibility. 
 
We can take for example the situation we now have with the Department of Natural Resources and the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan regarding fisheries. Now surely fisheries are something that can 
be handled with a co-ordinated effort and yet have two distinct jurisdictions in the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan and the Department of Natural Resources. Personally, and I don’t think anyone 
else that I have talked to who is acquainted with that type of a problem can see any necessity why we 
should separate fisheries in northern Saskatchewan and fisheries in southern Saskatchewan. Southern 
Saskatchewan, I use that just as the line of demarkation the Government has outlined for the division 
between northern and southern Saskatchewan. This is only one case of many. We are going to be using 
the same type of biologists, we are going to be using the same necessity for setting fishing limits, the 
same study of water problems and yet instead of having any co-ordination whatsoever, we are going to 
be doing away with it. And so on down the list. The same with many of the other aspects of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to also mention the statistics on Social Welfare. 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1826 

Again in the Estimates I notice that welfare payments are up in northern Saskatchewan. Which would 
seem to indicate that the treasurer certainly is not as optimistic about the level of social welfare in 
northern Saskatchewan decreasing as are many of the speeches we have heard. He has appropriated in 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan for an increased amount of social welfare payments. The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan is up from $3 million to $3.5 million. In the first report of 1972-73 we 
notice the case load went in November from 995 to 1174 in March 1973. I would suspect that if it were 
not for the tremendous amount of Government spending that the welfare work load would be increasing 
even more. 
 
I think one other aspect that the Government should be condemned for and that is that its policies or lack 
of them on industrial development are having a serious effect on northern Saskatchewan. The previous 
Liberal Government had various policies that did result in development such as the uranium mine which 
is coming on stream in about a year. It will have probably two to three hundred permanent employees. 
 
The Liberal Government had an incentive program for looking for mines and minerals in northern 
Saskatchewan. This was the type of economic activity, if it is bolstered by government money into 
housing and government money into welfare, I don’t mean social welfare, I mean welfare programs that 
will assist in public health, schools, hospitals, this type of spending that the Government is putting in, 
which I congratulate them for. I give them full credit for putting money into public housing and into 
schools and hospitals. But unfortunately this will not count for much unless their industrial development 
policy changes in northern Saskatchewan simply because the Government itself is not creating 
permanent jobs and their policies in industry all over Saskatchewan, particularly northern Saskatchewan 
are disastrous. We are not creating jobs in manufacturing anywhere in our province. 
 
I think that generally speaking, while the Government opposite is going to attempt to bail themselves out 
by spending sufficient money to make northern Saskatchewan look somewhat prosperous that the people 
of Saskatchewan are not going to get very much for a lot of that money. There are two or three things 
the Government I would say are doing right. I would say that the development of a Northern Advisory 
Council is a good step. I think the election of such people and more say in their own affairs is certainly a 
good move in the right direction but I do think that many of the things they have done there we will live 
to regret. I think that many of the people in Saskatchewan are regretting. Mr. Speaker, in closing, I don’t 
doubt that the Minister of Co-operatives when he was in Prince Albert talking with a number of people 
there, that the ones he talked to patted him on the back. 
 
If I was spending money and a Minister of that Government was spending money like he is, I would 
expect to get a lot of pats on the back. But not necessarily because I was doing a particularly good job. 
So I don’t think it should be too much of a surprise to the Minister of Co-operatives that a number of 
people told him that he is doing a good job. With the kind of money he has to hand out he is apt to get 
quite a few congratulatory pats on the back which not necessarily are indicative of anything. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1827 

I just want to close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I will be supporting our side’s contention and this 
Resolution. I hope that the Government does not continue its high minded manner and I hope that will 
be so particularly for the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan because northern Saskatchewan is one of 
the biggest geographic areas and has a great deal of potential. I think that if they are unwilling to show 
any type of change that many of the mistakes that they have made now will go on completely 
uncorrected and in fact will become much worse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few comments to this 
Resolution. First of all I want to ask the Members opposite a simple question. Why is everyone 
protesting to the degree they are with a very simple resolution that is asking for an inquiry, an 
investigation into the affairs of northern Saskatchewan? You people have tried an exciting new concept 
called the single agency concept in northern Saskatchewan. We have rejected that. Because we felt that 
one single department of Government which would have complete jurisdiction over every aspect of the 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan’s life, whether it came to health, education, welfare, municipal 
government, local government whatever it was, that it was just too dictatorial and it had too much scope 
or regimentation of the same kind of regimentation and the attitude and the reputation of the old 
Department of Natural Resources in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet every single Member has stood up and attempted to justify the new department’s existence. They 
have pointed to Members of the Opposition creating trouble. I am going to say just a few words and then 
I am going to ask leave to adjourn the debate because tomorrow there is a group of people from northern 
Saskatchewan coming down and these, Mr. Speaker, are not Members of the Liberal Opposition, these 
are not Members of the Liberal Party. I don’t even know who these people are. These people are people 
coming from northern Saskatchewan to hold public meetings in southern Saskatchewan to tell the people 
of southern Saskatchewan what is going on in the North. What some of the problems are. 
 
Mr. Faris: — They are Wafflers. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I don’t care if they are Wafflers as long as they are people from the North. They 
are coming here to point out to people of the South that there are problems in northern Saskatchewan. 
And yet you people want to whitewash this. My colleague the Member for Moosomin who was up in 
northern Saskatchewan on that tour of the MLAs has some comments that he wants to make. We had 
some specific observations. The Liberal Opposition wants to hear what the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have to say and not the political hacks and not the Minister standing up to defend 
government policy. We want to hear an independent observation of northern Saskatchewan. We want to 
give the people of southern Saskatchewan an opportunity to hear what is going on from people outside 
the Legislature before we make our interpretation. I am going to ask the people opposite to re-examine 
their position on this. If they have nothing to hide, if Ted Bowerman is doing such a great job, if Wilf 
Churchman is doing such a great job, if the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is revolutionizing the 
North, revolutionizing the standard of living, the educational 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1828 

opportunities, the economic opportunities, why for goodness sake are you afraid to make this public to a 
public independent inquiry which will report to the people of Saskatchewan, will report on the single 
agency concept, report on the progress, report on the attitude of the people of the North, it will justify 
the position you have taken. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a few other things to say, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, there was a Member on his feet here before and I am sure that if the 
Member was going to adjourn the debate he should have had the courtesy to let him speak first. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The motion will still be before the House. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 10 — Upgrading of Beef Industry 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to consider immediately the 
improvement and expansion of The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act and the implementation of a 
program of assistance to expand the use of artificial insemination as a means of upgrading the 
beef industry and ensuring the continued growth and expansion of this very important sector of 
provincial agriculture. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Carlson: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 
commends the Government of Saskatchewan for introducing the FarmStart program to expand 
the livestock industry and further commends the Government for having appointed an artificial 
insemination advisory council in December 1972 which is to make recommendations for a 
program that will encourage the use of artificial insemination and thus upgrade the quality of 
livestock in the Province and ensure the continued growth and expansion of this very important 
sector of the provincial economy. 

 
Mr. J. C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments on closing the debate on this 
particular motion. I want to comment briefly on a couple of the opening remarks made by the Member 
for Yorkton in his reply on behalf of the Government to this motion. 
 
I pointed out in my own remarks that the FarmStart program was not large enough to allow all of the 
farmers and all of the livestock people in the province to participate in it and it was for that reason that I 
put forward the suggestion that we expand and improve the opportunities available under The 
Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act. And had the Government seen fit to or should they in the future expand 
the FarmStart program to make at 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1829 

least some of the advantages perhaps not the grants and so on, but some of the advantages of that agency 
available to all farmers, we could certainly do without The Guaranteed Livestock Loan Act. That much I 
certainly agree with. The suggestion in that sense was certainly not out of date. It was a very timely one 
because of the limitations of the FarmStart program. FarmStart concept is a good one. And I only regret 
that it is not available to all of the farmers of the province rather than just a few. 
 
I regret, Mr. Speaker, the direction that I believe the Government will be taking, certainly if we can take 
the remarks of the Member for Yorkton as he made them to us speaking on this Resolution. 
 
There is a good deal that can be done to facilitate the use of artificial insemination in the province 
particularly to upgrade the beef industry. I might point out I spoke only about the beef industry because I 
wasn’t concerned in this Resolution about dealing with the swine industry or the dairy industry or any 
other aspect. The largest sector by far of the livestock industry in the province is the beef industry and it 
was that industry that I wanted to talk about and that was the reason it was put that way. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that if again we can interpret the remarks of the Member for Yorkton as being 
generally indicative of the direction the Government intends to go in this regard, he is going to once 
again step in with the Government and the Government agencies entirely and allow no opportunity, 
allow no room for the good work that is now going on by some of the private semen operations and 
some of the co-operative semen organizations that are in the province and that might well be encouraged 
to come into the province and instead step in with a government agency, a major government program 
and as I say, I think, the work could be done. Much of what they spoke about could well be done by 
some assistance, it need not be very great assistance and some guidelines so that some of the progeny 
testing that is now going on could be expanded, it could be upgraded, it could be made available to all of 
the livestock men in the province. 
 
As usual, Mr. Speaker, the NDP drag out the old bogey and the biggest argument that he put forward for 
stepping in with a big government agency is because of some report in Quebec or Ontario where by 
fraud or by mistake or otherwise somebody wound up finding that they didn’t have cattle bred to the bull 
that they thought they were in one instance. He cited no instances from the Province of Saskatchewan. 
There is no question that care must be taken in this regard but it is certainly a mistake and very unfair of 
the Member to try and leave the impression that this happens and is much more liable to happen to 
private organizations than under a government scheme. That certainly isn’t the case. I think the Member 
well knows that. I think it is also fair to say that there have been very few situations of that kind in the 
province here. I think it is also going to be very difficult for the Government to ensure that there is no 
trading or exchanges or handling of any kind of semen in the province other than completely under the 
thumb and the jurisdiction of the Government or of a government agency that is going to be almost 
impossible to police. 
 
He made the point that the semen might be shipped or sent to a livestock man, he might in turn next 
spring sell some of 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1830 

that to a neighbor and make $5. Here again, an awful thing as far as the NDP are concerned if somebody 
should make a dollar. If somebody else should feel that the demand for that semen was such that he 
could well afford to pay a little more for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again would urge the Government to take what steps they can to establish more districts 
if you like, to set them up co-operatively, that is fine and to assist the technicians for rendering the 
services to the farmers. In many of these areas, the Member for Yorkton made a point and it is a very 
good one, that up ‘til now we have seen a good deal of the development in the more heavily 
concentrated areas, and I suppose that is only natural. These services should be made available to the 
sparsely, the less concentrated areas of livestock in the province. I think that is a government 
responsibility, and one that I hope any new policy will accomplish, to make the services of utilization of 
AI available more generally across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I regret that the amendment was put forward, I will however in the interests of 
the industry and the furthering of it, support the amendment because it still seeks to promote greater use 
of AI for the cattle industry of Saskatchewan. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare 
 
Mr. P. P. Mostoway (Hanley) moved, seconded by Mr. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South) that the Final 
Report of the Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to lead of discussion on the Final Report of the Special 
Committee on Welfare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mostoway: — It gives me much pleasure because I have to say in all sincerity that it is a good 
Report. It is the result of much hard work by Committee members and of even probably harder work by 
the various people attached to the Committee. It is the result of many excellent suggestions put to the 
Committee by numerous individuals and organizations of Saskatchewan through briefs, letters and 
public and private oral presentations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 160 formal briefs were presented to the Committee and at least another 100 informal 
ones. Many letters were received; much information was presented, along with numerous reports from 
various agencies. To me, this indicates that there was a need for such a committee as ours for we all 
know that social security change, whether it be good or bad, is one of the chief characteristics of this day 
and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say at this point that I have no intention of bringing politics into this debate. 
Members of the Committee did not politicize while on Committee business and for 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1831 

this all members should be commended. I believe that the whole area of welfare or social services is too 
important to all citizens to be a victim of politics. Too many good ideas are lost, too many emotions 
come into play when social services are looked at closely through a political bias. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform you that very seldom did the Committee run into persons who 
allowed politics to influence their presentations to us. That is not to say that some did not openly admit 
to embracing some sort of political philosophy. Rather, almost all presentations were made with the 
view of pointing out to the Committee certain things whereby the one big idea was a desire to have a 
social security system that is just for all. Mr. Speaker, it was to this end that the Committee worked. 
 
As Chairman of this Committee, I should like publicly to commend the various individuals who helped 
this Committee function smoothly. Mr. Gordon Barnhart, Ms. Merry Harbottle, Mrs. Joyce Rublee, Mrs. 
Rose Zerr and Mrs. Vivian Doan, deserve some good desk-thumping applause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mostoway: — I want also to commend Mr. Lorne Dunsmore, the Committee’s research assistant 
from the Department of Social Services, for the good hard work he provided the Committee. Also to be 
commended is Mrs. Marj. Mickleborough, from the same Department, for her advice and assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was always the Committee’s intention to allow as many individuals and organizations, as 
possible, to submit their opinions and ideas to the Committee. Therefore, the Committee decided to visit 
a number of Saskatchewan communities in the south as well as the north. In most communities visited, 
the response was good; in some it was excellent; in others it was not so good. Relative to this, I should 
mention that, I think, the Committee was wise in visiting numerous northern communities for it is from 
this area that we had few briefs but many good oral presentations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many of the communities visited, various Committee members went out to talk to 
citizens about welfare and related things. In some communities, certain members visited the recipients of 
social assistance in their homes. Mr. Speaker, we saw and talked to people from all rungs of the 
economic ladder. We visited homes that ranged from the modern, well-built to the log hut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one scene from a home I visited up north, I shall never forget. I believe it was at La Loche. 
I think two of us visited the home which was a log hut. It was small, much too small for the old woman, 
the young girl, the baby and the three middle-aged men it housed. It contained one little window and a 
small wood stove. Obviously it couldn’t hold back winter’s cold sting very well. 
 
Through our able Metis Society interpreter we were able to find out that all six were related. The 
middle-aged men were socially and physically unemployable, and had been for a goodly number of 
years. The girl had no job for she had to look after her fatherless child. As for the grand old woman, she 
was 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1832 

weather-beaten, frail, contorted and blind. 
 
We questioned the old woman and with tears streaming down her cheeks, she told us that she had come 
from farther north nearly 70 years ago. She also told us that if we thought conditions were bad in that 
home then, we were wrong, because when she was a girl, they were much worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I wish to make is this. One could almost smell the despair and the hopelessness 
that hung about the house. One could not help somehow coming to the conclusion that we are all, in 
varying degrees, responsible for our fellow men and obligated to help them reach their highest, based on 
their potentials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lest you think the Committee members always listened, questioned and visited in an air of 
sombreness, let me tell you about a gentleman who presented a brief to our Committee in the south. This 
fine gentleman had, I believe, two children whom he was bringing up himself. He lived on a large lot on 
the edge of a certain village, and of course, he was receiving social assistance. Well, as he related his 
story to us, one day he got to thinking about how he could better himself and possibly become 
completely or partially independent. Soon, he was able to scrape up enough money to buy a female goat, 
whose milk he used for his family. Well, he figured two goats would be better than one, so one day he 
took his female goat for a social visit, and, well, to make a long story short, soon he had two goats. This 
went on and on until it resulted in this man having quite a nice little herd of goats, partial financial 
independence and a well-earned feeling of accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case anyone in this House is of the opinion that we met only with recipients let me 
dispel that notion right now. We met with businessmen, farmers, housewives, fishermen, clergymen, 
parents, societies, institutions as well as recipients. Although it is true most were middle aged, there 
were some elderly, and some young. We met those who thought there was too much social assistance 
given, and we met those who thought there was not enough. We met those who suggested that the names 
of recipients might be posted on public billboards; we met those who were more compassionate. In 
short, Mr. Speaker, we had so many opinions and ideas given the Committee, that it would boggle the 
mind. 
 
And what is my reaction to this host of opinions and ideas? Well, Mr. Speaker, simply put, it is that in 
most matters related to welfare, there are few areas where there is unanimous agreement. In most areas 
there are numerous divergent opinions held by different people. I suppose this is exactly what one would 
expect in a democratic society such as ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suppose I should mention the one area in which there seems to be unanimous agreement 
— and that is that assistance should be given to those who need it. No one quarrels with this. No one 
quarrels with the physically handicapped getting assistance. No one quarrels with the deserted mother 
receiving it. No one quarrels with the aged getting it. There is, however, as is usually the case in such 
thins, a grey area — an area where there is not unanimous opinion on whether or not certain people 
should be receiving assistance. And it is in this area that the Committee realizes there has been, is, and 
will probably continue to be much public discussion. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1833 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that certain members of the Committee, including myself, have certain 
reservations about this Report. I see nothing wrong with this. In fact, I see it as a healthy sign. I see it as 
a partial reflection of the many diverse views held by the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Committee felt that what with all the various plans and schemes in this and other 
Canadian provinces, few people can honestly say they do not accept some form of assistance from 
public coffers. The aged avail themselves of assistance from the Federal Government through the old 
age pension the supplementary allowance and various other provincial programs. Parents accept family 
allowances to help feed and clothe their children. Many workers take training courses and allowances. 
Many unemployed receive unemployment benefits. Many businesses accept tax write-offs and grants. 
We all eat food, some of which is subsidized. Many students who attend universities are subsidized. 
Many businessmen owe much of their business to recipients of social assistance. Public transportation 
may be subsidized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I really wish to say is that the people of western society have come to accept 
subsidization, or assistance, or whatever you wish to call it, as being desirable and normal. It is a fact. It 
is just that some have been subsidized for so long that we have come to accept it, very often under 
another name. It is just that some forms of assistance are so subtle as to be almost unknown to the 
general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the subsidization of a millionaire for the promotion of horse racing any worse than the 
assistance given the poor? Is the public subsidization of shysters who might, for example, be involved in 
a strawboard factory, any worse than assisting the handicapped? Mr. Speaker, let me tell this House that 
whether we like it or not, very few people can say they are not receiving some sort of assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to comment on some of the recommendations of this Committee. I think 
this will be useful in that certain reasons will be given, some of which may not have appeared in the 
Report. 
 
In the area of public relations and information, the Committee became very well aware of the lack of 
information or lack of accurate information in regard to programs offered and actual benefits given 
recipients. In this regard, I must say that a large number of the public at large would find it beneficial to 
be made more aware of programs offered. I am under the impression that many people are of the opinion 
that fantastic assistance payments are given some, which is not the case. I well recall at one meeting one 
lady thought that a small recipient family she knew was receiving approximately $1,000 per month. 
When she was told it was closer to $200 per month, she seemed to be more pensive for the remainder of 
the meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, still on the same subject, I know people tend to harbor anxiety and suspicion about things 
they lack information on. This is only natural. And this is why the Committee has recommended more 
information and a better public relations program be directed to the public by the Department of Social 
Services. That is why I should like to publicly commend the present Minister of Social Services (Mr. 
Taylor) for the good start he has made in this direction. I am sure the public, and 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1834 

particularly municipal councils, appreciate the good start already made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a well-known fact that there can never really be complete social justice unless there be 
economic justice. But can there be economic justice in our society? Can we really expect the worker 
who works with his hands to compete with the person who inherits a tidy sum? Can we really expect the 
docile, the meek, to compete with the domineering? Nobody expects the mentally, emotionally or 
physically handicapped to compete. No one expects the unemployed to compete. 
 
What I say, Mr. Speaker, is that thanks to the wonder of science and good Christian values, our society 
contains many whom society must assist in order for them to survive. 
 
Now I will be the first to admit that there are a host of programs to assist these needy persons. But I will 
also be the first to admit that very often these people do not get their share of the economic pie because 
of the low benefits, or both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any way one looks at it, the disadvantaged are almost doomed to be disadvantaged and to 
pass on this disadvantage to their children. It is with this in mind that the Committee recognized the 
hodge-podge of programs which are now being offered as being little more than stop-gap measures. 
 
As a partial solution to this, the Committee certainly recognized the part that could be played by a 
guaranteed employment program. The Committee is well aware that lack of employment opportunities 
puts some people on social assistance. And in this regard the Committee feels that the unemployed but 
employable recipient wants to work, but he must be given the opportunity. 
 
The Committee also feels that a guaranteed employment program should allow for cost-sharing by the 
Federal Government regardless of who initiates such a program. It seems difficult to comprehend how 
cost-sharing can be accepted for assistance, but not for programs to help people become self-sufficient 
through work. At any rate, Mr. Speaker, the Committee feels that the only way a fair degree of economic 
justice can be guaranteed people in general is to implement a guaranteed annual income program. There 
are a number of reasons why the Committee feels this should be so. 
 
In the first place it would help guarantee a degree of economic justice, not the sort of justice which is 
now the case whereby in the last 20 years in Canada the top 20 per cent of income earners increased 
their share of total income from 41 to 43.3 per cent while the bottom 20 per cent dropped from 6 per 
cent of total income to 3.6 per cent. In the second place, although at the first glance the cost might be 
high, it would certainly help to generate economic activity throughout the country. In fact, a case could 
be made that every dollar spent through this plan would benefit a host of people, businesses and even 
governments. Mr. Speaker, it would help put money into circulation. 
 
I have no doubt that all Members of this House will be paying close attention to the Guaranteed Annual 
Income experiment which will be taking place in Manitoba with the Federal and Manitoba Governments 
participating. 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1835 

And, if a Guaranteed Annual Income were to be implemented, it could well result in a cutting back of 
the host of personnel now used to administer social services in the country. Supplementary to this, one 
can visualize that the social workers left could well use their time then for matters other than financial, 
which is now not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks in regard to a recent article on the Guaranteed Annual 
Income in yesterday’s Leader-Post. A point made was that such a program makes sense. Another was 
that the price tag is manageable, but the real point is that the Guaranteed Annual Income is politically 
dangerous, especially to Federal politicians. The article then went on to point out an obvious truth. That 
truth is that under the present Canadian social security system, the point has already been reached where 
it may pay the breadwinner of an average sized family to cease working and receive welfare benefits 
that exceed his or her minimum wage income. Would the Guaranteed Annual Income dash to pieces the 
work ethic any more than the situation I have just mentioned? Mr. Speaker, I think not. In fact, I think 
less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee felt, and I am sure that most Members of this House will agree, that if a 
universal Guaranteed Annual Income Plan cannot or will not be implemented at this time, with federal 
and provincial governments participating, the next best step would be to implement, as a start at this 
time, a Guaranteed Annual Income plan for a segment of society. Such a segment o society could very 
well be all one-parent families with dependent children as advocated in a Catholic women’s League 
1973 annual convention resolution. Mr. Speaker, the implementation of such a plan, or the start of one, 
would very much help, and here I wish to quote Pope Paul, “The poor to a better standard of living.” It 
would, Mr. Speaker, help to eliminate poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee embraced no illusion that the Guaranteed Annual Income would be 
implemented in the very near future. With this in mind the Committee set about making 
recommendations relative to the present system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the Committee was working, it was announced that revisions were to be made to the 
family allowance program. The Committee felt that this program could have very well been used to help 
eliminate economic injustice and poverty. The Committee felt that family allowances should be related 
to the income of a family along with family size and age of children. However, this was not to be, and I 
am sure the Committee is disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee took note of the fact that very often one spouse would be eligible for old 
age security while the other spouse would not be. In the majority of these cases, it would be the wife 
who would not be eligible due to the fact that in our society men in a marriage tend to be older than their 
wives. In this regard, the Committee was made aware that very often the younger spouse would have to 
apply for social assistance to help the couple maintain even a minimum standard of living. The 
Committee felt that a reduction in the eligibility age for old age security from age 65 to 60 would do 
much to alleviate hardship at this age area for our senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at many of the numerous hearings held, great 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1836 

concern was expressed in regard to youths receiving assistance. The Committee is well aware that many 
people are of the opinion that it is too easy for youths to receive this assistance, that some are almost 
induced to leave home and school in favor of independence from parents but with dependency on 
assistance. With this knowledge in mind, the Committee felt that all youths under 18 years of age should 
be legally regarded as children and as such should only be allowed to receive assistance under The Child 
Welfare Act. As well, the Committee felt that under this plan, more pressure would be put on parents in 
turn to put pressure on their children to remain at home and receive adequate training and education. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the Committee was well aware that there are genuine cases where it is in the 
interests of society publicly to support those under the age of 18 who might live independent of their 
parents. In these cases, the Committee asks only that the youths concerned be engaged in some 
meaningful activity — not idleness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if one of the aims of the society in which we live is to allow individuals the right to 
develop socially, emotionally and economically to their highest potentials, then I am sure we would all 
agree that recipient adults and children are not always allowed to do so due to a shortage of money 
necessary to help develop these potentials. No one will deny that it is more difficult for a child of a 
recipient family to participate in hockey, dancing, summer camping or music than it is for a child of a 
non-recipient family. No one will deny that in terms of children, we may be denying a genius the 
opportunity to emerge in society. No one can deny that a night out for recipient parents is almost a must 
in this day and age if good mental health is to be enjoyed. And no one would deny the 55 year old 
woman who lives alone and is not able to engage in gainful employment, the opportunity to see the odd 
movie. Mr. Speaker, it is for this reason the Committee recommended that a social allowance be 
included as an item of basic need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that the newly announced Family Income Plan closely parallels one of 
the Committee’s recommendations, and that is the removal of the extreme hardship clause whereby the 
working poor, in the past, found it very difficult to receive any sort of assistance while employed. To the 
Committee, it almost seemed that the hardship clause was in reality an incentive in some cases, for 
working parents to throw in the towel, as far as employment is concerned, and to go on complete 
assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the newly announced plan will really create an incentive to working parents to 
continue working and receive some degree of assistance at the same time. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
the new plan has in it an incentive to work, and this is what we were told at our hearings there must be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the Committee’s opinion that under the present set-up, many of our good social 
workers must put their energies to use in a host of activities, two of them being the processing and direct 
involvement with applications for assistance. The Committee feels that insofar as applications are 
concerned, the better method would be to use the self-declaration concept whereby actual applicants and 
applicant processors, only, would be involved. This in turn would free the higher paid social worker to 
be able to concentrate more fully on what he is 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1837 

Really trained to do — to counsel and assist recipients on the road to independence if at all possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the various hearings held by the Committee, time and time again, the Committee was 
told that even though municipal councils have no desire to ever get back into direct involvement in the 
dispensing of social assistance, these same councils feel strongly that there should be more consultation 
between the Department of Social Services or its representatives and themselves. These same councils 
feel that formal meetings would better help them, as elected officials, to help the Department and 
recipients in such matters as local employment opportunities the exposition of abuse, and the detection 
of those who might well be in need. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that the Committee felt that more 
dialogue, formal and informal, between municipal councils and department representatives is desirable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must briefly touch on another Committee recommendation which recommends that a 
system of family courts be established. The Committee felt that far too often in this society, there is no 
institution to deal adequately with child welfare cases, separation of parents, deserted wives and the 
custody of juveniles. The Committee felt that the present court structure is too formal, too rigid, too 
non-understanding, too cold thinking to adequately deal with such problems. Then, too, the Committee 
also felt that the present court structure is such that it usually ends up as being a ‘court of last resort’. 
Mr. Speaker, a family court system as envisaged by the Committee could well involve itself in these 
cases before the point of no return is reached. It could well help to preserve and strengthen families 
when the first cracks appear. Manned by personnel not legally oriented, it could very well do what we 
all wish the present court system could or should do, but can’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Committee made a number of recommendations pertaining to housing in 
Saskatchewan, and well it should have for the housing of recipients and the working poor is in what I 
would term a sorry mess. 
 
As I mentioned previously, many members of the Committee had occasion to see the housing that the 
working poor and recipients are forced to live in. I well recall one small slum housing compound in one 
northern community in which a number of recipients lived. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I was 
ashamed to know that this particular compound was hastily put together by an entrepreneur who was 
being vastly over-subsidized to provide living accommodation that would turn the hearts of even the 
coldest of individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the housing of the working poor, recipients and even those not in this category 
could be greatly improved if various pertinent regulations were enforced. And by enforcement, the 
Committee did not have in mind gentle prodding or innumerable reminders to owners that improvements 
are needed. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the whole area of housing, there is even some suggestion that jail 
terms be considered in order to avoid such catastrophes in housing as we experience now and again in 
this province, sometimes with considerable loss of life. 
 
On this last point I am sure all Members of this House will be following with interest a case in Ontario 
where Toronto city council has asked the Attorney General of that province to lay 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1838 

charges of violations of the Criminal Code against an outfit that paid no attention to council’s pleadings 
to upgrade safety in its numerous leased houses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the Committee’s recommendations favors a provincially operated employment 
agency to involve itself in a program of job finding and creation. This, of course, should be done by cost 
sharing with the Federal Government as I mentioned earlier. It would also be closely attuned to the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
You may well wonder why such a recommendation was made. Well, it was made because at most of our 
public hearings, people told us time and time again that Manpower is not doing the job it is supposed to 
do. We were told in no uncertain terms that it caters to employers first and foremost and not to potential 
employees. Mr. Speaker, I can verify that myself from personal experience and from experiences of 
people I know who have pounded the streets looking for work themselves knowing full well that 
Manpower is a sort of ‘last resort’ agency for people really seeking work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, such an agency could very well serve to offer employable recipients as well as possibly 
others the opportunity to work and thus help in making Saskatchewan more productive. As well as being 
the agency charged with putting the guaranteed job concept in the realm of reality, numerous projects 
for the public good could materialize. Another reason for this recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Committee’s belief that employable recipients and certain physically handicapped want to work. I think 
this was brought home by the Employment Support Program of last summer where the Provincial 
Government, alone, I might add, set aside money for work projects for recipients. I believe the program 
was a smashing success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee was aware of the numerous work training programs offered people in all 
walks of life. Most such programs are greatly subsidized by various levels of government and with this 
the Committee certainly had no quarrel. However, it was made aware that very often, particularly as 
these programs affect recipients, training courses are offered without any in-depth study of future 
implications. To show what I mean, Mr. Speaker, I will give you an example of an employable recipient 
I know and ran into last year. It seems he had this opportunity to take a course through Manpower. Well, 
he was a big strapping man, the kind you see in the Saskatoon area. He was the outdoor type, too, and do 
you know what course he ended up taking? Well, it was gourmet cooking. And when I asked him how 
come, he told me in a matter-of-fact voice that it was better than doing nothing, and besides, he would 
be paid for doing it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this may be an extreme case, but it should illustrate my point that far too often 
people take courses which they will not follow through with after completion. 
 
Then, too, it seems that under the present set-up, when many of these people complete their courses, 
there isn’t too much effort made on the part of any jurisdiction to help these persons find jobs for which 
they trained, sometimes for considerable lengths of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to condemn, completely, the whole job training and employment program, 
for I know only too 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1839 

well that many have been helped by it, and many will be in the future. It’s just that I voice the 
Committee’s concern in some instances in the trainee-course match up and the lack of opportunity of 
employment for some on the completion of their courses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee recommended a Day Care Program with the fee schedule based on income. 
I am pleased that such a program was recently announced by the Minister of Social Services. It will be 
of particular benefit to single parents and families where both parents must work to provide for the 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Committee recommended that subsidized adoption be considered by the Department of 
Social Services. I think we all know of certain families where it would be most desirable to have 
children placed for adoption — desirable because the family is wholesome, and the parents especially 
considerate and good. But in many of these situations an adopted child would mean an initial financial 
strain — one that could not be borne without some sort of initial subsidization. 
 
Then, too, I remember one case I ran into years ago. Disaster struck the family of five — the father, the 
mother and three children. The parents were killed in an automobile accident. Who would take the three 
children? You know who did, Mr. Speaker? No one, so the three little orphans were sent to three 
different places. Oh, they were each adopted all right, but they grew up never knowing each other. Now 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, was that justice; was that a price to be paid in a so-called civilized land? Why 
should those children have been separated, never to know each other? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that particular case, I can’t honestly say that subsidized adoption might have kept those 
three little children together, but then again it certainly might have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few minutes on another recommendation which stresses the 
importance of having workers who appreciate and understand the culture and the language of our native 
people, working with native people. I know many non-native workers are doing a good job in working 
with native people, but we often were told that language and cultural barriers were almost too great so 
that much of the rapport which is needed for a good relationship between social worker and recipient is 
strained or in some cases, lost. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is this Committee’s hope that in future, a 
higher percentage of native people be employed to deal with other native people in the context of social 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on the Committee’s feeling in regard to adjustments and various 
allowances paid under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. I believe I am correct in saying that all 
members felt that far too often, in the past, various allowances were often far below the minimums 
actually needed for particular needs. In other words there is often a time lag in adjustments and 
particularly so when one considers the high rate of inflation past and present. Keeping in mind the real 
need experienced by many in the past, the Committee most certainly should agree that recent 
adjustments have certainly been in order. But to more or less guarantee that adjustments are made when 
they are actually needed and not before or after, the Committee recommended that once the various rates 
are found 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1840 

to be just, they should be tied to some sort of index that adequately portrays the cost of living. Tied to 
such an index, these allowances would be less likely to cause hardships among those in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) has a committee soliciting 
people’s thoughts on family life education in our schools, I will make no comment on the Welfare 
Committee’s recommendation that our schools offer a course on budgeting, money management and 
economical buying, other than to say that it is my hope that these three items will be three out of many 
more much needed items which will appear in a so-called Family Life Course offered to our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case anyone is of the opinion the Committee thought of improving our social security 
system in terms of juster and better Government programs and department people, only, let me set the 
record straight. Committee members felt there is a much greater need for community involvement in the 
future than there has been in the past. All members felt that most communities want to play a greater and 
more direct role. Committee members felt most communities harbor a host of good people eager and 
willing to contribute time, energy and excellent ideas to make social services in this province acceptable 
and just to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why, in numerous recommendations, we have called for more public involvement 
from individuals, from organizations and from institutions. The Committee believes they want to 
involve themselves more fully and the Department of Social Services should take advantage of this 
desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why, in numerous recommendations, we have called for more public involvement 
from individuals, from organizations and from institutions. The Committee believes they want to 
involve themselves more fully and the Department of Social Services should take advantage of this 
desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to be a sad comment on our society, but the number of desertions by spouses is 
climbing yearly at an alarming rate. The Committee is well aware of the hardship, the suffering which 
usually ensues. The Committee is well aware that should a family breadwinner decide to desert, there is 
little the other spouse can do to receive maintenance. There seems, Mr. Speaker, to be no way to force 
the deserting breadwinner to meet his or her obligations to the deserted spouse and dependents. Oh, 
there seem to be various laws in the various provinces to ensure such support, but there seems to be no 
coordination of these varying provincial laws, so that all a deserting spouse has really to do is move 
around a lot, and if not within a province, then within the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why this Committee advocates that the Federal Government assume responsibility 
for desertion legislation. Mr. Speaker, if the Federal Government has the power to dissolve marriages, 
surely it has the power to force deserters to fulfil maintenance obligations. 
 
It is this Committee’s suggestion that in the interim, the Provincial Attorney General’s Department 
assume this responsibility of seeing that maintenance is provided by deserters. Surely the deserted have 
enough troubles arising from such situations. Surely they cannot in all sincerity be expected to expend 
their energies pursuing such matters. They have troubles enough just mustering energy to keep their 
families together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, desertion is a blot in our society. It is an emotional crippler that inevitably saps our society, 
and it is society as a whole which must pay for it sooner or later. It is you and I who pay for it. I don’t 
pretend to believe we can 



 
March 26, 1974 

 

 
1841 

stop it; however, I do think we can prevent it from wrecking the lives of those who are most affected by 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Committee met with numerous native people throughout the province. The Committee 
believes that numerous bands are doing a good job of administering their own welfare programs. 
 
The Committee also appreciates the fact that traditionally and otherwise, it is the responsibility of the 
Federal Government to provide for our native people. This the Committee would not like to see altered. 
 
However, there is one area of concern in which the Committee would like to see more positive action, 
and that is child welfare on reserves. The Committee was made aware of the fact that there is not, on 
most reserves, any workable plan or personnel, for dealing with child welfare. Consequently, very often 
the Provincial Department of Social Services is asked to involve itself, often too late, and sometimes in a 
spirit of uncertainty. Relative to this I am sure most would agree that it would be far better were a good 
working agreement worked out to alleviate or solve reserve child welfare problems before they 
degenerate to the detriment of the children involved. And in this regard, Mr. Speaker, the Committee 
particularly had in mind such things as adoption and foster home placements. But I must also mention 
here that the feeling is that all means must first be exhausted to try and place these children with other 
native families. This feeling is a direct consequence of what we heard from local people whenever we 
held hearings where a goodly number of native people attended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have only commented on some of the recommendations. It was not my intention to 
comment on all because this would be too time-consuming. However, I would not want anyone to get 
the impression that those I have missed are not important. I believe that Committee members feel that 
every recommendation is important, each in its own special way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that many of the Committee’s recommendations are at this very 
moment being implemented, and I have no doubt that others will be in the near future. To me this 
indicates that, generally speaking, the numerous recommendations are realistic, desirable and certainly 
capable of promoting justice within our province. But, Mr. Speaker, I harbor no illusions that all the 
recommendations will be implemented. Rather, I see some of them becoming talking points of interest 
on the part of the general public. Out of this, new or altered recommendation will certainly emerge, and 
this is desirable in a changing society to keep pace with changing needs and trends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Committee feels the task assigned it is completed. It was asked for recommendations, 
and it produced them, 80 in all. In formulating these recommendations, some with long term 
implications, others with short term, it at all times tried to keep the best public interest in mind, but this 
is a difficult thing to do in a free society because of diverse opinions held by people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at all times Committee members were well aware of a movement emerging in our society, 
and that is a backlash directed toward recipients of social security. Mr. Speaker, this backlash is real, but 
it is one we found wanes when the facts are 



 
March 26, 1974 
 

 
1842 

given — facts like those that show that only approximately 10 per cent of recipients are employable; that 
many recipients are those who are unemployable in an emotional, physical or mental sense; that many 
are deserted spouses who have families to bring up; that some find themselves dependent but not able to 
take advantage of programs such as compensation, The Canada Pension Plan or unemployment 
insurance; that some of those directly affected are children who will grow up and be caught up in a 
dependency cycle to the future detriment of themselves and, probably, society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this last general point leads me to another area on which I will spend just a few minutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mostoway: — I will spend just a few minutes, and that is on abuse in our social services system. 
No one would be so naïve as to suggest there is no abuse in this system. Nor do I think anyone would 
not suggest that there will probably always be some abuse in any system or program in which humans 
are involved. Certainly abuse was a topic at many of our hearings, but for the most part specific details 
were difficult to come by. Mr. Speaker, in my estimation the Committee found little real evidence of 
abuse. However, given that some abuse probably does exist, I believe the Committee felt that to ferret 
out this abuse, to possibly police to a certain extent, would be very costly, and in terms of dollars and 
cents, cost the public more, much more, than what might be saved in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like now to sound a last call to Members of this House for copies of this beautiful 
Welfare Report. A number of copies are still in the Clerk’s Office. I know he would be only too happy 
to have them sent out to your constituents — the line forms to the right. 
 
In closing, I want to go on record as congratulating each Committee member for his particular 
contribution, and I mean that in all sincerity. Rugged individualists they were, and it was a pleasure 
working with them. I said I wouldn’t politick at this time, so I’ll honor my word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move that this Report be concurred in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:45 o’clock p.m. 
 


