
























































Hansard: December 06, 1974


 
 

207 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

7th Day 
 

Friday, December 6, 1974. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to welcome a 
number of students in the west gallery and the Speaker’s Gallery this afternoon. We have some 90 
students from Balfour Technical School in our city, they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Wahl 
and Mr. Harder. 
 
This is my home school where my daughter took her high school training. It is not too far from where I 
live and it is outstanding for its many high school football wins. I think they have won more provincial 
championships than any other high school in this province. 
 
They are also today being hosts, Mr. Speaker, to some 120 debaters who have come from the four 
western provinces and the Northwest Territories for contests. They are going to be here the next two 
days, and one of the topics they are debating, I should like you to know, is on the “Canadian Pacific 
Railway, its Role in the Future of Western Canada.” I think it will be most interesting and some of our 
men here, I think Mr. MacMurchy, is taking part in the seminar. 
 
I should also like to welcome some Grade Seven and Eight students from Wetmore School. Mr. 
Lupastin is their teacher. Wetmore School, I might say, was the largest and oldest public school in this 
province until recent years. I had the pleasure of representing them in the south east constituency. Now 
that we have Regina-Victoria, I will have the privilege of representing them again. I welcome them here 
today on behalf of this legislative Assembly and I hope their stay will be most educational and that they 
will learn much from their law-making body. Again, welcome. 
 
HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

LAY OFF OF 200 WORKERS AT THE BURNS & COMPANY PLANT 
 
HON. G. SNYDER (Moose Jaw South): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
make a brief statement with reference to the statement which was made by the Leader of the Opposition 
(Mr. Steuart) in a House yesterday, concerning the suggested lay off of 200 workers at the Burns & 
Company Plant at Prince Albert. 
 
To quote from the official record, Mr. Speaker, the Leader the Opposition said and I quote: 
 
I am informed by the President of the Company that the Department of Labour and the Government of 
Saskatchewan were informed many weeks ago. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

208 
 

I want to tell you today, Mr. Speaker, that departmental officials have confirmed that no notice was 
received by the Government of Saskatchewan or by the Department of Labour prior to the arrival of that 
letter yesterday, December 5, 1974. The Department of Labour has been in touch with the writer of that 
letter, Mr. W. F. Goetz, the vice-president of Industrial Relations for the firm with the following results. 
The Deputy Minister of Labour, Mr. Mitchell, is to meet with Mr. Goetz on Thursday, December 12 in 
Prince Albert to discuss the problems at the plant. Secondly, Mr. Goetz informed Deputy Minister 
Mitchell that his letter to the Minister which arrived Thursday, December 5 was the company’s first 
notification of this impending situation, Let me repeat, Mr. Goetz confirmed to Deputy Minister 
Mitchell that his letter to the Minister that arrived Thursday the 5th was the company’s first official 
notice to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have been advised also, Mr. Speaker, that the employees at the plant under the terms of the 
technological change clause of The Trade Union Act have received no notice and the technological 
change clause requires 90 days notice of any technological change. No notice has been served upon the 
employees. And once again, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has displayed the kind of wild 
irresponsibility which has become his trade mark in this House over the years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER — Once again, Mr. Speaker, he has acted in a most irresponsible manner which isn’t in 
keeping with the position that he holds in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MACDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a brief comment on the 
words of the Minister of Labour. I am not sure whether or not - I was not in the House yesterday because 
there is a Liberal Convention with 1,200 to 1,400 Liberals down in the Regina Inn. We would like you 
all to come down there and have an opportunity of hearing them. But I do want to say that the tragedy of 
what the Minister of Labour has said that he didn’t mention what has happened to the 240 or whatever 
the number of employees. He hasn’t mentioned the cause of the responsibility for the lay of the 
implications to the city of Prince Albert, the efforts of this Government. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER — What’s the question? 
 
MR. MACDONALD — I’m not making a question, I’m making a comment on a statement by the 
Minister, it is not a question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER — Order! It is usual that if a Minister makes a statement someone from the Opposition 
has a right to comment as long as stays with the flavour of the statement that has been announced. 
 
MR. MACDONALD — All I want to say is that it is very unfortunate, first of all, for the meat packing 
industry of Saskatchewan, it is very unfortunate for those 200 and some employees of Burns, 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

209 

that all that the Minister of Labour has said to you today is to make a personal attack on the Leader of 
the Opposition rather than trying to indicate some positive action on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan in order to alleviate that kind of a situation. It also indicates the health of the livestock 
industry in the Province of Saskatchewan is a direct result of the agricultural policies of the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer) in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER — Mr. Speaker, the suggestion has been made that nothing has been done and I feel 
obliged to clarify. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER — Order! It is not debatable. Your statement is on the record and whether the 
statement was or was not reacted to in a proper manner is for the House to judge but we can’t debate it. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

CAUSE OF LAY OFF OF WORKERS AT BURNS & COMPANY 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Agriculture. In light of the announcement made by Burns which we have just been 
discussing, that they will be cutting their staff by 240 in March because of a lack of hogs being marketed 
in, Saskatchewan, I should like to ask the Minister of Agriculture, will this affect Intercontinental 
Packers as well? Will they the same fate in March, or is Burns problem the result of an unfair allocation 
of hogs by the Hog Marketing Commission? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can say and I want to say very clearly 
there has been no unfairness by the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission in the allocation of hogs 
to any processor be he in Saskatchewan or outside of Saskatchewan. I think it is unfortunate that the 
Member insinuates that perhaps one of the reasons for the closure would, in fact, be the activities of the 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. 
 
In regard to the first part of his question, Mr. Speaker, he says that the plant is closing down as a result 
of a reduction in hog production in the Province of Saskatchewan. Yes, there is, there is a reduction of 
hog production in the Province of Saskatchewan, but it is not as great in the Province of Saskatchewan 
as it is in other provinces and I know of no reduction or closing of packing plants in those provinces and 
I suggest that it is for some other reason that the announcement has been made by Burns that they are 
closing. We have heard not only in Legislature but in Saskatchewan on previous occasions 
announcements that plants were going to be closed by Mr. Childs, the president of Burns and those 
plants have not yet been closed. He has referred to the Prince Albert Plant on occasion in the inferring 
that it was about to be closed in order, I think, to improve his strategy and his negotiating ability with the 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

210 
 

MR. WIEBE — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Just to alleviate the charges that I have made 
and to avoid a question on the Order Paper or Order for Return that would take six months to answer, 
will the Minister of Agriculture assure this House that on Monday next he will provide the following 
figures — the number of hogs marketed to Intercontinental and Burns six months prior to the 
implementation of the Hog Marketing Commission. Also the number of hogs marketed to 
Intercontinental and Burns six months after the implementation of the Hog Marketing Commission. Also 
the amount of hogs marketed to Burns and Intercontinental Packers in the last six months. 
 
MR. MESSER — Mr. Speaker, there is no way that I can do that by Monday, for a number of reasons. I 
think it is an extensive amount of information to be asking for. I would have to consider whether or not 
the companies which are purchasing the hogs in fact want the information made to the general public 
and I think the Commission undertakes to do a lot of the business in a confidential manner. It is not, I 
think, within their right to release all information which may affect companies that are dealing with 
them. I am sure some Members of the Opposition will agree with that. But I will give consideration to it 
if the Member will put the question on the Order Paper. 
 
MR. WIEBE — Mr. Speaker, you are saying that the allegations I have made are correct. 
 
MR. SPEAKER — Order! We can’t debate it. 
 

AMENDMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT 
 
MR. C.P. MACDONALD (Milestone): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in a different vein and ask the Attorney General if it is 
the intention of the Government to amend the Act establishing the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission so that parents will not break the law in determining what sex they will welcome into their 
own homes, particularly students? I should like to bring in an example of a personal case if I might. I 
have six girls and one son. My son is in Nova Scotia going to university. This fall I did invite a young 
lady into my home until she got established. I wonder now would I be breaking the law in advertising in 
the month of January for the second semester in order that I make sure that I brought a girl in and I 
didn’t necessarily have to bring a boy to mix with my many, many teenage daughters. I wonder if the 
Attorney General could give us some indication as to whether or not he is going to amend this Act? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Member has raised a very 
important question. Certainly I have received and Members of the Assembly have received a number of 
queries from people respecting this particular section of our Human Rights legislation. I think that there 
is widespread misunderstanding by the public which gives more reason for the need to look seriously at 
amending this particular Act as to the sex and private home situation. And, accordingly, I can advise the 
Member that I personally and my department people are very much actively looking at this now with a 
view to determining the feasibility of introducing legislation later on during this Session. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

211 

MR. MACDONALD — Just a supplementary question. I want to tell the Attorney General I am very 
glad to hear that. There is a sense of urgency the Minister is aware. We have a shortage of housing for 
university students in both Saskatoon and Regina particularly in the boarding level and I would like to 
ask the Minister if he is planning to do it prior to the adjournment of the House before Christmas? I 
would like to also advise the Minister that if he brings in this amendment and it is a very short 
amendment, a few words, it doesn’t take any great detail, that Members of the Opposition will 
co-operate in seeing that that particular legislation is amended prior to the adjournment of the House 
before Christmas. I want to assure him again that we feel very strongly about this - it is ridiculous - and 
we will co-operate in every way in order that that can be passed as quickly as possible. 
 
MR. ROMANOW — Mr. Speaker, I regret I can’t give the Member any assurance that the amendment 
will be brought in at this sitting of the Session because quite frankly I haven’t had the opportunity nor 
my colleagues to have made any policy decisions in this matter. I simply tell the Member that I view it 
with the same degree of importance as he does and whatever decision will be made will be brought 
forward to the Legislature as quickly as possible. 
 

LAND PRICES IN REGINA AND SASKATOON 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood), in the absence of the Minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It concerns land prices especially in Regina. These prices have 
doubled from $3,000 in 1971 to $6,000 in 1974. The question to a Minister is, what provisions does the 
Provincial Government have to stop what is obviously very large profiteering in urban land in Regina 
and Saskatoon even if it has not yet reached the stage of the large metropolitan cities of the country? 
 
HON. E.I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — I am afraid that as the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs I have to say that I don’t believe we have any on the Statute Books at the present time. We have 
looked a good deal at the possibility or the desirability of bringing in some legislation that would have 
some bearing on the subject but at the present we don’t have that legislation in place. So far as the 
present situation concerning the value of land in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, the housing portion 
of it, this has been largely under the control of the Minister in charge of the Housing Corporation and I 
am afraid I can’t bring you up-to-date on it. I would have to confer with him and possibly the Hon. 
Member can himself. 
 
MR. RICHARDS — Is the Minister in agreement that my estimates are approximately accurate of 
$3,000 according to CMHC per lot in Regina in 1971 and $6,000 per lot in 1974? I am glad to see that 
the Government is considering legislation to put a halt to the speculative profiteering here. Is there any 
guarantee that during this Session there will be something in the order of legislation on the resource 
industries to end what is obviously speculative profiteering on urban land? 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

212 
 

 
MR. WOOD — No, I am sorry I cannot give an answer on either one of those questions. So far as 
dealing with the current price of land in Regina, I have not been in close contact with the Housing 
Corporation for some 11 months now and you would be surprised how quickly I forget these things. My 
“forgettory” works very well and I am afraid that I am not in touch with the situation there. So far as the 
legislation is concerned I am afraid I cannot give any guarantee that it will be brought forward at this 
Session but we will be making announcements on that in due course. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. K. Comer (Nipawin) and 
the amendment thereto by Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition). 
 
MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this opportunity again to enter 
this Debate in support of the Speech from the Throne. It is a great satisfaction to me to have been part of 
the Government which presented not only this document, but others which have preceded it since 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite, who have contributed this Debate, have attempted to portray this 
Throne Speech as unproductive in that it does not contain the outline of future programs in the 
magnitude that they have come to expect from this hard-working Government. The contents of this 
document may appear to be somewhat subdued in terms of the last three years but when one compares 
its content with the very best of the Liberal Government between 1964 and 1971, I can assure you it will 
withstand any comparison. 
 
It is interesting to note that in the past three years the volume of legislation passed by this Government 
almost equals that of the entire seven lean years of the Liberal Government. I invite Members opposite 
to look down on the Clerk’s table and compare the skinny books of statutes compiled in those years to 
the substantial volumes of 1971 to 1974. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — It is appropriate therefore that having put into place the large number of major 
pieces of legislation which this Government has done that there should be a period of consolidation so 
that Government departments could more fully integrate these programs and that the people of the 
province could become more conversant with the major developments which have taken place. It is also 
appropriate it seems to me in this period of rapid inflation which we are now experiencing not only here 
in Saskatchewan, but in Canada, and indeed throughout the western world that a responsible government 
would re-examine its priorities and try to avoid adding major new programs which help to feed the 
inflationary spiral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) in yesterday, giving the most abusive tirade ever 
heard in this House, complained that there was no reference to inflation in 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

213 

this year’s Throne Speech. Probably that was an oversight. I am sure the Premier felt that everyone in 
Saskatchewan was aware of what this Government had done to ease the effects of inflation in this 
province. He could have referred to the removal of seven cents per gallon, with a significant saving of 
$35 million to farmers and vehicle owners. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — He could have mentioned the Property Improvement Grant which had increased 
from $12 million to $52 million, a saving to home owners, farmers and businessmen of $20 million. Or 
he could have mentioned that we picked up the entire increase in educational costs to school units, 
thereby eliminating the need for tax increases, another $37 million. He could have told you that the 
Community Capital Fund put another $47 million over a five-year period at the disposal of urban 
municipalities to help hold the line on taxes and provide capital improvements. The elimination of the 
deterrent fees and the removal of medicare premiums took another $22 million off the cost of living. 
 
In all, Mr. Speaker, this amounts to the very significant total of $161 million. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — We would have thought that everyone knew of these programs, but apparently the 
Member for Lumsden learns a little harder than the rest, so I thought I should remind him. It was 
unbelievable to hear this same Member lecture this Government on its lack of action to prevent 
starvation in the under-developed countries. Where was he when his federal Liberal counterparts 
imposed a LIFT gram in 1972 and denied millions of bushels of wheat to hungry people of the world? 
 
He accused us of putting a stop to potash development. I inform him that there is a $30 million 
expansion underway in my constituency and if the federal Liberals would keep their “cotton pickin’ 
fingers” off our royalties that industry would get along very well indeed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Mr. Speaker, when I look back at these past three years since we have been 
entrusted with the government of this province, I am very proud indeed of its accomplishments. In 1971, 
in spite of the fact that we have a potash industry in my constituency, many people there were 
discouraged and disheartened and many of our young people had left the area to seek work in other 
provinces. Retail sales had dropped to disaster levels. Homes and apartment blocks were empty and 
many businesses had closed their doors and a general air of gloom pervaded the scene. The Liberal 
Government of the day had managed to alienate the working people, the small businessman and pitted 
teachers against trustees and labour against farmer. Taxes had been levied on property, on meals, on 
entertainment and on the sick in an effort to maintain faltering programs. 
 
The first priority of the Blakeney Government was to develop programs which would revive our rural 
areas and bring some 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

214 
 

stability to agriculture and upgrade the standards of living in the rural communities. The success of these 
programs is evident in all of our communities today. 
 
One needs only to look at the main street of towns in my constituency to see the tremendous change. 
Where only dust and gravel existed four years ago, you will now find an oiled main street in every town, 
village and hamlet in the constituency, thanks to the Mainstreet program introduced in 1972. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Since that time many communities have continued to extend their dust-free 
surfacing to cover most of their business section and many residential areas through assistance provided 
under the Street Improvement program and the Community Capital Fund. Many of these businesses 
which were closed have reopened again and housing is at a premium in every community. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a news release which came out only this morning: 
 

Eventful day at Spy Hill - five businesses reopened on Main Street, a new town office, a new SGIO 
agency, a grocery store, a plumbing shop and a new regional library. 

 
If that isn’t progress in our rural community, I should like to know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Villages such as MacNutt and Tantallon, which were off the main highways had 
been clamouring for years to get an outlet to a provincial highway. Within two years, both communities 
have been tied into the highway system through the Open Roads program and this year the village of 
Waldron was added as well. 
 
The Speech from the Throne indicates that over 600 miles of grid and connecting roads will be added to 
the highway system and the scope of that program will be evident by the start of extension of No. 15 
highway to Bredenbury, a connection that was promised by successive governments. Thanks to this 
Government, this road is now becoming a reality, as is the Binscarth grid road north of Spy Hill, which 
becomes an extension of No. 22 to the Manitoba border. A new system of dust free grid roads, now 
under study, will further upgrade the rural system. 
 
I believe every town, village, hamlet and municipality in my riding has taken advantage of the assistance 
made available to them under the Winter Works program to provide employment for people and to assist 
in providing facilities and needed services. Many major projects were undertaken or assisted. A curling 
rink in Bredenbury, a swimming pool in Langenburg, renovations in town of Churchbridge to the town 
hail, skating rinks in Stockholm and Spy Hill, a recreational director in Esterhazy, as well as many 
smaller projects such as assistance to gun clubs, cemeteries, community halls and drop-in centres and a 
host of others. 
 
To accommodate the ever-increasing need for senior citizens services a new 35-bed care home has been 
approved in Langenburg and low rental housing units have been approved in Churchbridge, 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

215 

Spy Hill and Esterhazy. Several other communities have applications pending. 
 
It is rather ironic, Mr. Speaker, to have those so-called champions of the senior citizens opposite, 
criticize this Government for its program of aid to senior citizens. Try to remember, or should we rather 
forget, that these are the same people who have opposed almost every major program we have 
introduced for the welfare of older people. These are the people who applied deterrent fees and 
utilization fees in 1968 which were borne, more by the aged, than by any other group in our society, 
whose requirements for senior citizens’ care homes were so rigid that only the largest towns could 
qualify for a home. 
 
Under our Government, senior citizens who require level II or level III care have the medical component 
of that care subsidized to the amount of $3 per day for level II and $7 per day for level III. In addition, 
many community services have been added to make life for senior citizens more attractive. The senior 
citizens Home Repair program has assisted many of them to improve their homes in which they wish to 
remain. 
 
In the 1974-75 year the estimated cost of programs for community service and subsidies to care home 
patients in the constituency of Saltcoats will amount to about $52,000. How much do you think they got 
in 1970-71 under the Liberal Government opposite? Was it $20,000? No! Was it $10,000? No! Was it 
even $5,000? No! Surely it must have been at least $1,000? Something less than that. Sorry folks, the 
total spent in 1970-71 in the constituency of Saltcoats on services for senior citizens was the grand total 
of $600. Let’s compare that, Mr. Speaker, $52,000 in 1974 to $600 in 1970. What a difference! 
 
Another priority for this Government was to provide a means of getting young farmers started on the 
land without requiring large amounts of capital which they did not have. The introduction of the Land 
Bank program provided an opportunity for many of these young farmers, while at the same time, 
providing a means whereby older farmers could sell their land for a decent price on retirement. In spite 
of the vicious attacks and outright lies being spread around the province by the Members opposite, I 
believe this will be one of the major pieces of agricultural legislation in this decade. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — It is unfortunate indeed, Mr. Speaker, that Liberal and Conservative critics alike 
should be so bitterly trying to misinterpret and misrepresent this program. They say that farmers are 
forced to sell to the Land Bank. How stupid, Mr. Speaker. Can they document one case in evidence? 
They tell you that the Land Bank will never sell the land. One needs only examine the terms of the lease 
which states that the lessee may apply after five years to purchase the land, based on market value. They 
will tell you that after five years you will have buy the land or your lease will be terminated. Again, they 
are false. The lease provides that the lessee will have the lease until age 65, or until death and cannot be 
terminated except for breach of contract, the same as any farm credit transaction. What better protection 
can anyone offer? 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

216 
 

It is true that there are some problems with allocations. When the demand for leases is such that up to 20 
or more applicants apply for leases on a single parcel of land, allocations can become very difficult. 
However applications are assessed by as fair criteria as possible, on a point system, to try to get the most 
worthy recipient. Not everyone will agree with the allocations on those cases, but that can’t be avoided. 
It does prove the point, however, that the plan is serving a real need in the rural area. 
 
The Hog Stabilization program which this Government initiated last winter provided the kind of real 
assistance that oar hog farmers needed to weather a most difficult period. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Now that prices are returning to more acceptable levels these farmers are still in 
business to take advantage of better prices while many of their counterparts in other less fortunate 
provinces were forced out of business. It is rather discouraging, however, to find that some of these 
some operators who received the benefits of this much-needed protection should still be critical of this 
Government and at this Government’s attempts to provide an orderly marketing system. 
 
I should like to turn for a minute or two, Mr. Speaker, to the matter of labour legislation. You will recall 
that when this Government took office in 1971 the working people of this province were under some of 
the most restrictive labour laws in Canada. Under Bill 2 their rights to collective bargaining had been 
seriously eroded and their rights to organize into unions of their choice was often denied. The 
Workman’s Compensation Program had fallen into disrepute and many claims were ignored or refused. 
In successive years, this Government, through a series of changes in The Trade Union Act, Labour 
Standards Act, Workers Compensation Act and The Occupational Health and Safety Act, has once again 
put Saskatchewan in the forefront in labour legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Here is just a review of a few changes: 
 

The 40-hour week has become standard; 
Three weeks annual holidays with pay after one year; four weeks holidays after ten years; 
Equal pay provision for female workers; 
Maternity leave for females; 
Technological changes provisions; 
Workers have a right to a leave of absence to become candidates for public office; 
Right to refuse dangerous work; 
Minimum wage of $2.25 per hour, one of the best in Canada. 

 
Major changes have been made in The Workers Compensation Act to upgrade benefits to insured 
workers. Survivors’ benefits rose from $134 to $275 per month. Total disability rose from $173 to $325 
per month and temporary disability rose from $40 to $75 per week at the minimum. The cost of living 
adjustment to long-term recipients of two per cent per year since disability was incurred That’s for those 
with accidents previously. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

217 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act is slowly but surely having its impact as labour unions and 
management adapt to its regulations. I am confident that our labour force will appreciate the protection it 
provides. 
 
Members opposite like to deride this Government for lack of initiatives to provide jobs for our young 
people. Sad criticism indeed from those who were the Government in 1971 when the brave promise was 
of 80,000 new jobs. But our tradesmen and young people were leaving the province in droves because 
the jobs did not materialize. In contrast, in the past three years 25,000 new jobs have become available 
in this province and many of those who have left are returning. Unemployment is practically 
non-existent. Major expansions in timber operations, in machinery manufacturing and servicing and 
potash development will continue to provide additional new jobs in the years ahead. 
 
How much better, Mr. Speaker, to record 25,000 new jobs under the NDP Government than a promise 
of 80,000 jobs under the Liberal Government and none delivered. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — Hr. Speaker, farmers in Western Canada and the organizations that represent them 
are becoming increasingly alarmed at the succession of new developments being proposed for their 
industry by the arrogant Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, Otto Lang. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING — The imposition of the Federal Feed Grains Policy over the protest of every major 
farm organization; the proposal to abandon up to 3,000 miles of railway lines which means the end of 
elevator facilities on those lines; the introduction of flexible tariffs; the encouragement of inland 
terminals and now as a climax to all these, a serious proposal to end the Crow’s Nest rates for grain and 
grain products with a vague promise of some compensating programs. 
 
I have on my desk here, Hr. Speaker, a copy of the Task Force Report on Agriculture, commissioned by 
the Federal Liberal Government and tabled in 1969. This document was drafted by persons appointed by 
the Federal Government, not one of whom was a farmer and only one of whom had a remote connection 
with western agriculture. This Report, Mr. Speaker, contains many interesting proposals and 
recommendations. At the very outset it begins with a blunt, cold statement that in order for agriculture to 
become an efficient and viable industry, at least out of every three farmers would have to go. Then it 
goes to outline how much more efficient it would be to have these farmers with larger farms and larger 
trucks hauling grain to inland terminals on main lines. It recommended that the trading of coarse grains 
be returned to the open market. 
 
You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the debates we had in the House since 1971 over the abortive 
stabilization plan and on the feed grains issue and on rail line abandonment, the Member opposite 
vehemently denied any association with the Task Force Report. They said it was only a report, that they 
did not agree with most of it and that it was foolhardy for us to suggest that recommendations would 
ever be implemented. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

218 
 

As I re-read this Report recently, my blood suddenly ran cold, because, Mr. Speaker, almost all of the 
recommendations made in that Report are now slowly but surely taking place under the guidance of the 
so-called champion of the Wheat Board, and friend of the small farmer, Otto Lang. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, did God appoint Mr. Lang to be the saviour of western Canada? When was he given 
the divine right to decide for western farmers what kind of marketing system they would have, what 
kind of transportation system they should have, and what kind of grain assembly system was right for 
rural Saskatchewan? Time after time he has ignored the expressed wishes of the major farm 
organizations, he has bypassed alternatives proposed by western governments and completely ignored a 
plebiscite by western producers which voted almost unanimously to retain feed grains under the Wheat 
Board. 
 
We now have a new feed grains policy imposed against the wishes of farmers and in spite of the 
warnings that it would have serious complications. We now have the open market operating side by side 
with the Canadian Wheat Board handling grain through the same agents and the same elevators. 
Somehow agents are supposed to keep separate accounts, bin grain for two accounts. It has added to 
increased staff and bookkeeping, both at the local level, also at head office levels. 
 
Under the new policy, the Canadian Wheat Board is required to give preference to non-board grains and 
yet has been made responsible for overall movement with quota restrictions on board grains and no 
quotas on non-board grains. A truly confusing and unfair demand. 
 
Room is left under this policy for speculation, manipulation of markets by grain buyers and speculators 
on the commodity exchange. We have seen feed grain being purchased on non-board accounts at prices 
significantly below competitive corn prices in eastern Canada. Again we see eastern and western 
farmers being played off against each other with western farmers the losers. 
 
We have seen this fall a deliberate ploy by the Minister, to assure that the open market for feed grains 
would be given advantage in securing a share of the market. 
 
We have seen the entry of a foreign multinational grain company, Continental Grain, appear on the 
scene. They are chasing open market grain and having it delivered by truck to the government terminal 
at Moose Jaw. The terms under which grain is handled by this government terminal also leads one 
question whether another rip-off is not taking place; with the profits going not to western producers, but 
to private traders not even resident in this country. It would appear that this foreign-owned grain giant is 
using publicly owned facilities with no capital investment at a tariff of about one-half charged by most 
companies. 
 
The question arises, Mr. Speaker, who needs these multinational companies in Saskatchewan? Whom 
are they here to serve? Who stands to profit from their transactions? The answer is very plain. They 
serve their masters, the international traders. Any benefit to local farmers is incidental. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

219 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the apparent concessions and inequitable benefits being granted to Continental 
Grain Company, I call on the Federal Government to make a full public disclosure of their dealings with 
this company, particularly as it relates to the use of government inland terminals. It is intolerable to 
think that they should have concessions which would provide them with a competitive advantage in feed 
grain marketing over our local co-operative companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more things I should like to have said in this debate. I should like to have 
talked about the Community College Program and its value to the rural community. I should have liked 
to point out the tremendous increases in grants to our urban municipalities and our school units and I 
should have liked to have an opportunity to discuss resource development, particularly as it applies to 
the potash industry which has been so vital a factor in our communities. However, time will not permit 
me to do so, but many of these issues will be covered by my colleagues in this debate. 
 
It is evident, therefore, that I will be supporting the Motion and opposing the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.L. FARIS (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed listening to this Throne Speech Debate. 
I particularly took note of what the Liberals had done in Ethiopia. I want to remind the Member for 
Turtleford that this is nothing compared to what the Liberals did in Saskatchewan. The people of 
Saskatchewan will recall that in the difficult years of 1968, 1969 and 1970 a Liberal Government sat in 
Regina and did nothing. They did nothing for farmers, nothing for teachers, nothing for pensioners, 
nothing for sick people, nothing, that is, except add tax upon tax on the back of a province that was 
broke financially and almost broken in its spirit. 
 
But people are tough in Saskatchewan, they have to put up with drought, floods, grasshoppers and if 
they had to put up with a Liberal Government they could do that too. But in 1971 they got rid of that 
government, they got rid of the deterrent fees, got rid of the taxes on farm fuel, got rid of treating 
teachers like serfs, got rid of the neglect of pensioners. 
 
The last three years have meant good government for Saskatchewan and it has meant a good deal for 
Arm River. For example this past year has meant continued highway construction on Highways Nos. 15, 
2 and 11. Natural gas was extended to Broderick on No. 15 and to Stalwart, Liberty, Penzance and 
Holdfast on No. 2. One of the most exciting events was the arrival of bus service to the towns along No. 
2 Highway. I have worked three years on that project and I want to thank particularly the senior groups 
and especially Mr. Code and Mrs. Stratton for their efforts. Last time there was bus service to these 
towns was a few weeks before the election in 1967. It stopped a few days after that election. 
 
Another important development in the Arm River constituency is the taking over of major grid roads 
leading into the Diefenbaker Lake area; 60 miles of grid from Saskatoon to Cutbank and 30 miles of grid 
from Davidson to Loreburn will become part of the highway system and be hard surfaced. These 
connector 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

220 
 

highways will mean increased tourist and recreation development in this area. The towns in this 
Diefenbaker Lake area still require natural gas and bus service. I should like to see an early start on the 
rebuilding of that Highway No. 19. I will continue to request these from the Government and I shall 
continue to do so until they are delivered. It is a reasonable request for an increasingly important part of 
the province. 
 
There are a good many things that affect the Arm River constituency. I know of many cases where a 
family income plan has been of great help. I think we should be really proud of a plan like this which is 
a first that means that families with a low income and a large number of children can be guaranteed 
more money by working than by being on welfare. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FARIS — Last year we got the Regional Library system to cover Arm River, now we have the 
community college this year. We have dental care for children, we have over 100 FarmStart loans in the 
area. We have over 200 senior citizen home repair grants; we have approval pending on 10 units of 
senior citizen housing at Craik. Construction has already begun on 25 units of senior citizens’ low rental 
housing in Outlook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noted that the Throne Speech spoke of more money for alcohol education programs. I 
will deal with some of’ my views of the failings of the present programs. But I first want to correct an 
erroneous impression left by the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) in announcing the program. He 
declared that money now spent in alcoholism represented eight per cent of liquor profits whereas the 
Committee had recommended an optimum objective of ten per cent. The Committee, in fact, had 
suggested a minimum of ten per cent. Hopefully in the coming budget we will exceed that minimal 
figure as we are presently approximate five years behind Alberta in our alcoholism program. 
 
At our recent NDP Convention a delegate from Wilkie came to me and asked, “Don, have you had much 
to do with the AWARE program?” I replied, “No, nothing.” The delegate said, “Good, because people 
in our area who are involved with alcoholism think that most of these ads are written by the liquor 
industry.” I had to agree that I had great concern about the majority of the ads, because in fact this is not 
far from the truth. The Premier said in the Budget Debate last March 14th: 
 

We will involve key groups and individuals in Saskatchewan in planning and executing the program 
including the beverage industry itself. 

 
In fact, the AWARE program is based on similar programs in the United States which have as their 
theme the responsible use of alcohol. These programs originate in the American Government’s National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, which works very closely with the American liquor 
industry. Indeed here Canada the House of Seagrams, the great friend of federal Liberal Cabinet 
Ministers distributes in Canada free of charge the NIAAA pamphlet, “Alcohol and Alcoholism 
Problems, Programs and Progress.” That pamphlet denies any connection whatsoever between legal 
controls, volume of consumption and rates of alcoholism. It really argues that increased liberalization 
will socially integrate drinking customs and thereby reduce alcohol problems. The 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

221 

educational concomitant to this theory is the responsible use of alcohol approach which teaches people 
“how to drink”. 
 
The first point to be made is that the theoretical basis of this educational approach is wrong. There is no 
evidence that increased liberalization of attitudes towards drinking decreases alcohol problems any more 
than there is evidence that increased liberalization of liquor control laws has resulted in decreased 
alcohol problems. In fact, the evidence points the other way. Right here in Saskatchewan increased 
liberalization of both laws and attitudes has clearly resulted in increased alcohol problems. In the last 20 
years alcohol consumption in Saskatchewan has increased by 100 per cent. Alcohol problems have more 
than doubled. 
 
In the same period alcohol consumption increased in Holland by 111 per cent, in Austria by 127 per cent 
and in West Germany by 196 per cent. Their problems grew apace. It seems the whole western world is 
anxious to liberalize and achieve the sophisticated drinking habits of France. What price does France 
pay for this sophistication? Only an alcoholism rate of some 20 per cent of the population, 42 per cent of 
their health bill spent on alcohol-related disease, 50 per cent of hospital beds taken up with such 
patients. Is that where we want to go? That is where the integration, “responsible drinking” theory will 
lead. That’s where further liberalization of laws and attitudes will lead. 
 
Now turning more particularly to the AWARE program. It has three weaknesses — 1. The content tends 
in most cases to liberalizing attitudes. 2. It fails to give people the facts about the social health costs of 
alcohol use. 3. It does not accompany or lead to governmental action to reduce alcohol consumption and 
alcohol problems. 
 
The clearest example of liberalizing attitudes is in regard to the very large proportion of the program 
which is dedicated to drinking and driving. For 20 years the safety councils of North America said, “If 
You Drink Don’t Drive.” Now the AWARE program tells people that it is all right to drink and drive, 
only wait an hour for every drink you have had. For example, an ad clearly aimed at teenagers says, 
“Wait an hour for every drink you’ve had before you drive.” This advice is expanded upon in another ad 
under the sub-heading, “Allow an hour per drink.” It explains an hour is how long it takes for the 
average size drink to leave your bloodstream. So, if you’ve had three beers, three ryes, or three glasses 
of wine, wait at least three hours before you hit the road. Now that is great advice! Three drinks, three 
hours. Four drinks, wait four hours. Six drinks wait six hours. There is only one problem. Common 
sense tells you that when people drink they forget such things as how long they have been drinking and 
how many drinks they have had. How many people you know who will wait three or six hours or 
whatever it is a party without drinking just one more for the road. It is bad advice, it is foolish advice. 
Once more both of these ads fail to tell people that different sized drinks have different effects or that for 
instance body size counts. For example, a 125-pound girl would be over .10 with three drinks. But how 
about the multiplier effect of alcohol with other drugs, even antihistamines? 
 
Another example of liberalizing attitudes is in the ad “Introducing Alcohol; The Drug Habit Almost 
Everyone Supports.” There it gives approval to having a drink or two, “if you’ve had 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

222 
 

a rough day at the office, this could help you relax and agree that life’s not all that bad.” What this ad is 
doing is approving drinking to remove anxiety. It is really suggesting a form of self medication. It 
acknowledges alcohol as a drug and doesn’t go on to try to reduce its use. I consider this a very 
dangerous piece of advice. 
 
This same ad in the weeklies read, “Alcohol lets you forget what’s happening around you. Which is 
good if you’re out with friends to enjoy yourself.” This says it is good that alcohol lets you forget what’s 
happening around you when you are out with friends. I really can’t believe that the Department of 
Health would suggest that it is better to injure or kill a friend in a traffic accident than a stranger, better 
to beat up a friend than a stranger, as long as you enjoy yourself. It just seems to me to be silly and bad 
advice. 
 
What good is it to make people aware that alcohol is a drug? This is one of the good points of the 
program. It does this, but then it doesn’t have the courage to follow this up by discouraging its use. We 
half-heartedly discourage smoking, with very little success in our society. We discourage marijuana and 
other illicit drugs. How can we declare alcohol a drug and then not have the courage to follow through to 
tell people that it is a hard drug? It is one that has tremendous social costs and personal costs to it and 
that its use should be discouraged. This should be our stated public position to discourage the use of all 
drugs, alcohol, tobacco or the illicit drugs. I cannot believe that you can talk honestly to any teenager in 
our society and hope to make any impact with him at all unless our society has the courage to take this 
overall consistent approach. 
 
This leads to the second weakness of the AWARE program. The Minister of Health in announcing the 
program alleged that it was a follow-up on the recommendation of the liquor committee which I chaired. 
This program does not in fact, follow the recommendation. It does not present a social-health approach. 
For example, it does not give people the simple facts about alcohol involvement in traffic crashes and 
death, disabling diseases like liver cirrhosis or brain damage, divorce and family troubles, crimes of 
violence or losses to industry. Why, are the public not informed for example, of LeDain’s findings 
which follows American findings that alcoholics and problem drinkers were involved in 33 per cent of 
murders, 38 per cent of attempted murders, 54 per cent of manslaughters, 39 per cent of rapes, 42 per 
cent of sexual offences and 61 per cent assaults? I don’t think the public really realizes this connection 
and they should know it. Politicians of all stripes like to pretend that it is marijuana hopheads or heroin 
freaks who are beating up, killing, raping and otherwise assaulting people. It is not! It is your friendly 
man next door with a belly full of booze. 
 
The AWARE program failed to follow the social-health approach in clearly stating an aim to reduce 
alcohol consumption. Indeed the social-health educational program was named after the social-health 
pricing policy designed to reduce consumption. The Minister of Health made it clear two years ago that 
he was opposed to such a policy and more recently the Minister of Industry and Commerce who is 
responsible for the Liquor Board opposed it. Well, who supports the social-health pricing policy besides 
this Legislature’s Special Committee? It is, of course strongly recommended by the Ontario Addiction 
Research Foundation which is probably the best basic research agency in the world. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

223 

It is endorsed by the governments and researchers of Finland and Norway. The recent Lord Errol 
Committee on Liquor regulations in Britain supported it. This year the Expert Committee on Drug 
Dependence of the World Health Organization endorsed it. I have spoken to many groups around the 
province and I can’t say that I have met with any cross section of citizens of the province who discussed 
this idea and then failed to endorse it. I am very pleased to know that the Provincial Conference of the 
United Churches of Saskatchewan endorsed the pricing policy by a vote of approximately 500 to 2. A 
body as mixed as the Biggar Health Unit after spending a day discussing these problems endorsed this 
policy. 
 
Its major opponents are the liquor industry and the American Government Agency which works with 
them. It is very sad that the AWARE program reflects these sources in its approach to the problem. 
 
Because of its lack of proper understanding of the alcohol problem the program is an isolated attempt to 
do with words what must be done by action. It is not good enough to bemoan increasing teenage 
drinking unless you are willing to re-examine the lowering of the drinking age. It is no good to bewail 
increasing alcohol consumption unless you are willing to tackle it with pricing policies which have been 
demonstrated mainly in the countries of Scandinavia. It is not good to feign concern about traffic 
accidents when we know that .08 legislation has worked only in countries where enforcement is stricter 
than it is in Saskatchewan. 
 
What is needed is government action and the mass media program should pave the way for this action. I 
personally do not expect much action until the alcohol manufacturers power is broken in our society. 
The Arm River Constituency passed the following resolution: 
 

Resolved that the Government of Saskatchewan take into public ownership all alcohol manufacturers 
in Saskatchewan by expropriation with fair compensation. 

 
This resolution was passed overwhelmingly by the panel at our recent NDP Convention. It in fact, 
follows the pattern of Scandinavia where significant portions of the alcohol industry are publicly owned 
and explains their dramatically low alcoholism rate. For instance, if I were to point to a model for the 
program on alcoholism I would suggest Norway. Norway has an alcoholism rate of around two per cent. 
Compare that with Canada’s nine per cent or France’s 20 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the answer lies in their 
courage to have a full-blown public policy to attack problem. 
 
I am convinced that although the problem is difficult, a courageous and consistent public policy will be 
successful. I frankly don’t believe that a Liberal Government would have the courage to undertake such 
a program. I will continue to urge within this Government that such programs be undertaken because I 
am convinced that they are in the NDP’s tradition of putting people before profits. 
 
I have criticized the Liberal position as being even worse. I say that, because I have heard speaker after 
speaker from the benches opposite plead the case for commercial liquor advertising, Apparently that is 
the position of that party, if you are 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

224 
 

to look at the votes at their last annual convention. Indeed at their annual convention last year, by a vote 
of over two-thirds they voted for the sale of beer and wine in grocery stores. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would estimate that if these two actions were to be taken in Saskatchewan they would 
increase alcohol consumption in this province by at least 30 per cent in one year. I am particularly 
concerned that both of these measures would particularly worsen the already bad situation in regard to 
teenage alcohol abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t conclude without expressing on behalf of the farmers in my area a very great 
concern about federal agriculture policy and, in particular, the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board, 
Otto Lang. They have had Otto’s Lift program, Otto’s gross receipts stabilization plan, Otto’s rape seed 
poll, Otto’s feed grains policy, Otto’s interference in west coast bargaining, Otto’s Crow’s Nest rates 
removal. Mr. Speaker, surely after six strikes he’s out. It’s time we Otto Lift Lang, Otto Lang should be 
removed as Minister in charge of the Wheat Board as has been suggested in other places. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FARIS — But I don’t like to criticize without having an alternative suggestion. I would really 
suggest that the farmers in my area would much prefer Eugene Whelan to be Minister in charge. If we 
are going to have a Liberal Government in Ottawa let’s, at least, have Eugene Whelan there who has 
shown that he has some concern about orderly marketing. We realize that we cannot remove Otto Lang 
in the next provincial election. But we can certainly remove every Liberal Member in rural 
Saskatchewan and chances are we will. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FARIS — Before I conclude, however, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend this Government for its 
action on last year’s World Development Resolution. I was extremely pleased to be able to move that 
resolution and even more pleased that the Government acted on it over this summer. Now every dollar 
donated by the people of Saskatchewan for world development purposes to nongovernmental 
organizations is matched by the Province of Saskatchewan with another dollar and each of those dollars 
is matched by the Federal Government. Members and the public in general may be interested to know 
what organizations are co-operating in this kind of program so that they can direct their world 
development dollars so that they will be matched in this manner. 
 
At present the organizations are the Anglican Church, the Catholic Church, Cross Roads International, 
Canadian Hunger Foundation, Lutheran World Relief, Save the Children Fund, UNICEF, CUSO, Foster 
Parents Plan, Mennonite Central Committee, Oxfam, Presbyterian Church, Unitarian Service 
Committee, United Church, YMCA, YWCA, and new groups are joining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this kind of action, to feed the hungry to aid the sick, to help the weak, the party of 
Woodsworth Douglas and Coldwell is all about. An American poet said it well: 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

225 

I am unjust, but I can strive for justice 
My life’s unkind, but I can vote for kindness 
I, the unloving, say life should be lovely 
I, that am blind, cry out against my blindness. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member for Arm River 
(Mr. Faris) would have been better off to have repeated his 1973 speech, because most of us in the 
House could have agreed with many of the things he said last year. But when he starts prophesying on 
the outcome of the next election indicating the NDP would win he is sadly lacking in foresight and I am 
very, very disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to be able to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Throne Speech but 
unfortunately I can’t because the poor chaps were just not given enough to work with. They did a 
reasonably good job in reading their speeches. But when you consider how little they had to base their 
speeches on, it is surprising they did as well as they did. 
 
I am sure that most Members of the House must have reached the same conclusion as my guest did on 
the opening day of this Legislature. He said he hadn’t anticipated a Hell fire and brimstone speech, but 
at the same time he hadn’t expected such a lack-lustre, dull, unexciting document. 
 
This is doubly sad, because this particular individual is a recent arrival in Saskatchewan only having 
come here 15 or 18 months ago. He is one of the few newcomers to Saskatchewan and it was the first 
Throne Speech he had heard. He went away disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this chap’s remarks sums up the tone of the 1974 Throne Speech - dull, unexciting, 
repetitious. They have removed those deterrent fees so many times that surely to goodness they can find 
something else to brag about because I think the general public have accepted that the deterrent fees 
have been removed. The Speech was an outline of so-called accomplishments and good, bad and 
indifferent promises kept. I expect we’ll see the Throne Speech enshrined as an NDP campaign handout 
come the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is quite evident that the Premier plans on fighting the next election on the issue of 
federal-provincial rights to natural resources taxation. His one concern is that these idiotic differences 
might be settled before the writs are issued and would pull the rug right out from under him and he 
wouldn’t be able to use it as an issue. 
 
I used the word “idiotic” in referring to the conflict which has developed between Ottawa and Regina. It 
is almost like a jurisdictional fight between two unions. Personal relations are taxed to the near breaking 
point and the workers and the businesses suffer the agonies of the conflict. 
 
I am reminded of children who often fight over some article or toy and the first thing you know the 
argument has been settled 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

226 
 

but the toy has been damaged beyond repair. 
 
Surely in this enlightened age, it is not necessary for our senior governments to get into such a harangue 
where, in this case, it is the oil industry that is going to be considerably damaged as a result of these 
shortsighted policies that seem to have locked each government into their present positions. 
 
They have pushed the oil industry - one of our major industries in Canada - almost to the wall to where 
there is little or no activity and nothing but a fog-bound future. 
 
I wouldn’t want to try to predict which one is right, which one is wrong or which one is going to back 
down or which one should back down. I think they are both wrong. I don’t know whether they are 
equally wrong. I don’t think so, I think the provincial governments are heading in the wrong direction. 
 
Oil exploration here in Saskatchewan has virtually ground to a stop due to this bullheadedness and greed 
on the part of governments. It used to be so that they would tax for their needs - it has now reached the 
point where they want to tax business to the breaking point where the business cannot make any return. 
 
It is not restricted to Saskatchewan. I have before me a November issue of the Vancouver Province, and 
it is dealing with the pulp industry out there. It is addressed to Mr. Williams, the Minister of Forestry 
Products. It is related to the stumpage rates. It points out that as a result of government interference out 
there and the setting up of a marketing board where they set the prices for the chips, that a log boom that 
was sold recently, and as a result of the prices imposed by the Government, the boom was sold for $191 
per thousand less than the actual cost. An article out of the Financial Post a week later indicates that the 
province has backed down, but they only have done it after it has brought the industry to a standstill in 
terms of pulp expansion in the province. The industry investment analysts in British Columbia are 
pointing out the sad situation when a government does this. This is exactly what has happened in 
Saskatchewan. We are doing it with the potash industry. 
 
I think it is a sad situation too, when an industry such as the potash industry, and particularly the 
International Minerals, is publishing an article telling how wonderful it is to be in Saskatchewan, you 
can make a go of it here in Saskatchewan. But what they don’t tell is that the record which they are 
imploring people to get, was made in eastern Canada, it wasn’t made in Saskatchewan. They mention a 
girl’s name who takes part in this recording. She is not a resident of Saskatchewan, she is a resident of 
Manitoba. I think once again we have an irresponsible act by a business. 
 
We have often heard this accusation made against business, if they act irresponsibly. But it seems to me 
that government of senior levels are becoming more and more irresponsible in their attitude to business. 
 
How can any government rationalize severely damaging an individual’s opportunity to fend for himself 
and substitute government subsidy for that damaged opportunity? 
 
This dampening of private initiative and the substitution 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

227 

of so-called government action in the interests of the people is beyond my comprehension. 
 
Our Saskatchewan Government through royalties control, can develop and conserve our mineral 
resources in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. But I don’t think that anyone will ever 
convince me that SaskOil and the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation can ever replace 
the initiative and expertise of private industry. 
 
In the field of smaller, more local type business, I feel that they have, and are, doing well in spite of the 
Provincial Government. New programs and services initiated since 1971 have not been that earth 
shaking, and their effect has been minimal in the overall economy. 
 
The greatest single factor sparking business, has been money in the farmers’ hands. This has come about 
largely through world and federal situations and actions, rather than worthwhile moves by our Provincial 
Government. I’m not saying that the Department of Industry and Commerce through regional business 
representatives, research and increased loans have done any harm, they certainly haven’t. Their 
beneficial overall effect might be compared to a spit in the ocean. Actions by other arms or tentacles of 
our Government have more than offset the benefits emanating from the Department of Industry and 
Commerce. 
 
I am sorry the Attorney General is not in the House and I am sorry that the Minister of Co-ops is not in 
the House. I wouldn’t mention this except that he, I think, played dirty pool yesterday by making 
reference to it, the number of people in the House. I was hoping the Attorney General would be here 
because I want to speak for a minute on justice. 
 
Eleven printed lines out of 291 in the Throne Speech devoted to justice, which I feel rates up with 
inflation as one of our major problems. Those eleven lines refer to only one aspect, albeit an important 
one, namely, native people, native policemen, native court workers and court sittings on Indian reserves. 
These moves are long overdue and I sincerely trust that each will wove helpful. 
 
I feel the Attorney General should have demanded more lineage and told the people of this province and 
the residents of our two major cities particularly what his Government proposes to do to protect the 
innocent and punish the guilty. 
 
I realize that criminal legislation rests in the hands of Ottawa, but its implementation is a provincial 
responsibility. It is the Attorney General’s job to initiate changes and press Ottawa for action. I hope he 
tells us what he has done in this regard since June, 1971. 
 
How can we as legislators justify being silent when in our own Capital City people fear to be on our 
streets after dark? One of your own Ministers over there has expressed this concern. Persons are walking 
our streets on bail while awaiting trial for violent deeds, including attempted murder and even murder; 
this may be a shock to you but there are people walking Regina streets on bail and it is suggested that 
they have committed murder. 
 
It is a pretty sick society when we sit idly by and see a youthful taxi driver kidnapped, roughed up and 
his cab burned. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

228 
 

Last year, a similar ease resulted in a cab operator being murdered. The penalty for the perpetrator of 
this terrible act was life imprisonment, which has been appealed. I dare say that the do-gooders in our 
society will see that he serves considerably less than the twenty years which is equivalent to life 
imprisonment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago while speaking on this subject I said the good people are getting the short 
end of the deal, while the law-breaking element laugh up their gun barrels, and flick knives and walk 
free, while clamouring for their rights. 
 
Possibly the lash should be re-introduced. This may be the only action that will deter these monsters 
who disregard the rights of you and me - our human right to walk our streets unmolested - our right to 
feel that our private property, homes and businesses and families are secure. 
 
Two Regina citizens last week called me and said that their biggest fear is for their children and their 
wives. What a society we live in when a city of 150,000 is faced with this. 
 
I need go no further in elaborating the problems - you all know them. We are equally affected - NDP or 
Liberal - there are no political lines. 
 
What can be done? I feel that legislation should be tightened up and strengthened with more severe 
penalties. I am a firm believer that punishment is a good educator. 
 
I feel that the bail legislation must be reviewed. We must give more strength and flexibility to the courts, 
prosecutors and the police. I am very pleased to learn that the City Police Force here in Regina will be 
increased by some 20 members in 1975 - it is long overdue. 
 
I think there must be an awakening of responsible people to their role in running our society. Who is 
running the society? Well, I sometimes wonder. I think it is the lawless element that is running our 
society. We are living in too permissive a society. 
 
As legislators we must do our part to strengthen our social structure and encourage those who are 
prepared to defend the human rights of the innocent. 
 
I urge the Government opposite - don’t delay - act now – we will support actions that will punish the 
guilty and protect the innocent. 
 
One has real difficulty in discussing the Throne Speech because it says so little. A person must deal with 
what it doesn’t say. And that is why I dealt on the subject that I did as far as justice is involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government doesn’t tell us how the NDP Government has filled every available office 
building in Regina with its expanded civil service. They have even found it necessary to put clerical staff 
from Public Health into the Plains Hospital. Government Services are the best customers of Regina 
rental agents. 
 
No wonder there is high employment in Saskatchewan. The Government forces are such active 
recruiters of staff that no 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

229 

one who wishes to work should be unemployed. 
 
Who wouldn’t want to work f or the Government, look at the list of some of the civil servants, so-called 
employees of the Government in recent years. Mr. Jack Kinzel, the Executive Officer in the Premier’s 
office at a salary of $32,700. Was Boldstad, Cabinet Secretary - $32,700. If you compare these 
gentlemen with the Deputy Ministers, there are 25 deputy and associate ministers, 19 of them are getting 
the same as these two persons or a bit less. It seems to me that this is unfair when you consider the 
dedication and effort expended by most of our deputy ministers. 
 
There are others here I can name, Ralph Smith the Research Officer at $12,000, there is John Burton - I 
almost missed him, John I think was fortunately defeated because he is now getting $26,280 and I am 
sure doesn’t work as hard as he did down in Ottawa. 
 
Another thing the Government has not bothered to tell us about is work stoppages in 1974. The report, 
that is the Throne Speech, only listed a new August holiday, very welcome, but not earth shaking. 
Occupational health committees - old hack. A study of a universal sickness and injury plan, not that 
earth shaking, I don’t think. There is no mention made of the ten week construction workers’ strike last 
year. There is no mention of the Dominion Bridge strike which has been going on for some six or seven 
weeks. Or the threatened stoppage by teachers and believe it or not the Civil Service. As of yesterday a 
Commission of your own making, the Hog Marketing Commission is on strike. It is quite evident that 
many unionized workers in Saskatchewan have become disillusioned with this so-called workers’ 
Government. I am sure the NDP have sensed the departure of the teachers from their ranks. We are 
pleased indeed to see them in fast-growing numbers among our Liberal workers. 
 
Listening to a broadcast this afternoon, I found it a little shocking to learn that in 1972 in Canada we 
have 7.8 million man lost by unionized workers. Now there is 28.5 per cent of workers unionized, so 
28.5 per cent of our workers were involved in 7.8 million man days. That was the worst record in the 
history of Canada. 1974 looks as if it’s going to be a new record because up to September 30th that 
figure is 7.3 million man days. And it is anticipated that by the end of 1974 it will hit 10 million. 
 
What has happened in Saskatchewan? We did have 17.1 per of the workers unionized in 1972, I haven’t 
a more current figure. But in 1971 there were 1,924 man days lost; 1972, first year of NDP Government, 
75,000 man days lost; 1973 it improved a bit, only 33,000. The estimated ball park figure for man days 
lost in 1974, and this is a real shocker, it is a good everybody is sitting down, in Saskatchewan is 
300,000 man days lost as a result of strikes. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER — Shame, shame. 
 
MR. GRANT — I will say nothing further about that because I think it speaks for itself. I am firmly 
convinced that Mr. Snyder, the member for Moose Jaw is not interested in doing anything constructive 
to stop this. He is scared stiff of the union and is not prepared to raise a hand in protest against what is 
going on. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

230 
 

Mr. Speaker, every day in every way the Government shows its true colours. 
 
The control and ownership of natural resources by the people is acceptable by most people in 
Saskatchewan. However, Saskatchewan taxpayers are not ready to accept the Government as the only 
developer of these resources. I am sure that Government Members realize that I heartily disagree with 
their philosophy that the Government must get into business and take over business. Government’s role 
is to govern, to set the rules and then let the individual or business develop and grow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GRANT — The voters of this province did not give the NDP a mandate to take over oil 
exploration, mining, farming, forestry, meat packing and potash. 
 
Government Members will realize in 1975 they went too far, the people are fed up and contrary to what 
the Member for Arm River (Mr. Faris) says, the Liberals will form the next government, not the NDP. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GRANT — Twelve months ago I didn’t foresee the resurgence of Liberalism to the degree we 
have witnessed of late months. We should have adjourned this House so that you could all be in 
attendance with the other 1,200 delegates attending the Liberal Convention. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GRANT — Teachers, potash miners, farmers and business men. Mr. Speaker, I think it is quite 
evident that I cannot support the Motion, but I will support the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. TAYLOR (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — In taking part in this debate may I first of all 
congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply. During the past few years the 
Members of Nipawin (Mr. Comer) and (Mr. Mostoway) have demonstrated their ability; their speeches 
in this debate are merely a further indication of how ably represent their constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne indicates activities of this Government up to the present time, 
and some thrust being developed for the future. 
 
The new emphasis in the Department of Industry and Commerce and through SEDCO, towards assisting 
the small businessman has indicated to them our concern over their well-being and needs. In the past the 
small independent businessman has in many ways been the neglected member of the business 
community. The establishment of business reps serving functions similar to the Ag reps, and the 
extension of SEDCO loans to small business has overcome much of this discrepancy. 
 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

231 

The Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation will, of course, continue to be interested in 
large undertakings, but it now shows a new interest in the operation of small business. Surely, this is as 
it ought to be. The large corporation has the expertise it needs within its own organization. The small 
independent merchant is the one who has the greatest need of government assistance. 
 
I’m sure that all Members were also happy to note that the average age of those receiving FarmStart 
loans was 27. An indication that here is indeed a program assisting young men and women in their 
farming operations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — The Family Income Plan which was introduced by our Government at the last 
session, and which started paying benefits in October of this year, has been of substantial assistance to 
many working people in this province. Now this program has not defeated inflation, but it is assisting 
many working people to meet the demands of inflation. It should be noted that we are the first 
Government in Canada to provide a program to supplement the wages of those who are working. In this 
way we are the first government to guarantee that those who work are better off than they would be on 
public assistance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — The work incentive aspects of this program are of extreme importance to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now one of the new thrusts., Mr. Speaker, indicated in the Speech from the Throne, will be of particular 
benefit and is programmed for senior citizens. 
 
Some comments have been made, Mr. Speaker, by Members opposite about financial assistance for 
senior citizens, by those on the Liberal benches who would have us forget their record and speak only 
about today. But we’re not going to forget their record, Mr. Speaker. Let me give you some examples. In 
1971, in an election year when they were designing a budget that would be attractive for votes, they put 
aside $4 million under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan for senior citizens. Our Government has 
provided this year $7.6 million. In that same 1971 budget they fled $56,000 as subsidy grants to 
special-care or nursing homes, $56,000. This year we will provide $5.4 million. In construction grants 
for these same homes the Liberals provided $525,000 and this year we shall be providing $996,000. For 
community services for the aged, to provide meals-on-wheels and homemakers, the Liberals provided 
$60,000 in 1971, this year we providing $850,000 for the same program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — Our Government introduced a Senior Citizens’ Home Repair program that will 
provide $3 million in benefits, and low rental for senior citizens which will provide $605,000. The 
Liberals also were collecting from senior citizens approximately $2 million in deterrent fees and $3 
million in medical care premiums. This meant, Mr. Speaker, that they collected from 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

232 
 

senior citizens half a million dollars more than they gave to these same senior citizens. This is their 
record. In comparison with this, Mr. Speaker, our Government this year will be providing more than $23 
million in benefits to the senior citizens of this province. 
 
We have also, Mr. Speaker, carefully reviewed the recommendations in the Senior Citizens’ 
Commission Report. We have already acted in those areas where immediate action was possible. There 
has already, for example, been a substantial increase in the community service grants available for 
senior citizens. We are conducting unannounced inspections and evaluations of nursing homes. We are 
recommending to those constructing nursing homes that there should be a minimum number of double 
rooms. Unfortunately I cannot report any action from the Federal Government on those 
recommendations directed towards it. 
 
The Senior Citizens’ Commission urged the province to continue its efforts federally towards the 
establishment of a guaranteed annual income for all people. In referring to the Federal Government’s 
Old Age Security and Guaranteed Supplement Program, the Commission recommended a guaranteed 
income of $350 for individuals and $500 for couples. They further recommended that pensions be 
available at age 60 and that the spouse remaining at home be able to participate in the Canada Pension 
Plan. Mr. Speaker, there has been little or no action in any of the fields. 
 
At the present time the Federal Government has established a study on the question of the spouse 
receiving coverage under the Canada Pension Plan, and we will be happy to discuss this with the federal 
authorities and attempt to find a solution for this problem. 
 
You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that the major recommendation, in fact some say, the only 
recommendation of the Senior Citizens’ Commission, was for the establishment of a Senior Citizens’ 
Agency. We have given very serious consideration to this proposal and to its implications. The total 
agency concept confronts with some very serious concerns. I should remind you that the concept was to 
have an agency which would also deliver services to senior citizens. That is to say it would have its own 
staff, would hire its own home care nurses, homemakers and so on. The agency would become 
responsible for the medical and social need of senior citizens. After careful consideration, it is our belief 
that this would not meet the real needs and requirements of the senior citizens of Saskatchewan. It would 
badly fragment the delivery system and the delivery of these services throughout the province, and lead 
in some areas to the unnecessary duplication of Services. It would also have the unfortunate result of 
segregating senior citizens from the main stream of society. To accept the agency concept in total would 
mean saying to people that up until a magic age, for example age 65, if you have a health problem or a 
social problem, you receive services from the Department of Health or Social Services, but after the 
magic age you must go to this new agency for your services. This we believe not only to be unnecessary 
but undesirable. Or what about the couple where one member is over 65 and the other under, where do 
they go for their service? 
 
There are also rehabilitative services provided through the Department of Health for those with a 
particular physical disability, regardless of age. It would seem unwise for us to 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

233 

fragment this service so that the Department of Health provided it only to those under a particular ago. 
Let me say here, Mr. Speaker, I’m not being at all critical of the work done by members of the 
Commission. They spent many long days and months preparing and working on their report, and they 
have identified clearly three major problems facing senior citizens throughout the province. First, the 
availability of information regarding programs which are already in place. Second, the need for far 
greater co-ordination between the Departments of Health and Social Services in meeting the 
requirements of this very special group of people. Third, the need to expand the delivery of services to 
our senior citizens. 
 
The Commission pointed out that senior citizens frequently experience a feeling of alienation from 
society, and of loneliness and frustration; frustration because they don’t know where to turn for 
assistance that might be there waiting for them; frustration because no one seems to speak on their 
behalf. Segregation of services would not, I believe, overcome this feeling of alienation. 
 
As a result of the Senior Citizens’ Report, our Government intends to introduce a program which we 
believe will meet these needs without creating fragmentation and segregation. We intend to establish 
within the next few months a provincial senior citizens council which will include a full-time chairman 
and part-time members. The council will also be provided with staff for its work. The council will 
represent the views of the elderly, and keep these views before the Government and its departments. It 
will also provide a central information service for the senior citizens of the province, providing 
information about the various programs available, we hope both federally and provincially. It will be 
asked to assist in the development and support of local senior citizens councils and other organizations 
meeting the needs of the elderly in our province. The provincial council will also serve as an advisor to 
government in the development of new programs, both by initiating such discussions with the various 
departments and also by serving as consultants to the departments. At the same time this council will 
work to ensure the co-ordination of the various departments providing programs and services for senior 
citizens. 
 
It is also at this time our intention to encourage the development of local senior citizens councils 
throughout the province. As some of the Members will remember, the Commission Report called for 
regional councils, and we do not oppose this concept. We feel we must start with a local base before 
moving to a regional council. The local councils will represent the views of the elderly at the local level. 
They will develop guidelines and recommendations for the development of community programs for the 
aged. They will assist in the co-ordination of existing services to the aged in their communities. They 
should serve as vehicles for senior citizens to express their needs for community services and see 
solutions to their problems. They should also prompt community action in meeting the needs of the 
elderly. These groups will also be encouraged to provide information, co-ordination and referral services 
in their local areas. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Government will provide financial 
assistance. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we will establish a Senior Citizens’ Branch within the Department of 
Social Services. This branch will provide the technical, financial and administrative 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

234 
 

support necessary for the development of programs for senior citizens. It will have the responsibility for 
the licensing of special-care facilities and, in consultation with the provincial council, will encourage 
senior citizen participation in the development and support of local councils. This Branch will have the 
responsibility for assisting in the promotion and organization of community-based activities and services 
for the elderly. In consultation with the provincial senior citizens council the Branch will conduct a 
public information program. 
 
You will see from this, Mr. Speaker, that our Government has reacted in a serious and responsible 
manner to the report of the Senior Citizens’ Commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — Our proposal will make it easier for senior citizens to play a more meaningful role in 
the development of programs which will be of direct benefit to them. It will ensure that these citizens are 
aware of the present programs which are available; and it should lead to the expansion, not only of the 
kind of programs available, but of the number of locations in which they can be found. This proposal is 
a further indication of our Government’s deep concern and respect for the pioneers and senior citizens of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words now about Core Services Administration. I have, with 
some interest in recent months, read and listened to some of the comments by Members of the 
Opposition regarding this agency. I’ve heard the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. D. F. MacDonald) 
speaking in a way which could only be taken as an attempt to incite the withdrawal of services of the 
employees at Valley View Centre. I’ve been astonished at the political games that these Members would 
play with a program whose whole emphasis is to bring the handicapped more into the main stream of 
society. They have complained of such things as overcrowding and understaffing. Mr. Speaker when I 
hear Members opposite criticize the retardation program in this province, there is a verse of scripture 
that comes quickly to mind. 
 

Why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but not notice the log that is in your own eye? 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — Particularly when the Opposition tries to make something of overcrowding and 
understaffing. Mr. Speaker, their voices have a hollow ring and there is more than a log in both eyes. 
 
I’d like to point out to you some of the facts. At Valley View Centre in 1970 under the Liberals there 
were 1,169 patients. At the same time there were 561 staff persons. Compare this with September of this 
year when the number of patients at Valley View had dropped to 891 and the staff had increased to 704, 
This was 278 patients less than in 1970 and 141 additional staff members 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

235 

MR. TAYLOR — One could also note that in 1970 there were 335 people on direct care staff while 
today there are 410. But the most important aspect of our work with the retarded is not in the increased 
number of staff, important as this may be, but in the changing emphasis on the program. The increasing 
emphasis has been to equip the handicapped to live as normal a life as possible within the community. 
Now there are those who think we have not moved quickly enough in this direction. However, great 
strides have been taken and they’ve been made in co-operation with the public, and not by imposing our 
will on the communities involved. 
 
Let me again give you some examples. 1970 there were 35 spaces in developmental centres for the 
mentally retarded, this year there will be 129. In 1970 there were no spaces in group homes, this month 
182. In 1970, 219 clients in approved homes, this month 339. In sheltered workshops in 1970 there were 
421, this month 562. In 1970 there were six spaces available in activity centres, we will have approved 
335 this month. There were no work stations for the retarded in 1970, we have approved 70 work 
stations. In 1970, 269 of our clients were enrolled into vocational training under the Vocational 
Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons Act. We will have approved this for 800 clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real effectiveness of this program is best demonstrated by looking at the waiting list at 
Valley View Centre. This is a list of those who have applied for admission and whom we have not been 
able to accommodate. In 1970, in spite of the fact that they had over 200 more in the institution than we 
have today, they had a waiting list of 600. Today the waiting list stands at 12. 
 
A special pilot project for children has also recently been established at Valley View Centre designed for 
retarded children up to 16 years of age, to prepare them for eventual normalized living in the 
community. Along with this an in-service training program for staff has been developed. We are in the 
process of developing two resource homes, one in Saskatoon and one in Regina. These homes will 
provide short-term accommodation for handicapped people. We’ve also provided a grant to the 
Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded to operate a demonstration project in preventive 
and protective services. This is intended to provide volunteers with an opportunity of representing the 
interest of handicapped people. Additional grants will be available to day care centres who assign some 
of their spaces for handicapped persons. Two institutions, Valley View and North Park Centres are now 
in the process of becoming more specialized. In October and early November of this year 136 residents 
of North Park were transferred to Valley View and 74 residents from Valley were transferred to North 
Park. Those transferred to Valley range in age from 25 to 45. They have been transferred so that they 
may receive the intensive training necessary for eventual discharge into the community. 
 
Residents transferred to North Park are older residents, and require the long-term care North Park can 
provide. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that prior to the move the residents and the of kin were all asked for 
and all gave their approval for these moves. Valley View, in this way, is becoming the centre which will 
prepare the residents for participation in community programming. 
 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

236 
 

I do not believe that any other part of Canada, on a per capita basis, provides the services and facilities 
for’ the mentally retarded that is now provided in Saskatchewan. This is not to suggest that we should be 
satisfied with our progress, There is still much to be done, but we are convinced that we are started on 
the right road, and will continue to make improvements as experience dictates. I am willing at any time 
to compare our record in this field with that of the Liberal Government for seven years, 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — On the same lines, Mr. Speaker, may I say how much I welcome the reference in the 
Speech from the Throne to legislation which will allow handicapped people an equal opportunity to 
exercise their rights in choosing their elected representatives. Too often our handicapped citizens have 
been the forgotten group in society. In elections it is extremely difficult for many of them to cast their 
ballot. I, for one, will support any move which removes some of this discrimination. 
 
In the same vein, I commend the Minister of Government Services, for his policy whereby all provincial 
office buildings will be built to such standards as to accommodate handicapped citizens in wheelchairs. 
This is an important move in our province, not just for the provincial buildings, but in the hopes that it 
will also serve as an example to municipalities and for other public buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn to another program introduced by our Government in the last few 
months, in fact still in the early stages of development. For too long now we have followed the medieval 
practice of sending people to jail for the offence of poverty. I am speaking, of course, of the people who 
are incarcerated because they are unable to pay the assessed fine. This strikes me as a holdover from the 
old concept of the debtors’ prison. This method of handling offenders provides no benefits, either to the 
individual or to society. In effect, it says that the wealthy, or at least those with sufficient funds may 
avoid prison by paying a fine, but the poor will go to jail. 
 
The fine option program will, for the first time, provide such people with an alternative. It will enable 
individuals to perform some type of community service as an alternative to incarceration for 
non-payment of fines. The program will go a long way towards providing equal justice, regardless of 
one’s income level. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that no one is under the delusion that this is merely a minor problem. During the 
past year approximately one out of every two persons admitted to a correctional centre in Saskatchewan 
were admitted because they were unable pay the fine. Because they serve relatively short sentences this 
means that such people account for approximately 10 to 15 per cent of the actual persons incarcerated on 
any given day. 
 
Now the person jailed in this manner quickly comes to believe that there is no justice in society when he 
sees someone else up for the some offence, capable of paying the fine, and therefore walking the streets. 
If he was a low-income wage earner it is quite possible his job may not be waiting for him at the end of 
his period of incarceration, and that the only 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

237 

option at that point might well be total public assistance. 
 
I night say, Mr. Speaker, it is also a costly process for the taxpayer. In some instances it is necessary to 
provide assistance for the spouse and family who remain at home. But even if this is not the case it costs 
approximately $20 per day to keep an individual in a correctional centre. When we project these costs 
over the average 30 days in default spent in custody, the average $100 fine has suddenly cost the 
taxpayers of the province $600. In addition to the costs of incarceration there are substantial costs 
involved in obtaining a warrant of arrest from a judge, of arresting an individual, holding him in a local 
police lockup under guard until he can be transferred under guard to a correctional centre. The centre 
might be as much as 400 miles away. On his release the Government is responsible for the costs of his 
transportation to the community in which he was arrested. It makes very little sense for society to spend 
that kind of money because they could not collect the $100 fine. 
 
The fine option program, which is just getting underway, is designed to assist local communities and 
community groups to develop work situations which, when completed, will be of assistance to the 
community. For example, an individual who owes a $100 fine, which he is unable to pay, may choose to 
work for a non-profit group for approximately 44 hours to satisfy the financial requirements of his fine. 
He might do this by taking a week of his vacation or by working evenings or weekends. And for those 
who are worried about the penalty, surely it is just as much a penalty to lose some of your free time, as 
to lose some of your working time. 
 
It is our hope, Mr. Speaker, that this program will benefit the communities who participate by enabling 
them to undertake some community projects which otherwise might not have been done. We hope it will 
benefit the individual in that he will be able to pay off his debt to society in a responsible manner and 
with a feeling of accomplishment. And it will benefit society in the savings over incarceration and in the 
more humane treatment of offenders. Care will be taken, Mr. Speaker, to insure that work done on this 
program is work which would not have been done otherwise by regular employees. 
 
May I say that, so far, we are very enthused with the response we have received regarding this program, 
from the judiciary and those engaged in providing legal services, and from municipalities and 
community groups. 
 
I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to one of the major programs in the Department of Social Services, the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. Mr. Speaker, I continue to be astounded at the political games which 
Members opposite seem willing to play with lives of the unfortunate members of society. Once again, 
we see these Members opposite attempting to use the old device of divide and conquer. In the realm of 
public assistance they have been deliberately attempting to divide the people of Saskatchewan and set 
one segment of society against the other, in the hope that by so doing the Liberal Party will receive the 
support of any backlash they may be able to develop. 
 
You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that just one year ago Members of the Opposition were attempting to 
stand with one foot on each side of the fence, and from the recent screams it must 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

238 
 

have been a barbed wire fence. In July of 1971 they publicly called for a 20 per cent increase in welfare 
allowances, no doubt to gain some support from those on public assistance. But four months later the 
same Party condemned the 17 per cent increase as being too much. It would seem that the Liberal Party 
has now at last decided which stand it must take. It has decided to go on an all-out attack on the poor, 
and in this way reinforce any prejudices which might exist in society against those who are 
disadvantaged. 
 
The feeling one gets from reading Liberal press releases is, indeed, that there is a far greater chance of a 
poor person abusing the Welfare system than there is of a rich man abusing the income tax system. 
When it comes, Mr. Speaker, to unconscionable profits, the silence from the opposite benches has been 
deafening, and that, to me, is the real abuse of our so-called free enterprise society. j 
 
It would appear too, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) is becoming the chief 
spokesman for the Opposition in their attack on the poor. I can understand that the problems and the 
conditions of poverty must seem very, very real to someone in a law office. It is noticeable that the 
Member for Lumsden and his colleagues refuse to be confused by the facts. Indeed, the Member for 
Lumsden is to be congratulated for the way in which he has managed to avoid completely any proximity 
to the facts. 
 
On October 29th he is quoted as saying in a prepared release, maybe written by Liberal office but issued 
by him, “ The real issue is that the number of recipients has remained much the same over the past three 
years. This means our welfare system has failed.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to have asked where the Member dug up this information, but that 
would have been somewhat facetious for he did no digging, instead he depended solely on his 
imagination The facts, as you know, are quite the reverse. Far from this being the case, the number of 
recipients has dramatically decreased in the last three years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — The figures I will now provide you with, Mr. Speaker, are for the total province, 
including the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In March of 1972 - and I want to remind you that that included the last three months of the Liberal 
administration - there were 60;109 persons receiving public assistance in Saskatchewan. In September of 
1973 there were 51,298, a drop of almost 10,000. In the latest figures I have available for September of 
1974 there are 43,758 people receiving public assistance - a further decrease of 7,540. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — This means, Mr. Speaker, that in the last two and one half years there has been a net 
decrease in the number of recipients of 16,551. In fact, Mr. Speaker, under the Liberals since the 
introduction of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan in 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

239 

1966 the number of recipients steadily increased. In 1968-69 it was 44,975; in 1969 and 1970 it went up 
to 52,161. It is only under the New Democratic Government that it has shown any decrease. It seems to 
me that the record will speak for itself. 
 
I can only assume, therefore, that either the Member for Lumsden is incapable of reading and 
understanding a fairly simple departmental report, or on the other hand he is deliberately falsifying the 
facts for his own political advantage. 
 
I want to say a very special word in this regard about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. In my 
opinion the staff of DNS have done an outstanding job under the leadership of Mr. Bowerman in the 
field of social services. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — They have developed entirely new programs, new to all of North America, in the 
field of corrections and they are making great strides in this regard. They have also made great strides in 
economic development and in public assistance. In September of 1973 there were 4,331 persons on 
public assistance in northern Saskatchewan; in September of this year the figure was down to 2,929. 
These figures were included in the total I have mentioned earlier. 
 
The Member for Lumsden went on, Mr. Speaker, in the same press release to say that he would like to 
see the Assistance Plan remodelled on the basis of the New York state system, and he has said this 
before. What he was talking about was the creation of projects to give recipients work experience and 
increase their chances of getting a regular job. In this regard he went on to say that the Provincial 
Government’s Employment Support Program should be a permanent one. 
 
Let me say, first of all, I am happy to have his support in this regard, even though he usually doesn’t 
know what he is talking about. We believe that the Employment Support Program is an important step 
forward in the field of social and income security. We would like nothing better than to see that type of 
program become permanent, but then our Government has already shown its interest in work-related 
programs. The previous Liberal administration did nothing in this regard. They did lots of talking but 
nothing in the way of programs. At the present time we have Employment Support Program. We make 
use of Training On the Job. We have Work Preparation Centres and Work Activity Programs. Under the 
Department of Municipal Affairs Winter Works Program, municipalities are provided with a bonus of 
$30 per week for each public assistance client that they hire. Apart from Training On Job none of these 
were in existence three years ago. The thing that is stopping us from expanding programs such as Work 
Incentives and the Employment Support Program are the Liberal colleagues of the Members opposite in 
Ottawa. 
 
The Member for Lumsden well knows that the Federal Liberal Government cost-shares on a fifty per 
cent basis the administration of public assistance in this and in every other province, They have 
steadfastly refused to cost-share on the same basis work programs such as the Employment Support 
Program. This, in effect, makes it twice as expensive for any province to put a man to work than it 
would to pay him public assistance. For dollar we provide in public assistance we receive 50 cents 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

240 
 

in return from Ottawa. For every dollar we provide in wages to these same people we receive nothing in 
return from Ottawa, 
 
The same federal colleagues of the Members opposite have recently forced us to remove, from the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, some of the work incentives we had already had in place with their 
approval for two years. They have insisted that if we want to continue cost-sharing we must be more 
restrictive in this regard. Up until recently, physically and emotionally handicapped people, working 
part-time under supervision in sheltered workshops, were able to keep $100 of their earnings without 
having their assistance payments reduced. Under the new regulations, forced upon us by the Federal 
Government, they will only be able to claim $50 of their earning exemptions or 25 per cent of their basic 
needs under public assistance. 
 
Under the new federal rule a married man with a family is allowed to keep $100 from his earnings or 25 
per cent of his basic needs, however, if his income equals 50 per cent or more of that basic need, he 
loses all of his exemptions and therefore has a very strong disincentive to increase his earnings. This 
cut-off point of 50 per cent only penalizes a person on assistance who is trying to move into full-time 
work and trying to be self-supporting. It increases dependency and takes away any incentive to work. 
 
I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the Members opposite are really concerned about a work 
incentive, that they apply pressure to their federal counterparts so that we will able to expand our work 
incentives and work activities programs. 
 
Let me point out clearly, the Employment Support Program this summer cost the people of 
Saskatchewan an additional three quarters of a million dollars; the total program was about one and a 
half million. If we had paid these people one and a half million in public assistance the Federal 
Government would have refunded three quarters of a million. However, because we paid them to work 
the additional cost falls entirely on the people Saskatchewan. 
 
Our record in this regard is perfectly clear. From the start of the social security review, initiated by the 
Federal Government, we have insisted that an employment strategy must be the first priority in income 
security. We have developed, within our own province, work programs and work preparation grants to 
assist the recipients of public assistance into the labour market. We have developed and implemented s 
Family Income Plan which ensures that everyone working will receive a higher income than he could 
receive on public assistance. No other government in Canada, and certainly not the previous Liberal 
administration, can make this sort of claim. In spite of all this, the Members opposite limit themselves to 
stirring up the public because of abuses which are more imaginary than real. At the same time, as I 
mentioned earlier, they make little reference to the abuse to the economic system which is foisted on the 
public by their corporate friends. 
 
We are all aware, for example, of the great increase in sugar prices recently. On November 20th it was 
reported by the Press that a Michigan sugar company had stated its profits during the past 12 months 
were up 2,000 per cent over the 1975 fiscal year. They went on to say that the profits would have been a 
4,000 increase, except for a change in accounting procedure. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

241 

I can only assume that for taxation purposes a new accounting procedure would cut their tax payable by 
more than 50 per cent. It is amazing that the Liberal Members of the House have little, or nothing to say, 
about this kind of economic abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite attempt to make much of welfare abuse. I suggest to you, Sir, that 
there is less abuse of welfare than there is abuse of welfare recipients by the Liberal Members of this 
Legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — We acknowledge that there is some abuse of the Public Assistance program. It 
would be naive and foolish to believe otherwise. There are always a few that will abuse any program, 
and indeed take advantage of society itself. If this were not the case we would need neither police nor 
courts. 
 
It is our policy in this regard to lay charges against those who are discovered to be abusing the system. 
In the last twelve months, for example, 18 such charges were laid in this province with eight convictions 
and one case still pending. I have no hesitation in insisting that charges be laid. And as far as to who 
goes to jail, they are usually sent there or not by a federally appointed Judge in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — I have no hesitation in insisting that charges be laid. This is necessary, not just to 
protect the taxpayers who supporting the program, but also to protect the vast majority clients of the 
Department of Social Services who are honestly struggling to get by. They tend to receive abuse because 
of a few who are dishonest. 
 
The other day, in his speech, the Leader of the Opposition said that because there are some rotten people 
in business, the Blakeney Government wages war on all business. This we know, Mr. Speaker, is 
entirely false. But I suggest that because there are a few dishonest people who have claimed public 
assistance the Liberal Opposition wages war on all recipients. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — I have already indicated that our policy is to lay charges against those who attempt 
to cheat the system. It might be interesting to discover how many charges the federal Liberals have laid 
under the Combines Investigation Act. Investigatory powers for this Act rest with the federal authorities. 
But I have heard of very few charges being laid. 
 
Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that the welfare of the corporations is of greater interest to the Liberal 
Members than is the welfare of the individual? It is interesting to note that recently a Federal Cabinet 
Minister, unfortunately, a member from Saskatchewan, has indicated that the Federal Government will 
support Canadian Industrial Gas and Oil Limited of Calgary, when they appeal the decision of the 
Queen’s Bench Court about the validity of our legislation. This will be a deliberate attempt by the 
federal Liberals to assist this poor, I suppose, welfare 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

242 
 

company, in receiving higher profits at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again we see the Liberal position of welfare for the corporations, free enterprise for the poor. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that this Government will continue to speak on behalf of the disadvantaged 
people of our province, We will not be deterred by the misrepresentations made by the Members who sit 
on the opposite benches. 
 
For sometime we have seen politicians using the poor as a ploy in an attempt to gain power. We have 
seen them attempting to blame the poor for every economic ailment of society. I can only say that our 
Government intends to speak out on behalf of these citizens. We will not be deterred by an Opposition 
that attempts to make profit for itself out of the sufferings of the unfortunate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — We intend to do all that is within our power to assist these less fortunate citizens in 
becoming fully integrated into the main stream of life. We will do so through training and work 
preparation; through the provision of employment program with or without the assistance of the Federal 
Government. We will continue to do so by insisting that a work incentive be built into any income 
security program. We will continue to work to develop a system of economic security for all Canadians. 
We will not use the poor as a whipping boy to protect the failures of an economic system which 
continues to make the rich richer and the poor poorer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn very briefly to a slightly different subject, the credibility, or lack of it, 
and the desperation of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. Their credibility, Mr. Speaker, I suggest is 
probably at the lowest point in history, even lower than it was in June of 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — But in the normal Liberal tradition they are taking steps in an attempt to correct this 
situation. It is interesting to note, however, that the steps they are taking follow the normal Liberal 
tradition. There is no positive declaration of policy. There are no real arguments on issues of the day, 
indeed on the major issue, that of resource taxation, the Leader of Opposition has merely indicated that 
we shouldn’t have been as trusting of the federal Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their methods follow the two traditional routes of the Liberal Party. First, a smear 
campaign aimed at the Premier of the province and secondly, a slick advertising campaign aimed only at 
selling a product without consideration whether or not that product provides any benefits. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the advertising campaign is masterfully done. It wasn’t dreamed up by just 
one or two in the back room. It is a professional job. You only have look at some of the ads to recognize 
that. I have some of with me. One from a weekly newspaper and a nice one from one of 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

243 

our daily newspapers. They are very well done, they are nice ads. I congratulate their ad agency, 
whoever they happen to be. It is really a professional job. We listen to their radio ads, or watch their ads 
on television, and are even more impressed by the professional productions. It is really slick. They make 
a fair use out of what some people call subliminal advertising technique; a technique which is supposed, 
according to the advertising specialists, to appeal to the subconscious mind and to convince you to buy 
something that you never believed you wanted in the first place. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — It is being used in an attempt to sell everything from soap to automobiles; and now, 
as a last ditch effort, it is being used in an attempt to sell the people of Saskatchewan a Party they want 
nothing to do with. Consider the fantastic costs of such an advertising campaign. It is really no wonder 
the Liberal Members opposite don’t want an Election Expenses Act. When one considers the television, 
radio, daily papers, weekly paper ads, the cost of the campaign must be in the hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. But then their corporate friends have had extremely high profits this last year. I suppose they can 
afford it. No one needs to worry about the $100 a plate dinner or what happened to the money. We have 
seen what happened on television. 
 
Now certainly there are some groups that would be interested in a Liberal victory at the next election. 
No doubt the resource industries would be inclined to put up a fair amount of money to assist that Party. 
Why shouldn’t they be willing to throw a fair bit into the coffers? They know that if the Liberal Party 
were to win an election in Saskatchewan, the pay-off to oil and potash and other resource companies 
would begin immediately. But the people of Saskatchewan can’t afford this. We cannot afford the 
pay-off that would be made by the Members opposite to the resource industry as a whole, the pay-off 
carried out by allowing vastly increased profits to the companies, and a much lower return to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of our province will not be fooled. They will not permit a slick advertising 
campaign to provide a cover for a bankruptcy of ideas, a dearth of policy, and a philosophy which puts 
corporations first and people second. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — Nor will they allow a smear campaign to close their eyes to the real truth. Ask 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, “Who is the friend of the people of Saskatchewan?” Is it the Liberal of Steuart 
and Lang? Lang who introduced the LIFT program to cut back on grain production? Who as Justice 
Minister supported a potash company in fighting the laws of Saskatchewan in court? A Party led by men 
who favour the abolition of the Crow’s Nest rates for the shipment of grain? A Party that is supporting 
rail abandonment throughout our province? A Party whose Federal Justice Minister has said that he will 
join an oil company in fighting Saskatchewan legislation, which brings the oil profits to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Where is the credibility, Mr. Speaker, of their provincial Leader who remains adamantly 
silent while his federal friends in the House of Commons launch 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

244 
 

an all out attack, not just on Saskatchewan or on western Canada, but on the whole field of provincial 
jurisdiction? Where is his credibility when he says on the one hand, he would go to Ottawa and get a 
better deal, and on the other hand we should stop asking Ottawa for our rightful share of taxation? 
Where was the present Leader of the Opposition when his own Party was in power and when his then 
Premier went to Ottawa saying I am going, “Screaming for more money from the Federal Government?” 
Where is the Member for Prince Albert West when his Ottawa friends announced that they will increase 
the tax on natural gas avai1able to Saskatchewan Power and thus force the price of gas up to the citizens 
of our province? No advertising campaign will overcome the handicap of poor leadership and the lack of 
positive programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the other hand the people of Saskatchewan know Allan Blakeney. Since he became 
Premier of this province he has made a practice of travelling throughout the province. People have come 
to know him, and when they know him they trust him. They know him as a man committed to building a 
new and better Saskatchewan. As a man, with a deep concern for the needs of people. As a man willing 
to take a strong stand against the powerful corporations and a powerful central government. They know 
he speaks for the rights of Saskatchewan people. They have seen that under his leadership this 
Government is one which keeps its promises. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — No glossy ads can make the Liberal alternative credible. The people of the province 
know that if they should by chance come back into power, we will see the biggest sellout in the history 
of Saskatchewan, as our resources are once more put up for grabs and for profiteering by the private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Opposition apparently has all the money they need. They plainly have the services of a 
good professional advertising agency. The only thing they will not have is the support of the voters of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech has set before the people of our 
province, both the record of this Government and our proposals for future action. A record of which we 
can be justifiably proud, providing for commitments which will be supported by the people of this 
province. 
 
Consequently, I will be opposing the amendment put forward by the Leader of the Opposition and will 
gladly support the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WEIBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, it has been normal practice in 
the past to congratulate the mover and the seconder. I will do so, not for the contents of their remarks or 
what they had to move or to second, but I will congratulate them on the honour which they received. 
 
This afternoon and ever since last Thursday we have seen speaker after speaker get up on that side of the 
House and each 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

245 

and everyone of them with the same theme in their comments. What they are spouting is the old 
mushroom theory in politics. What is that mushroom theory in politics? It has been very evident for the 
last five days what that mushroom theory in politics is. 
 
You feed the people in this province a bunch of manure and then keep them in the dark for the rest of the 
year. That is exactly what the Members opposite have been doing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIBE — As well, Hr. Speaker, I should like at this time to congratulate the Minister of Culture 
and Youth for his selection of Swift Current as the site for the Saskatchewan Summer Games. I am 
pleased that finally this Government has recognized that there is a southwest corner of Saskatchewan. 
Even though, Mr. Speaker, that there are four NDP MLAs sitting in this House from the southwest part 
of Saskatchewan, this is the first time since 1971 that this Government has even recognized or 
considered that there is a southwest corner in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIBE — As well, Mr. Speaker, when you enter into a debate it is normal to comment on some 
of the points that have been made in the debate by Members opposite. I wish to do that at this time. 
 
My only problem is that the Members on that side of the House have not made any points in their 
comments with a result that nothing concrete has been said, with the result that my reply to them as well 
will be nothing. 
 
I should like to look at the Throne Speech itself. What we debating here today, Mr. Speaker, is rather a 
strange document and probably one of the first of its kind in the history of Saskatchewan. It deals with 
things out of the past and is void in setting any direction at all for the future. As I said a bit earlier it 
indicates three things. 
 
First of all it indicates that after only three and one half years in office, the NDP in this province has run 
out of ideas. I ask, Mr. Speaker, what is the matter, fellows, can’t you bring any more people in from 
outside this province to furnish you with ideas? Are they among the rest of the people of Canada who 
are refusing to come into Saskatchewan because they realize what kind of government we have got 
here? 
 
It is quite easy to understand that you need these people, it was quite evident after six months in office 
that the 43 Members sitting on that side of the House had run out of ideas in only 180 days. 
 
Secondly, and I think this is the answer, that it is an admission by the NDP in Saskatchewan that they do 
not know how to face nor do they know how to solve the economic conditions which we have now in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. They have just thrown their hands up and decided to say nothing. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

246 
 

It was Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, that provided this province with the wealth that it now has. First of all, 
through one man, whose name happens to be Otto Lang and who is the one man who those people on 
that side of the House have continued to ridicule ever since this Legislature opened. Not only that, but it 
is Ottawa that provides this Government with 40 per cent of its wealth. Again they are using the old 
tactics of asking Ottawa to solve their problems here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thirdly, and I think most sad of all is that this NDP Government has lost touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, do not want more government takeovers, they 
don’t want more government involvement in business of farm lands, or more bureaucratic control over 
their lives. The people realize that each and every time a government implements a control or regulation 
to solve one problem that that regulation creates two or three more problems. So that you have a 
snowballing effect which means more and more government involvement in the lives of each and every 
one of us. 
 
The priorities of the NDP ignore the real needs of senior citizens who are on fixed incomes and are 
unable to cope with the rising cost of living. What is needed is a provincial pension supplement instead 
of just creating a new government agency. No amount of work by a group of government bureaucrats in 
a Senior Citizen Agency can be as necessary right now as higher incomes. 
 
The priorities of this Government as well ignore the needs of our cattle industry in Saskatchewan. I ask 
Members opposite, what good was the cash advance which your Government implemented to help the 
cattle industry in Saskatchewan? It only postpones, Mr. Speaker, a fate which could be worse than the 
present dilemma that the cattle industry now finds itself in. What than cattle industry in Saskatchewan 
needs today is help. 
 
The Government opposite will be encouraging young farmers and livestock producers to keep their 
calves over the winter months. Many of these people, Mr. Speaker, do not have the adequate experience 
needed to winter these cattle. Many of these people do not have the facilities nor do they have the high 
priced feed in order to get those cattle through the winter alive. 
 
If they lose some of those calves over the winter months, Mr. Speaker, that cash advance still has to be 
paid. The cash advance requires that young farmer to tie up as security in that advance everything which 
he owns with the exception of his own soul. If any of you had the opportunity to look at that application 
you will realize that that is exactly what it does. I say what position will that young man be in next 
spring? What will happen next year when he starts to market those calves? Our markets and the farmers 
will have to look at selling two calf crops in one year. What will that do to our already depressed cattle 
prices in Saskatchewan? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are many cattlemen in Saskatchewan who are able to take advantage of that cash 
advance. And I will tell you a lot of them have done it. And what are they doing with it? They are taking 
it to their credit union, they are taking it to their bank and they are investing it at 10.5 per cent and that is 
the profit that they are going to be making on that cash advance. Is this the right direction to help the 
cattle industry in this province? Mr. Speaker, I say that that 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

247 

cash advance program is useless and a slap in the face of all cattlemen in this province. 
 
As I said a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, and I say it again, I am opposed to subsidies because I do not feel 
that they solve the problem. Yet I might concede something in my stand when you look at the possible 
suggestion of an $80 grant per calf sold, and this I think should be looked at a lot closer. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) told the people of Saskatchewan that this program would cost 
$40 million for all calves sold in the Province of Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Agriculture is talking through his hat. Did he realize last year when prices were high that there were 
220,000 calves sold in the Province of Saskatchewan. That doesn’t add up to $40 million, that adds up to 
$22 million. I say to this Government, if you feel that a direct subsidy to the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan is worth $18 million then I say a direct subsidy to the cattle industry in this province is 
worth $22 million. The fact that you are ignoring the cattle industry in this province only means one 
thing, you want to see the cattle industry in Saskatchewan down on its knees. That is the only industry in 
this province that you people do not have control over and once you get the livestock industry in this 
province down on its knees you are going to have that control. I can tell the cattlemen of this province 
that if this Government is re-elected I will guarantee them that in six months after the election there will 
be a cattle marketing commission in this province and it won’t be voluntary, it will be compulsory, 
exactly the same as the hog producers in this province. 
 
Let’s look at that hog subsidy of $18 million. Why did this Government bring it in? Was it for a concern 
for the hog producers in Saskatchewan? If they have that concern for the hog producers, to spend $18 
million, why don’t they have that concern for the cattle producers today, and spend $22 million. That 
subsidy was put in strictly because of politics, because those Members opposite realize that if the hog 
industry in this province failed, the direct result of that failure would be blamed on them because of their 
compulsory Hog Marketing Commission and that is the only reason why the $18 million was spent on 
the hog producers in this province. If you feel the same about helping the cattle industry in this province 
that you did the hog producers, spend that $22 million. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the cattle industry and compare it to the hog industry. The hog 
producer can buy breeding stock today, he can breed that animal and in ten months he will have a return 
on his investment because he will sell an offspring from that breeding stock. Let’s look at the cattle 
industry. If you buy breeding stock today it takes you three years before you can realize any return on 
that investment. The people, whom this Government has encouraged to get into livestock took in this 
province through FarmStart, once they get their fingers burned you can rest assured they are not going to 
go into the cattle industry again. These are the people that we have to be looking at in this province 
today. 
 
The established cow/calf operator, the established feedlot operator, he can survive, he can survive this 
downturn, but can that young man whom we encouraged to go into cattle, survive? I say he can’t. He 
can’t because he got into it one or two years ago. The Government, through FarmStart, in many 
instances instead 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

248 
 

of encouraging a man to start out gradually, to diversify in a smaller way and eventually grow, they have 
encouraged him to sink $70,000 or $80,000 into hog barns, into feedlot operations and into cow/calf 
operations. What is going to happen to these people now? 
 
Let’s look again, Mr. Speaker, what this NDP Government has done to help those young people in 
Saskatchewan, the ones whom they have encouraged into livestock. Again, I mention first of all they 
encouraged them to go into livestock in a big way which tied up a tremendous amount of money and 
debt in buildings, equipment and livestock. They now have a fantastic debt, with little or no income to 
reduce that debt. As well, they implemented the cash advance system which I have talked about a little 
earlier. 
 
Now some of the other ways in which they have helped young cattlemen. First of all let’s look at our 
community pastures. Since forming the Government in 1971, they have not doubled but they have 
tripled the fees that are required to put cattle into our provincial community pasture system in this 
province. About one month ago I stopped in at a farmer in my constituency who was just about down 
and out. Mr. Speaker, he had to sell half of his calf crop, half of his 1974 calf crop, to pay the 
community pasture fees so he could take his cattle home. And that is a direct result of the kind of help 
that Government is giving the cattle industry in this province. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but grassland lease fees on grassland in this province, have just about tripled 
as well. And they on that side of the House say that they are concerned about the people in livestock, 
that they are concerned about young farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what should happen? As I said earlier we are losing, we are in danger of losing one of our 
greatest industries. We are in danger of losing one of our greatest resources. That industry and that 
resource is our youth in agriculture and our youth in farming, the youth whom we have encouraged to 
diversify their agricultural operations and go into livestock. I say that this is needed in the province. We 
need more young people to diversify their straight grain farm operation and diversify a livestock 
operation. But why sit on your hands, gentlemen? Why allow those young people to go down and out? 
 
I should like to offer three suggestions that this Government can do to help those young farmers, if you 
don’t want spend the money on a direct subsidy. First of all I call on the Government to initiate a 
one-year moratorium on all FarmStart loans in this province; give those young men an opportunity to 
extend the length of term of payment and tell them this year if you are in rough shape, we will not 
require that payment for 1974 or 1975. 
 
Secondly, I suggest that all interest payments on those FarmStart loans be cancelled for this year. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that community pasture fees, breeding fees be reduced to 1971 levels 
and the grassland fees as well be reduced to 1972 levels. 
 
These suggestions, Mr. Speaker, I believe are concrete positive suggestions, suggestions and proposals 
that will enable the young farmers in this province, whom we have encouraged to go 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

249 

into livestock, to be able to hang on and stick it out just the same as senior people in our livestock 
industry who have been established for a considerable length of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should now like to turn to another subject, I am sure many of us watched Provincial 
Affairs last Saturday night, featuring our fearless Roy Romanow and his concern about rail line 
abandonment in Saskatchewan. It was a beautiful program to watch, the colour was fantastic and our 
Attorney General, again, was in his usual form. But I should like to talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, about 
the concern that the Attorney General had on that program. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that concern was 
not for the towns and rural communities that would be affected by abandonment. That concern was not 
for the social and economic costs that abandonment would have on the producer, on businesses, on the 
communities or on our rural way of life, but rather, Mr. Speaker, it was a concern strictly for politics, a 
concern for the NDP Government and the New Democratic Party, a concern for political gain, a concern 
for justification of the actions taken by the CCF-NDP of which many Members opposite were a part of 
ten years ago, a concern to try to shift the blame for the only rail line abandonment that has ever 
occurred it this province; a concern to take public suspicion away from the New Democratic Party and 
place that suspicion on the Federal Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite just do not want to admit that the only rail lines that were ever 
abandoned in this province were abandoned when their Government or their Party was the Government 
of Saskatchewan. As I said earlier, many of the Members who are presently sitting on that side of the 
House were sitting on that government at the same time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a fact that they do not wish to accept and it is a fact that it was a provincial Liberal 
Government and a federal Liberal Government that called a halt and stopped rail line abandonment in 
this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIBE — They are aware, and I am sure the people of Saskatchewan are aware, that the only 
time that rail lines were torn up and abandoned in Saskatchewan was when their Party opposite were the 
Government of this province. At no time, Mr. Speaker, during that controversy did they rise to the 
defence of keeping those rail lines. At no time did they rise to the defence of our rural communities and 
farmers who were affected by this abandonment. What was their concern at that time? What constructive 
alternatives did they suggest? What pressure did they put on the then Conservative Government in 
Ottawa to call a halt to that abandonment in this province? The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
can answer those questions. 
 
The CCF-NDP government sat on their hands and did nothing! They finally became involved in the 
controversy when they realized the political ramifications of what they had allowed to happen. For the 
past ten years speaker after speaker has tried to shift that blame. They don’t want to stand up and admit 
that it was an NDP government that allowed rail lines to be abandoned in Saskatchewan. And, again, 
that it was the Liberal Governments in Saskatchewan and Ottawa that called a halt to that abandonment. 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

250 
 

The interesting part of the entire controversy, Mr. Speaker is that during the past ton years and during 
the present debate on this subject, the NDP have not come up with one positive approach to this 
question. Not once have they put forward any constructive or rational ides or solution to this problem. 
Sure, they have set up a department of the Government to look into rail rationalization. 
 
We, on this side of the House, have tried fruitlessly to find out exactly in what direction those studies arc 
going and our only indication is so far that it is providing a few extra jobs for a few more party hacks in 
this province. They have decided, as the Attorney General did last Saturday night on Provincial Affairs, 
to take the negative approach. They have decided to leave things as they are with no constructive 
alternative. They are content to allow the rail lines in this province to deteriorate, they are content to 
allow the services on our rural lines to deteriorate. 
 
The comments by the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, have been negative. He is content to run down 
and to ridicule any attempt that has been made by the Federal Government to look into the entire 
transportation system. During the length of the freeze, Mr. Speaker, not once has the Attorney General 
nor his Government, made any concrete proposals to Ottawa regarding the entire question. Not once has 
he been prepared to get involved, to work together with Ottawa in finding a solution to our 
transportation problems, a solution, Mr. Speaker, that would benefit the entire western region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say at this time, that it is necessary for the various organizations, the individual 
producers, rural governments and western provincial governments to sit down together to assess the 
facts and to participate in determining the best course of action. We must be able, Mr. Speaker, to 
understand - and I say to understand each others’ problems. Where does our responsibility as Legislators 
lie in regard to a question as vital as rail line abandonment and the effects that this entire question can 
have on our rural way of life Saskatchewan, its effect on our economy and its effect on the future of the 
many farms and towns in this province. 
 
Our responsibility, Mr. Attorney General, is not destructively to oppose suggestions or ideas, our 
responsibility is, not refusing to co-operate or to go off on our own tangent, our responsibility is to find 
answers. We must make every effort to take this issue out of the narrow range of both petty party 
politics, and the interests of the railways and the elevator companies. We must be prepared to ask that all 
western provincial governments, farm organizations and most importantly, the producers, set petty 
issues aside and work together with the Federal Government to provide the alternatives, to come up with 
solutions that if changes are required the grain producer and our rural communities will get the entire 
benefit of these changes. 
 
I urge the Attorney General instead of trying to tear apart, that he try constructively to work together 
with other levels of government, organizations and individuals to find a solution that will be beneficial 
to our rural communities, our producers and our province as a whole. 



 
December 6, 1974 

 

251 

 I ask the Attorney General to put aside his petty desire for political gain. I ask him to sit down and 
work. I offer today that I will work together with the Attorney General to find a solution, to find the 
answers that are required. I ask the Attorney General to take the first initiative in that regard and if he 
takes that initiative he has my co-operation and understanding 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more which I shall like to say on highways this afternoon, but I understand 
that my time has been allocated to 5:00 o’clock and with that I shall leave my comments on highways 
until we have an opportunity to debate the resolution which I presented. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will state at this time that I will be supporting the amendment and not the 
main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. K.B. MACLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to speak in 
this debate today. I have two subjects to deal with and I should like to deal with one very briefly at this 
time and the other one I should like to deal with at a later moment. 
 
The first one deals, Mr. Speaker, with the question of the provision of legal services and facilities for 
legal services in Saskatchewan. We are, in this province, increasingly aware of the importance of 
competent legal services to all members of society. This increasing awareness was recognized by the 
commencement in 1967 of the First Legal Aid Plan ever put forward in Canada and it was put forward 
by the then Liberal Government under the Attorney General, Darrel Heald. Now since that time, with 
the assistance of the Federal Government, these plans have been expanded and I congratulate justice 
Minister Otto Lang, the former Attorney General, Mr. Heald and the Attorney General, Mr. Romanow 
for their particular work in this regard. 
 
The physical facilities, however, particularly in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon and especially those 
under the control of the Provincial Government have not quite kept pace with this increasing awareness 
of legal needs. 
 
Under the British North America Act the administration of justice is the responsibility of the provinces. 
In Regina and Saskatoon there is need for much more court space and more court staff. The situation in 
Saskatoon is especially acute, where Magistrates’ Courts, District Courts and the Superior Courts 
together with the Land Titles Office all crowd into the same building. I urge the Government to purchase 
land nearby, south of the present building in Saskatoon, and build a brand new building for the Land 
Titles office thus freeing additional space in Saskatoon Court House for the law offices and for the 
courts that are properly there. 
 
I recognize that finance ministers of this and previous governments may well put this type of thing down 
the scale of priorities. There is great need for these in Saskatoon particularly, and I urge the Government 
to give close attention to this. I look forward eagerly to seeing something in this regard in the Budget 
which we assume will come along in late January or early March. I therefore urge the Attorney General 



 
December 6, 1974 
 

252 
 

and the Minister of Finance and the Government to give this a fairly good priority. I hope that the 
Attorney General will continue in his efforts to supply legal services to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan in the areas where they are not presently properly covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks relating to the physical needs of our legal system I should like to 
suggest that I have some lengthy remarks, some 15 or 20 minutes or perhaps longer relating to the 
opportunity that was presented to me this last summer to represent the Province as an observer along 
with the Speaker of the House at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Ceylon (now Sri 
Lanka). However, Mr. Speaker, it will take some time to deal with this, so rather than have my remarks 
broken in two parts, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 o’clock p.m. 


