



















































Hansard: May 08, 1974


2988 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

67th Day 

Wednesday, May 8, 1974. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY STRIKE 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to ask a 

question of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that in the construction industry that the negotiating teams are not meeting. The 

negotiations are at a complete standstill and there is absolutely no progress made after five weeks of striking. 

 

I wonder if the Minister can indicate to the House what steps he is intending to take, or if he is going to take 

any steps to bring the two sides in the dispute together and see if the strike can be settled? 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — I think the Member is overstating the case if he says that 

nothing is happening and no meetings are taking place. The Department of Labour through the Deputy 

Minister and through the Industrial Relations Branch has been in regular touch with the principals involved. 

While at the present moment there is no immediate plan for a meeting to take place of the parties to bring 

them back to the table, we are assuming that in the not too distant future there will be a firming up of 

positions to the point where they will return to the bargaining table. 

 

I don't have anything further to add other than that the Department of Labour is bending every effort to see to 

it that there is no stone left unturned with respect to the construction industry and the building trades 

involved. We will keep the House informed as the matter develops. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, I find this attitude extremely strange. 

 

The nursing profession went on strike one day. The Minister of Health got up and put the heat on them and 

demanded that they go back to work. The reason, of course, was because they didn't join CUPE, they joined 

their own union. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Will you state your question please, not a statement. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Is the Minister going to ask the construction industry and the workers in the 

construction industry to go back to work and take the same attitude as the Minister of Health or is he going 

to sit idly by and do nothing. Millions of dollars worth of construction projects are at a standstill, thousands 

of employees are out of work and now from what I understand they are concerned, they are not getting a pay 

cheque. They are 

 



 

May 8, 1974 

 

 

2989 

disturbed about the possibility of the strike going on for weeks and weeks. And the Minister of Labour sits 

there and does absolutely nothing, while the Minister of Health in one day . . . 

 

MR. SNYDER: — We have the continual editorializing by the Member opposite, he never makes a point in 

this House, he never asks a question without an editorial comment. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the Members to ask questions and not make statements. 

 

MR. McISAAC: — The Member did ask a question. It would be nice if the Minister would answer. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is: Is the Minister going to continue to sit on his butt 

and do absolutely nothing about the construction industry while the Government attacks the nursing 

profession after the first day of the strike? 

 

MR. SNYDER: — The gentleman opposite is a master of oversimplification and I suppose he knows so 

little about industrial relations or the construction industry that he isn't aware of the complexity of the 

construction industry. There is no indication at this time that an outside mediator or a person who would act 

in that capacity would serve any useful purpose. 

 

I believe both parties have indicated a confidence in the Department of Labour and the conciliation services 

that are being provided. We think some movements are being made and we feel at this point in time an 

outside mediator, keeping in mind the wishes of both parties involved in this dispute, an outside mediator 

would not serve a useful purpose. 

 

There are some plans that are being made that I don't propose at this stage to reveal to the House. But we are 

as interested and as concerned, probably more concerned than the Members opposite in seeing that a solution 

is reached to the problem. 

 

PRO-RATIONING OF POTASH 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Is the Government planning to put an end to pro-rationing of 

potash? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Any Government policy in that area will be 

announced in due course. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Surely you can answer the question. Is the Government planning, and if so, when will 

you announce your plans about putting an end to pro-rationing of potash? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I said 

 



 

May 8, 1974 

 

2990 

before, the Government is planning many things. The Government will announce the results of its planning 

in due course, when the Government feels it is an appropriate time to so announce. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Is the Government also planning that they will announce in due course to increase very 

sharply the royalty or the tax on the potash — on the potash industry? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — The same answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 133 — an Act respecting 

Representation in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise to introduce and move second reading of Bill 133, an Act respecting 

Representation in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to make any lengthy speech at all with respect to this Bill. I believe that most of 

the issues have already been debated at the time of the boundaries resolution. 

 

This Bill embodies in statute what the actual recommendations of the Maguire Commission on Independent 

Boundaries was with respect to the constituencies. The ridings are set out there according to the schedule 

which has been taken identically out of the report of Mr. Justice Maguire. 

 

There will be extensive House amendments to the Bill. These House amendments, I am advised, are the 

result of technical errors in the descriptions of the constituencies. I refer to surveyor description errors in 

terms of boundary points and townships and so forth. The officials have advised me that there is no change 

in the intent or in the description or in the effect of the boundaries whatsoever. That all of these House 

amendments are those that basically make it technically more correct. 

 

In fact I have received a letter form the Hon. Mr. Justice P.H. Maguire of the Court of Appeal and he says 

this in the letter which I should like to read into the record dated May 1, 1974. He writes: 

 

Dear Mr. Minister. I am advised that you wish to receive confirmation of the fact that the 

Commission approves and accepts a number of changes in boundary descriptions which were 

proposed. I understand by an engineer, Mr. Babiuck, these recommending changes which do 

not in fact make any change in boundaries were considered and checked by the Saskatchewan 

Land Surveyor engaged by the Commission for this work. And following approval by him 

were considered to be proper and in many instances somewhat better in the actual 

description. I am pleased therefore to confirm to you that these changes are in order. 

 

This matter was first brought to my attention by Mr. J.E. Friesen, Q.C., and I therefore think 

it proper to forward 

 



 

May 8, 1974 

 

 

2991 

to you a copy of my letter to Mr. Friesen, of January 28,1974. Yours sincerely, Mr. Justice 

P.H. Maguire. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don't think anything else can be said with respect to this Bill. This Bill will come into 

effect when on the day next following, the day on which the 17th Legislative Assembly is dissolved or is 

determined by the effluxion of time. We work in the meantime on the old boundaries. We represent the old 

boundaries. But the new boundaries will come into play on the day of dissolution or otherwise through the 

effluxion of time. 

 

There will be, as I say, these series of House amendments. I should advise that I have given a copy of these 

proposed House amendments to the Liberal Party opposite so that they can take a look at them, to double 

check them. I haven't personally checked them myself, but I have confidence in my officials and Mr. Justice 

Maguire that there is no change in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the only words I'd like to say and I, therefore, should like to move second reading of 

Bill 133. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. A OLIVER (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to this House some 20 

Grade Eleven students from Mankota High School, located in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 

Mrs. Picard. They have had a tour of various places in the city. I hope that they find the deliberations of the 

Committee of the Whole and later on, Committee of Finance, of an educational value to them. And you will 

see how sometimes the House operates rather informally and sometimes rather formally. This is one of the 

informal times. I hope your stay will be educational and you have a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:31 o’clock p.m. 

 


