
























































Hansard: March 21, 1974


1681 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

34th Day 
 

Thursday, March 21, 1974 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. E. C. Whelan (Regina North West): — It is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
Members of this Assembly 36 Grade Four students from the Al Pickard School in Regina North West. 
These visitors are seated in the west gallery with their teacher, Mr. Craig. On behalf of all Members may 
I say to this group welcome and may your visit here be pleasant, memorable and educational. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan — Leon McAuley 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier 
(Mr. Blakeney). I listened to a rather disturbing news announcement on the 1:00 o’clock news when a 
Mr. Leon McAuley, who was elected in the northern municipal council, was accused by Mr. Daniels of 
having been promoted by, and received assistance from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. He 
claimed the Government was providing air travel and other campaign assistance against other candidates 
in running for that position in the municipal advisory board. I would like to ask the Premier is it a fact 
that Mr. McAuley is working for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and secondly, is it a fact 
that the NP Government and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in particular, is actively 
promoting this candidate by giving him free flying time and other assistance in a democratic election? 
 
Hon. A. E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the question asked by the Hon. Member is one which 
the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan might be able to answer off hand. I certainly cannot. I am not 
informed whether the candidate was an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan, nor whether or 
not he obtained any assistance from the Government of Saskatchewan. All I can do is suggest to the 
Hon. Member that if he would like to provide his question to me I will have it researched or alternatively 
if he wishes to put it on the Order Paper I would attempt to find the answer. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I can appreciate perhaps the Premier not 
having the knowledge at this time but I think everybody in this House will recognize the gravity of the 
charge of Mr. Daniels. If it is a fact, it then makes the people of northern Saskatchewan nothing but 
puppets to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I should like to ask the Premier if he would hold 
an immediate investigation and contact the officials of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and 
find out if they did provide free air travel for one candidate and not other candidates in this election and 
then report to the House as soon as possible. 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1682 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I know that Hon. Members will appreciate that following elections there 
are frequently charges. I don’t know whether or not we can provide an immediate investigation every 
time anyone makes a charge without providing some information to back up the charge. If there is 
information which requires investigation, fine; we will certainly do so. It has been alleged for example 
that when the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) was an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan 
he flew around the North prior to elections on government time and with government aircraft and I 
know that he would reject any suggestion that there was any impropriety there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — For all I know this candidate was an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
simply don’t know that. But if he flew about the North in the discharge of his duties as other people 
have done in the past I know that there would be no more suggestion of impropriety than there has been 
in the past. But we can certainly look into this and see whether or not there is any substance to the 
allegations apparently made on the news broadcast. 
 

Printing of Blues and Whites 
 
Mr. A. R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Government Services (Mr. Brockelbank). I received a Return the other day showing that the blues and 
whites, the Routine Proceedings and Orders of the Day, are being printed by Service Printing. I should 
like to ask the Minister in charge of Government Services if this job was put out for tender in the normal 
fashion or whether it was handed to them on a silver platter? 
 
Hon. J. E. Brockelbank (Minister of Government Services): — Neither, Mr. Speaker. It was not 
handed on a silver platter nor was it put out to tender and that is the way the whites and the blues 
printing has been done for many, many years as I understand it. 
 
Mr. Guy: — A supplementary question. Is Service Printing the company that‘s owned solely by the 
NDP? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I wonder if the Minister would like to reconsider and tell us the truth this time. 
 

Potential Flooding in Regina 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question 
for the Minister of Environment (Mr. Byers) or the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) in the absence 
of the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood). I am sure all Members share my concern with the bad 
weather we are having that the threat of a flood in Regina and in Saskatchewan is 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1683 

Increasing ever more. The Ministers have given advice to this Assembly that everything possible is 
being done to prevent the recurrence of a flood although as far as I am concerned they have given very 
few particulars. I would now like to ask either one of the Ministers whether or not they can assure me 
whether the level of the dyking in Regina will be increased by sandbags or other methods immediately 
or at least before the flood comes if it does come? 
 
Hon. N. E. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — As I have pointed out to the House on previous 
occasions that the Department of the Environment is heading up a co-ordinating committee of city 
officials, Wascana Centre Authority, SPC and so on to cope with flood control measures within the city 
of Regina. The city of Regina has devised a six-point action plan to cope with the flood and I understand 
that through the City Engineer‘s Department they are doing everything possible to man the dykes and to 
identify weak spots and to have sandbags and other corrective measures in place and that work is well 
under way. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I‘m not sure the Minister has answered the question. Perhaps the Minister of 
Agriculture could try and answer it. Are the level of the dykes going to be increased or not? Surely you 
can say yes or no. I‘d rather hoped the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) would have answered in the 
first place. 
 
Mr. Byers: — Steps to improve the dykes within the city of Regina are being undertaken by the city of 
Regina. As part of the action plan to cope with the flood problems in the city of Regina, the city has 
accepted that responsibility. They are, I am advised, making what improvements they consider necessary 
on the dykes to minimize any flooding in the flood plain area. How many shovelsful of dirt and how 
many bags of sand, how many cubic yards of dirt they are moving, we do not have all those particulars 
on hand. They assure us that they are doing that and I am sure that when we have that assurance from 
the city of Regina that that ought to console the Member for Lakeview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m not trying to answer questions for the 
Minister but I might report to the Member for Lakeview that we sat for three hours this morning as a 
co-ordinating committee; taking in the Provincial Government, the city, various department heads, also 
organizations such as the Frontiersmen, the RCMP and others. There must have been at least 35 
representatives there and I might say that they have it well in hand. We are doing what we can from the 
city‘s standpoint. We have 100,000 bags that we can use for dyking, also for the areas MLAs have 
mentioned. I‘m sure that our City Engineer has things well in hand. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Is that in the same category as cleaning the streets? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, I want to point out to the House that questions 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1684 

of Private Members are not permitted. Questions of the city should be asked at City Hall and not in this 
Legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I noticed today that you 
permitted two private Members to get up and make statements before the Orders of the Day. Is this to be 
the normal procedure? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It is not a practised procedure. I think every day I have permitted Members to get up 
and make statements before they ask their questions, including the Member for Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the 
Protection of Privacy. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a privilege and a great pleasure to introduce Bill No. 1, a Privacy Act 
for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposed Privacy Bill is essentially the draft Act which is presently under the 
consideration of the Conference of the Commissioners on Uniformity of Legislation in Canada. I must 
tell the Members also that it‘s a Bill which is based largely on the Privacy Acts which are presently in 
existence in British Columbia and in Manitoba. 
 
The basic objective of this Act is to provide for, quite obviously, the protection of privacy of individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concept of privacy is a complicated one, charged with many emotional issues. Privacy 
stated in simple terms is really a right to be left alone, both in a physical sense and I suppose in a 
psychological sense. 
 
The Claim of privacy or the claim to privacy is a relatively recent phenomenon. During the days of the 
early settlers, primary emphasis was placed on social cohesion and on the needs of the community. 
Individual claims to stand apart were by and large denied, and privacy was considered to be an 
anti-social force. However, as the population of the country grew and life became more complex and in 
a technological world, we traded the physical and mental solitude of the country for the hustle and bustle 
of what now has become to a large extent an accepted way or urban life. This way of life created the 
demand for privacy. 
 
Unfortunately, the common law has not kept pace with the demands of modern day society, and has 
failed to recognize the individual’s right to privacy. Accordingly, we are proposing the creation of such 
a right in this Bill, The Privacy Act, 1974. 
 
As privacy is not and cannot be an absolute condition, wide discretion is given to the court in 
determining what facts 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1685 

will constitute violation of privacy. It’s our hope that this Act will recognize an individual’s right to 
freedom of movement, freedom from surveillance, freedom to enjoy the solitude and the privacy of his 
own home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might move into a more detailed description of some of the provisions of the Bill. 
 
First of all, a word or two about Sections 2 and 3. In order to accomplish the objectives of this Act, 
Section 2 enables a person to bring an action, without proof of damage, for the wilful violation of his 
privacy. When this Privacy Act was reviewed by the Conference of Commissioners on the Uniformity of 
Laws at Quebec in 1972 a number of the Commissioners were assigned the task of preparing a definition 
of privacy. They asked that a definition of privacy be presented at the next meeting of the 
Commissioners. 
 
I think that we all share some concern about what might be an indefinite or somewhat general 
description of privacy. When the Commissioners met, in fact, in Victoria in August of 1973, the most 
recent of the meetings, the conference was informed by its officers that no totally satisfactory definition 
of privacy could be found. Instead, the British Columbia and Manitoba approach was adopted by the 
Commissioners of Uniformity and examples of violations for privacy were set out and this is what this 
Bill does. Examples of violation of privacy are set out in the proposed legislation. 
 
These examples are to be found in Section 3 of the Bill, which are before the Members of the 
Legislature. Accordingly proof that there has been, for example, auditory or visual surveillance by any 
means, including eavesdropping, watching, spying, besetting or following, or proof that there has been 
listening to or recording a conversation in which a person participates, or proof that there is the use of 
the name or likeness or voice of a person, for the purposes of advertising or promoting sales if in the 
course of the use of letters or diaries or other personal documents of a person. In these examples the Bill 
says that there will be a violation of privacy. 
 
The Act provides that violations of privacy are not confined strictly to the foregoing examples, because 
of the very obvious difficulty in being comprehensive or having a nice tight definition of privacy. The 
court of course, is not restricted as to what facts will or will not constitute a violation of privacy. This, in 
the case of a hearing, will be determined by the courts. 
 
Now a word about Section 4. Section 4 of the Act outlines exceptions to the so-called violation of 
privacy. These are exceptions on which the Act would not apply. Subsection 1 provides that acts, 
conduct or publications which are for example: (a) consented to; (b) which are incidental to the exercise 
of a lawful right of defence of person or property; (c) which are authorized or required under a law in 
force in the province or by any process of a court; (d) where the actions are that of a Peace Officer 
acting in the course and within the scope of his duty or a public officer engaged in an investigation 
within the scope of his duty. These are examples which shall not constitute a violation of privacy. 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1686 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to advise the Members of the House that I shall also be proposing a House 
amendment to this Bill. The House amendment which I intend to propose for the consideration of the 
Members provides yet a fifth exemption, which means that it shall not be a violation of privacy. An 
exemption which would do as follows: persons engaged in news gathering for a news media where the 
act, conduct or publication in issue is reasonable and necessary for, and incidental to, the ordinary news 
gathering activities, will be exempt from the provisions of this Act. 
 
Subsection 2 of Section 4 of Bill No. 1 provides a further exemption, or if you will, the other side of the 
coin to the House amendment with respect to news media that I have just said. 
 
Subsection 2 of Section 4 provides the exemption in the publication by the news media of matters of 
public interest or fair comment on matters of public interest and publications which are privileged within 
the law are not within the provisions of this Bill. 
 
So that to summarize, anything which falls within the public interest area or is fair comment on matters 
of public interest (and the phrase “fair comment” is well understood by the lawyers and the judiciary) 
are exempt as not being violations of privacy. 
 
I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is the opinion of the law officers in my Department that 
subsection 1 of Section 4 as it appears now in the Bill (that’s the public interest, fair comment section 
that I have read) would not in any way restrict the conduct of news media in this province in reporting 
any matter of public interest to the public. This is the opinion of the lawyers. Similar legislation, I would 
remind all the Members, has now been in force in British Columbia since 1968 in almost similar or 
identical wording, and in Manitoba since 1970 and no restrictions have been felt by the news media and 
no restrictions have been communicated, I am advised, to the officials in those provinces and certainly 
not to myself. 
 
So the Bill has worked in British Columbia since 1968 without any difficulties in this area and in 
Manitoba since 1970. And as I say, I think the present Bill as worded under Section 4 is adequate to 
protect the news media. However, to further insure that problems do not arise, I am proposing this 
House amendment which I have already told you about, which will specifically relate to the news media 
and say that the Bill does not apply to them. 
 
I would also, Mr. Speaker, expressly like to refute the allegation that freedom of the press may be 
compromised by the Bill as it was originally tabled before this House. I would refute this because under 
new clause (e) of subsection 1 of Section 4 the House amendment will make it abundantly clear that 
news media personnel may engage in all reasonable and necessary news gathering activities. Secondly, 
as I’ve said again, subsection 2 of Section 4 of Bill No. 1 expressly states that the newspapers may 
publish matter of public interest and fair comment on matters of public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Bill was first tabled there was a news report which related to the matter of 
revelation of the sources of news. With respect to the allegation that this Act 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1687 

will compel the news media to reveal the names of their news sources, I would merely point out to the 
Members of the House that this is already the long-standing present condition of the common law, in 
this province, in Canada, the United Kingdom, all commonlaw countries. For example, in a defamation 
action, a newspaper defendant is presently compellable under the rules of law relating to examinations 
for discovery or testimony at trials to reveal the source of a defamatory statement or pay the 
consequences. That is the present law. This Bill does not inject any new principle in this area of the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a word or two on Section 5. Section 5 provides that actions for violation of privacy shall be 
taken in the Court of Queen’s Bench. I think the reasoning for that is straight forward. Court of Queen’s 
Bench is the superior trial division in the Province of Saskatchewan and does give adequate safeguards 
to the people involved. 
 
Section 6 provides criteria to be followed in determining whether there has been a violation of privacy. 
Again, a wide discretion has been given to the court in that the nature and degree of privacy to which an 
individual is entitled is that which is reasonable in all the circumstances. Some will say — what does 
this mean? And it is impossible for Legislators to say with absolute precision what this does mean. But 
as all Hon. Members will know in the charge of negligence, what is the standard of care, what is the 
duty owed to the parties involved, what is reasonable under all the circumstances. And as we have given 
the trust and confidence to the Queen’s Bench Court of this province in matters such as negligence, 
thousands of dollars in defamation suits and the like, so, too, I say to the Hon. Members of this House, 
we can similarly place confidence in the Queen’s Bench Court in defining the degree of privacy which is 
reasonable under all the circumstances. 
 
Section 6 contains examples of relevant criteria that a court could consider criteria of the reasonableness 
and the acts relating to privacy and the violation of it. 
 
For example, the nature and frequency of the act, conduct or publication. Or further, the effect of the act, 
conduct or publication on the health and welfare, or the social, business or financial position of a person 
whose privacy has been violated. Or further, the relationship between the parties to the action, or further 
yet, the conduct of the parties before and after the act, conduct or publication, including any apology 
made by the prospective defendant. 
 
I believe that these are specific examples and guidelines for a Court of Queen’s Bench, the superior 
court of this province upon which to make a reasonable ruling. 
 
Section 7 of the Act sets out the remedies which are available to a person whose privacy it has been 
found by a court, has been violated and includes such things as damages, an injunction, an order to 
account for any profits that have accrued or that may accrue to the defendant as a result of the violation 
of privacy of the plaintiff. I might stop here to say that while we have perhaps not any widespread 
evidence or no evidence of industrial espionage that exists in Saskatchewan the fact of the matter is, that 
this is a practice which is growing with the sophistication of technological equipment and I believe that 
the potential damage that can exist to industries 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1688 

and to individuals is something that we should protect by setting up this cause of action. 
 
Another example of an order which can be made by the court is an order that the defendant deliver all 
articles or documents that come into his possession by reasons of the violation of privacy, if he has 
obtained them by wrongful or criminal activities. Or such other relief as would appear to be necessary 
under all the circumstances which are presented to the court. 
 
Section 8, Mr. Speaker, provides that any right of action under this Act is in addition to any other right 
or remedy available under the common law or other legislation. 
 
Section 9 places a limitation period on the time within which an action may be commenced for violation 
of privacy. The time prescribed is two years from the date of discovery of the alleged violation of 
privacy. 
 
Section 10 provides that a right of action for a violation of privacy is extinguished by the death of the 
person who has the right of action under this Act. 
 
Section 11 provides that the Crown will be bound by provisions of this Act. 
 
Section 12 provides that this Act comes into force on the date of proclamation by 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, as I indicated in my opening remarks, the principle of this Bill is to create a 
civil right to privacy as a part of the laws of this country and a part of laws of this province. The purpose 
of this Bill is to provide individual freedoms for individuals in society. The purpose of this Bill is to 
enhance the civil rights of all of us in this society. The Federal Government which has legislative 
jurisdiction over the criminal law, has reacted. The Federal Liberal Government is to be congratulated 
because they outlawed under criminal laws some aspects of this invasion of privacy, thanks to Otto 
Lang, the Minister of Justice. Now, it’s incumbent upon us, as provincial legislators to follow the lead 
and to make concurrent provincial legislation because we have the power over civil matters to ensure 
this civil right, to provide this civil cause of action in the case of violations of privacy, to be 
complementary to the Federal laws enacted by the Liberal Government in order to ensure that the right 
to privacy is a right that is enjoyed by all the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 1 and set up The Privacy Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — This Bill makes it a cause 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1689 

of action and creates a lawsuit when there is absolutely no damage as is stated by paragraph 2 of the 
Bill. More than that, it is a mischievous and frivolous Bill. For example, Section 3 (b) says in part that 
listening to a conversation in which a person participates is evidence of the violation of the privacy of 
that person. That means that if two people are in conversation and even if you only hear one of them, 
both of them can sue you. There are many cases where this can happen. If you lean forward in the bus 
the people talking ahead of you can sue you. And wilfully adds nothing to it because if you know you 
are in the bus and if you know you are leaning forward, that is wilfully. You can be sued as a result of 
this Bill if the other people think you are listening. Perhaps you are daydreaming and maybe you weren’t 
listening at all, you can be sued if it looks as if you are listening. Who can say whether or not you 
actually heard what was said. 
 
There are a very few good things about the Bill. It is wrong to use someone’s picture or voice for sales 
promotion. But the good things in the Bill are quite frankly already protected in the law. We have ample 
protections of privacy. We have laws against libel and slander. It is against the law for example to 
declare that a company or a person is bankrupt if they are not bankrupt. The privacy of your income tax 
return is protected as is the privacy of numerous government documents and reports and returns. There 
are laws to protect people against interference with the mail. You are not allowed to interfere with the 
post. Credit bureaus are not allowed to put out false reports about you. The Federal Government has, as 
the Attorney General indicated, just passed a law against electronic eavesdropping and wiretapping. 
 
Do we need these laws? The fact is, we do not. This will encourage frivolous law suits, it won’t please 
the lawyers, of course, because they have better things to do than to horse around with these things. We 
do not need this law. It is a frilly-dilly type of Bill. It is the kind of a Bill brought in by a Government 
that has run out of all other ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no demand for this Bill. There is really no requirement for this Bill. I draw 
attention of the House to the fact that there is a great deal of difference between defamation on the one 
hand and slander and loss of privacy. The libel and slander laws are already protected by statute in 
Saskatchewan and the laws which require disclosure in defamation cases, libel and slander cases, do not 
necessarily apply to The Privacy Act. And the protections that the news media have under libel and 
slander are not necessarily applicable here, but more than that, the example given by the Hon. Attorney 
General does not apply to privacy because they are two entirely opposite things. 
 
Libel and slander is a case where somebody says or does something which causes other people to think 
poorly about you. Privacy is where you are upset yourself over something. It is an entirely opposite 
situation. Privacy invasion causes you to think poorly about the situation, libel and slander causes 
someone else to think poorly of you. 
 
The laws are not the same at all. I must say that if this is what the Committee on the Uniformity of Laws 
is doing, then we might just as well get rid of that Committee because obviously they have run through 
all the good they can do. 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1690 

This Bill will encourage anti-social behavior. The ability to sue someone else without any loss or 
damage whatsoever is a frivolous thing to bring into the law. This, as one of the Members said, is 
progressive legislation. It is clearly 100 years ahead of any industry being brought into Saskatchewan. 
 
If there was a problem with industrial espionage, no question about it, laws specifically directed to that 
point would be quite in order and we would support such proposed laws. Industrial espionage in 
Saskatchewan is like spying on Switzerland to determine what their war plans might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the addition of the House amendment described by the Attorney General will of course 
require some study. It may be that this might involve some change in attitude by Members of the 
Opposition, it will not change my attitude because I am opposed to the Bill, even with this addition to 
the Bill. 
 
It makes an exemption, as I understand the proposal of the Hon. Attorney General, it makes an 
exemption giving certain rights to the news media that other people do not have. I might say that we 
tend to welcome the change. And it proves, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition has done a lot of good up 
until now in this House and I congratulate the Attorney General for listening to us once in a while 
because this was the first Bill presented to this Legislature when it opened last November and my 
opposition was shortly thereafter made known. It is obvious that the opposition which developed 
between that time and this has resulted in the proposed amendments by the Hon. Attorney General and 
obviously he is listening, obviously we are doing our job. It does indicate to me that if there is a special 
exemption for the Press it may be that they now have more rights than the ordinary citizen. For example, 
if fair comment by news media is exempt, why is not fair comment on matters of public interest by 
ordinary citizens exempt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacLeod: — If newspapers are allowed to invade someone’s privacy on matters of public interest, 
why am I not entitled to do the same thing? Because obviously it is a matter of public interest. 
 
The amendment, as I understand it (and of course we don’t have it in front of us), but as I understand it, 
proposes to cater to the Press because of the opposition which has been created and I might say that we 
believe that the Press is the one fundamental defence of our freedom in this Legislature, I believe and 
support that amendment, except to the extent that it gives them more rights than I have as a private 
citizen. It seems to me that the Hon. Attorney General has created a hodge-podge, a frilly-dilly 
mischievous kind of legislation. Of course, it is going to require some additional study by the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1691 

 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The 
Dependents’ Relief Act (No. 2). 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this is an amendment to The Dependents’ Relief Act (No. 2). The Act is being 
amended by adding a new section 15 (a) to the Bill. The purpose of which is to restrict the right of an 
executor or administrator to distribute the estate for a period of six months following letters probate or 
administration, unless all the dependents consent or the court orders otherwise. 
 
This amendment is necessary to protect the rights of dependents. A recent court decision by the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal held that as the present Act does not prohibit distribution, the executor 
was free to distribute the estate during the six month period given to a dependent to apply for an order 
under the Act. The intent of the Act was to allow a dependent a period of six months in which to apply. 
Most members of the legal profession felt that the present Act implied that distribution could not take 
place except subject to the right of the dependent to apply within the six months. However, the court, in 
this recent court case, has ruled otherwise. 
 
The proposed amendment is patterned on the existing Alberta provision dealing with the same problem. 
 
If this amendment is not passed, a dependent may well have a hollow right under the present provisions 
of the Act. An executor or administrator can by a speedy distribution of the assets completely defeat the 
rights of a dependent. While a dependent can launch an application immediately in some cases, such is 
not possible in every case. This is particularly true where a person has been certified incompetent, for 
example, to manage his affairs. In these cases it often takes several weeks before the administrator of 
estates becomes aware of the fact that a person under his care may be entitled to apply for an order for 
relief. In the case before the Appeal Court, this case was the In Re Giles Estate, 1973 for WWR at Page 
561. In this case, Mrs. Giles lost her rights, even though she applied within the six month period 
provided by the Act. The assets simply were distributed. Therefore, the amendments to The Dependents’ 
Relief Act (No. 2) will provide the realization of the intent of the law, namely that there is six months 
before the distribution of the assets can take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 65, a Bill to amend The Dependents’ Relief Act. 
 
Mr. K. R. MacLeod (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, on this Bill the intention is to protect 
dependents who are not otherwise protected by the will, I presume. The unfortunate part of the problem 
with the Government (and the law profession) finds itself in, is that if you distribute the estate speedily, 
you may defeat some rights that exist; if you don’t do it you are subject to criticism. This will create one 
of two things, either delay in the administration of an estate or alternatively, additional expenses in the 
administration of the estates because you must round up all consents, that is, consents of all beneficiaries 
and those who might be persons claiming under The Dependents’ Relief Act or else you have got to go 
to court and get a court order allowing you to 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1692 

distribute the estate. It will either cause delay or additional expense and in some cases both. 
 
On the other hand, of course, there is a very recognizable problem which has been outlined by the 
Attorney General. And that is if a man should choose to leave his property to a close friend, named say, 
Annabel and his wife is named Susie, it is possible that the estate may be wound up in a hurry and given 
to Annabel before Susie can get into the courts to stop this procedure. The intention is to protect 
dependents, but it will have some unfortunate side effects. I have no doubt that the Law Society and the 
Attorney General’s Department will keep a close eye on this. We are not completely satisfied with the 
proposal. On the other hand we recognize what they are trying to do. 
 
We therefore, do not oppose this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce amendments to Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Evidence Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce amendments to Bill No. 68 — The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act. There are only two amendments but let me break them up in this way. First 
is Section 39 (b) of The Saskatchewan Evidence Act, any professional report purporting to be signed by 
a duly qualified medical or chiropractic practitioner, licensed to practice in any part of Canada, may be 
admissible in evidence without proof of his signature or qualifications as being licensed. 
 
In 1972, Section 30 (b) was added to the Act allowing a mental or chiropractic report to be admissible, 
with leave of the court and giving the court the discretionary power to award costs against the party to 
an action who requires a medical or chiropractic practitioner to give evidence where the court is of the 
opinion that the evidence could have been produced just as effectively by a written report. We have 
received representations from the practising bar that this Section should be extended to also provide to 
dental surgeons the same privilege which it does to chiropractic or medical practitioners. This 
amendment then will allow dental surgeons to also follow the same procedure which is now being 
followed by medical practitioners, namely in filing the report by written document without proof of 
signature or qualifications. There is a safeguard mechanism which is built into The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Act in case one party objects or wants to cross-examine the professional. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment will be a move towards improving the court efficiency and 
will be supported hopefully by all Members on those grounds. 
 
A word or two about subsection (2) of Section 33 of the Bill, which is the second general amendment. 
This, I think, is probably the more important of the two. What now appears as Section 33, sub (2) of The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act was first enacted in 1964 by Section 3 of the Statutes of Saskatchewan. The 
main purpose of that 1964 amendment to The Saskatchewan Evidence Act was to ensure that the 
accused in a prosecution of an offence against provincial law would not be made compellable 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1693 

to give evidence against himself. That 1964 amendment made the law of evidence in respect of 
prosecution of provincial offences more consistent with the law of evidence in respect of a prosecution 
in the criminal area or criminal offence. 
 
What now appears as Section 33 sub (1) of The Children of Unmarried Parents Act, 1973, is identical in 
all material respects to what was originally enacted as Section 125 of The Child Welfare Act, back in 
1946, and it has reappeared unchanged in subsequent revisions and consolidations of that Act, namely 
The Children of Unmarried Parents Act, 1946. It has at all times been the intention of the Government, 
and certainly the Department of Welfare and now the Department of Social Services that what appears 
as Section 33 sub (1) of The Children of Unmarried Parents Act, 1946, now 1973, would be the 
controlling provision in respect of the competency and the compellability of an alleged or an adjudged 
father in any filiation proceedings. 
 
The Department of the Attorney General agrees that this should be so. Filiation proceedings under The 
Children of Unmarried Parents Act are really civil proceedings rather than prosecution by way of 
offence under a provincial statute. By virtue of Section 33 sub (1) of The Saskatchewan Evidence Act 
the defendant in civil proceedings is a competent and compellable witness and his attendance to testify 
can be compelled by any party to that civil proceeding. 
 
A Court of Queen’s Bench decision held that that Section 32 sub (2) of The Saskatchewan Evidence Act 
applied to filiation proceedings as well and that it was the controlling provision in respect of the 
compellability of an alleged father. That same decision held that Section 33 sub (2) of The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act restricted the compellability of the alleged father compelling him to give 
evidence relating to his ability to pay only. This Court of Queen’s Bench decision is binding on Judges 
of the District Court, and Judges of the Magistrates Court before whom the trial and actions of The 
Children of Unmarried Parents Act, 1973 are held. The effect of the decision is to prevent Section 33 (1) 
OF The Children of Unmarried Parents Act from being the controlling provision and making the alleged 
father compellable to give evidence both in respect of his ability to pay and his liability to pay. 
 
Surely the social objective of this amendment to Section 33 (2) of The Saskatchewan Evidence Act is 
desirable. It ensures that The Children of Unmarried Parents Act and in particular Section 33 (1) is the 
paramount provision related to the compellability of an alleged or an adjudged putative father. This 
amendment is consequential upon and complementary to The Children of Unmarried Parents Act. This 
amendment will provide clearly that an application for a filiation order that in this case an alleged father 
shall be competent and compellable as a witness for all purposes, not only ability to pay but liability for 
all purposes relative to the application and that in proceedings to vary or enforce a filiation order, an 
adjudged father shall also be competent and compellable for all purposes relevant to the proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this to be a socially desirable objective and I would move second reading of Bill 
No. 68. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1694 

Hon. D. M. Cody (Minister of Co-operatives) moved second reading of Bill No. 69 — An Act to 
amend The Co-operative Associations Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, before getting into the details of the proposed amendment to The Co-operative 
Associations Act a bit of background information would appear to be in order. For some of the reasons 
for requesting the amendments, reference will first be made to the recent growth and development of 
consumer co-operatives in Saskatchewan. There are 221 co-operatives engaged in the retail business as 
of March 31st, 1973. This number has diminished slightly I must admit over the past year, however, a 
co-operative service is being provided to the members in all cities, both towns, villages and rural areas 
in Saskatchewan today. The reduction in numbers is due to amalgamation with larger organizations, a 
trend towards local centralization. 
 
It is interesting to note that while the numbers have decreased slightly, the sales volume continues to 
increase. Last year consumer co-operatives enjoyed sales at retail of over $162 million. This compares 
with sales of $146 million the previous year and $118 million ten years ago. It is safe to say that 
consumer co-operatives in Saskatchewan will enjoy sales and earnings in 1974 never before achieved. 
 
Development in the retail segment of the co-operative movement is now serving 301,766 members in 
this province. This is a significant figure, Mr. Speaker, considering the population which consists mainly 
of family groups. There is a trend shaping up these days of high living and a segment of people of our 
province who are in the underprivileged category are interested in starting direct charge co-operatives 
patterned along the COPRIX development in eastern Canada and the warehouse approach used in 
Ottawa. For example, existing co-operatives are expanding services where necessary in order to provide 
a wider range of commodities for the membership at large. 
 
While the retail sales achieved by co-operatives represent a relatively small part of the retail business 
done in Saskatchewan, co-operatives have nevertheless reached the plateau of big business. An awful 
word for the Members opposite. Keeping abreast with the complexities of big business and modern 
trends requires certain changes from time to time. 
 
Co-operative members and directors in particular are aware of the changing times and feel that some 
changes in the co-operative legislation are desirable at this time. Consequently the changes that you have 
before you have been presented on behalf of the locals and the people themselves. For example, 
technology change certainly is necessary as requirements that were deemed essential ten years ago may 
now need changing or perhaps dispensed with altogether. 
 
Some of the amendments merely change terminology, while others only make certain provisions clearer 
through better legal terminology. I shall outline some of the more important amendments for you. A 
provision in the Act that has caused some concern is that from time to time when a person becomes a 
member the present provision in Section 21 of The Co-operative Associations Act is specific as to the 
time in which this member becomes a member. When his written application for membership 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1695 

has been approved by resolution and recorded in the minutes of the Association, the date is not 
retroactive. The amendment in this instance provides that if the Board does not meet and deal with the 
member’s application for a month or more, as the case may be, the Board can, by resolution, approve the 
application as at the date of the application, which has a good deal of merit. The member under the new 
provisions would receive credit for the purchases that were made and had been made prior to the date of 
the application being approved. 
 
The Co-operative Association Act now provides that each member is entitled to receive a statement of 
his equity and other amounts held to his credit each year. The amendment proposes that if the 
Association has not made an allocation in any year due essentially to having suffered a net loss in which 
case the statement of his equity would not have to be changed from the previous year, then the 
Association would not be obliged to furnish a statement unless it is requested by the member. 
 
There are also other instances where any member can inspect the register for a list of members at all 
reasonable times during the office hours of the Association. Due to computer prepared lists of members 
the data included is more extensive than just shareholdings. There is personal information including 
such as purchases, etc. 
 
The amendment to Section 25, subsection (3) provides that an Association has seven days to advise 
members whether another member is a member of the Association or not. 
 
Over the years Section 30 of the Act appears to have been too restrictive in certain areas. It deals with 
members who want to withdraw from membership in an Association, in which case they are entitled to 
receive all the share capital and all other equities held in the Association. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this 
has been interpreted to include investments made by a member in co-operative debentures and other 
securities held that have a due date. In other words there is a contractual obligation involved. The 
amendment in this Section would essentially make the following changes: (a) money invested under a 
contractual obligation for example, debentures and savings certificates would not have to be paid out 
immediately but would be due and payable on maturity; (b) the Board could limit the total redemption of 
shares to five per cent of total paid up shares in any one year, depending of course on the financial 
position of the Association; (c) if requested equities exceeding $100 the Board of Directors would have 
the option of repurchasing the shares over a period of five years, here again depending on the financial 
position of the Association; (e) the last change provides that the Board may defer payment if in their 
opinion it was considered to be in the best interest of the members. 
 
The changes to this Section are considered to give a bit more protection to the Association, certainly as 
they relate to money invested with a due date. 
 
The Canada Co-operative Association Act which was passed fairly recently contained some provisions 
that are not included in The Co-operative Associations Act of Saskatchewan. These are more or less of a 
procedural nature and some changes to The Co-operatives Association Act have to be processed to 
arrive at some conformity with the Federal Co-operative Associations Act. The deviation is found in 
Section 55 subsection (2) which 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1696 

Provides that an Association may publish notices of meetings in a local newspaper rather than mailing a 
notice card to each member. The present provisions of Section 55, subsection (2) are such that an 
Association could do this if it had a supplemental by-law to provide for calling meetings by newspaper 
notice. The amendment to the Act gives the Association this authority without having to pass a by-law. 
 
New Section 55 (3) provides that special business or special resolutions that will be presented at a 
meeting will have to be included in the newspaper notice of the meeting. 
 
An amendment to Section 70 will make it possible for the Directors to examine regularly the credit 
transaction of the Association for cause to have them examined on the Board’s behalf. The implication 
here is that the Association accountant prepared an aged list of accounts receivable which is available to 
management and the Board. The Directors should not have to duplicate this activity. However, if the 
Association were to live within the law of Section 70, subsection (2), the Directors are obligated to 
examine the receivables. The amendment relieves the Association from having to live in sin so to speak. 
 
Other amendments spell out more precisely the use of reserves and realignment of the wording including 
the retention of records which at the present is not specific, the amendment is specific which is as it 
should be. 
 
There is some renumbering of some of the sections which is necessary as you will eventually note on 
page 13 for purposes of maintaining a sequence. This is desirable and we feel necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is not a great deal of department from the old Act, however, there are some sections 
which are very important to the co-operatives, to the members and with that I respectfully move second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. G. F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us is one which I think Members on this 
side of the House will have no difficulty supporting. Many of the measures contained in the Bill are only 
of a housekeeping nature, while others tend to assist in the growth and organization of co-operative 
institutions in the province. 
 
I believe that the case for co-operatives, particularly in rural Saskatchewan is a strong one and I for one 
certainly support it. However, in supporting this Bill I would like to caution the Government about the 
direction in which it seems to be moving. 
 
One is the needless growth of bureaucracy within the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. Last year, the Premier announced that there would be a full time Minister of 
Co-operatives. He also announced that there would be an increase in the number of people on staff 
within the Department and an increase in expenditures. The Budget provides for some of these increases 
and I think it is fair to say that we can expect more in the coming years. 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1697 

The Government’s role in co-operative development should be primarily that of assisting independent 
co-operative movements. This should be done mainly through Legislation which guarantees 
co-operatives a special place in the Saskatchewan economy and recognize their contributions. However, 
I am beginning to fear that the Government opposite plans to do more than this. I think that they are 
beginning to control co-operatives in Saskatchewan and this is not a good thing. One of the most 
positive aspects of co-operative movements is their independence and their community involvement and 
support. As the Government moves in, their independence and community orientation will be 
diminished and be replaced by faceless, centralized bureaucracies which this Government is so fond of. 
 
Co-operatives like most other enterprises, would prefer to function with as little Government 
interference and involvement as possible. We all recognize the necessity for the Government to 
safeguard the existence of these co-operatives and secondly to safeguard the interests of those who 
invest in them. But I should like to caution this new Minister that this does not give him the licence to 
interfere in the affairs of these organizations, nor to tell them what is best for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the Bill and I hope the Government will take seriously what I have said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the Member for Rosetown has indicated that the 
Opposition will support this Bill. I certainly don’t feel that all the amendments are ones of housekeeping 
nature, however, that is their prerogative to judge as they see fit. I do want to comment on one or two 
items which he mentioned. 
 
Firstly the area which has been talked about considerably in the House and out of the House and that is 
with regard to the appointment of a Minister for the Department of Co-operation with no other areas 
attached. We, on this side of the House . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I must advise the Member, he cannot raise new material, he must only answer 
statements raised in the debate. You cannot raise any new material, just answer the questions raised. 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I am just answering the allegations which the Member 
for Rosetown made which was that they couldn’t see why a separate Minister should have been 
appointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It could be better debated in the Estimates rather than on the Bill. 
 
Mr. Cody: — I have no right to rebut? Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will abide by your ruling, 
however, I think it is only natural that I would want to rebut in this debate some of the items which the 
Member raised, one of them being that the Co-operative Department being a small department does not 
deserve this kind of recognition, with a Minister and also that 



 
March 21, 1974 
 

 
1698 

the budget which we have is too high. I think that those allegations should be cleared off. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would have to answer that if you are answering statements made you have a right to 
answer but you can’t bring in any new material. 
 
Mr. Cody: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll abide by that, I won’t bring any new material in at this time 
and I do hope that they do raise the question again during the Estimates. I just want to say as I did before 
that I think we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, realize and recognize the tremendous amount of 
interest that there is in co-operatives today, and the tremendous amount of contribution that 
co-operatives have made to this province. And as a result we saw fit to have a Minister look after the 
Department of Co-operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, we are not like the people on the opposite side of the House who believe 
that unless you have a large purse full of money to distribute that that’s the only time you need a 
Minister. We recognize that there is in the Department of Co-operation a staff that is necessary to 
administer the kinds of things that we do in this organization. We recognize that there are 301,000 
members in the co-operative movement and we are a party which believes in people, not money, and 
that is exactly why we have a Minister in charge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cody: — With regard to the interference I can assure the Member that we shall not be interfering 
with any co-operative associations as such, but we shall be, as a department, out helping them from time 
to time which is something that we didn’t see in the seven years while they were sitting on this side of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is little question in my mind that the philosophy of this side of the House is 
considerably different than the philosophy on that side of the House. 
 
With these few words, if they have any questions in Estimates, I will be only too pleased to hear them. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before I leave the Chair I ask the indulgence of the Members to recognize a group in 
the Speaker’s Gallery of High School students from Spalding, which is in the corner of my constituency. 
I don’t have the names of the teachers to introduce them to you, but I am sure that the Members wish 
them welcome to this Chamber. They have seen the House in session and now they will see it go into 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1974 

 

 
1699 

Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Before you leave the Chair Mr. Speaker, I should like to join 
you in welcoming these students. I spoke to the two teachers at noon hour and we had a very brief lunch 
together because they had to rush off to another engagement on their tour of Regina. I should like to join 
with you, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming the High School students from Spalding. The two teachers are Mr. 
Peter MacDonald and the Principal, Mr. Palmer Ruten. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS

