
























































Hansard: March 13, 1974


1361 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Assembly — Seventeenth Legislature 

28th Day 
 

Wednesday, March 13, 1974. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. K. R. MacLEOD (Regina Albert Park): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in introducing to you 
and to other Members of the Legislature 30 Grade Eight students from W. C. How School in Regina. 
They are in the east gallery and are led by their teacher, Mr. C. B. Wilson. They have done a tour of the 
building and they will have the pleasure of meeting with their Member of the Legislative Assembly at 5 
o'clock this afternoon and he will undoubtedly enlighten them as to the procedures going on in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope they enjoy their stay, we welcome them to the Legislature and I hope that they learn 
something of the legislative process while they are here. We welcome them, this is an outstanding 
school and I am told that this is an outstanding class. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, again today it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to the Members of this House a group of 26 students sitting in the Speaker's Gallery. These 
students are here under the guidance of their teacher, Mr. Ram Singh and their bus driver is Mr. Lorne 
Bjorklund. They are Grade Nine and Grade Eleven students from the Lyndale School which is situated 
at Oungre, Saskatchewan, a district bordering our United States neighbors to the south of us. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is their second consecutive year in which they have visited our Legislative Building 
during the Session. I hope again this year that they find their visit with us both pleasant and educational 
and that it will help expand their knowledge of democracy in action. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all 
Members join us in wishing them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of introducing to 
you and to the House a group of 74 Grade Seven and Eight students from Lorne Hazelton School. They 
are just coming into the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Pantasiuk, Mrs. Park 
and Mrs. Froese. I hope that the students will have an interesting, educational afternoon. I will be 
meeting with them later this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1362 

QUESTIONS 
 

EXTRA REVENUE FROM OIL 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a 
question for the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley). Mr. Minister, Bill 42 has now been the 
law of this province for over two months and the federal export tax on oil has been law for a somewhat 
longer period of time than that. In view of this, Mr. Minister could you tell us how much extra revenue 
the province has received since the introduction of the Bill and since the federal tax went on from the 
production of oil? 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I can't give you an exact 
figure on that but I'll endeavor to supply the information to the Member this afternoon. 
 

QUESTIONNAIRE FOR MOTOR LICENCES 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). Would the Minister of Labour mind informing the 
House of the estimated present value of his car, including the vehicle weight and the maximum 
horsepower rated and braked please. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Quite frankly, I haven't the foggiest idea. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — And neither will 50,000 other people in the Province of Saskatchewan. We are calling 
attention and we are going to ask the Treasury Benches, Mr. Speaker, why they would put a 
questionnaire out like this when they can't possibly expect the people to have the answer? What penalty 
are they going to impose on people who don't comply with the questionnaire and are they prepared to 
waive the question? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Questions put by Members. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I didn't get the answer that I requested from the Hon. Member. What are 
they going to do about the questionnaire on the Motor Vehicle Licence? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It was not a question, it was just a comment. 
 
MR. LANE: — No, I asked a question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It wasn't phrased in the form of a question. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I prefaced a question. The wording of the question was, how do 
they expect the people of Saskatchewan and 50,000 other people applying for motor licence to have the 
information that the Hon. Member doesn't have? Secondly, 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1363 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to know if the Government intends to repeal this questionnaire which the 
Department itself doesn't have a reason for and if they are going to penalize the people of Saskatchewan 
who don't have the answer? 
 
HON. W. A. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the question wasn't directed to me, but I 
can tell you my vehicle weighs 2850 and has 100 horsepower motor. 
 
MR. LANE: — Is that brake or rated? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — That's brake. 
 
MR. LANE: — Okay, what's the rated horsepower? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — 77. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Gross or net. 
 

ADVERTISING BY AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT INSURANCE ACT 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 
the Premier. I was watching TV last night and an ad from Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
advertising the pilfering of the gas tax by about three cents a gallon or $9 million and then ending up 
sort of lamely asking that they write into the AAIA or that they do something. My question. Is the 
Premier aware that AAIA is advertising, they have been advertising in the newspaper and now over 
television, is this advertising being put through the Montreal based firm of Dunsky, an advertising 
agency brought out here by the NDP? Has he any idea what this very political and very unnecessary 
advertising campaign by AAIA — which is brand new — is costing and is if in fact going through 
Dunsky's? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the cost of this advertising, nor 
do I know which advertising agency it is going through. I know which one it isn't going through. It's not 
going through the Toronto advertising agency of McLarens, which was brought out here by his 
Government. But there are a number of advertising agencies in the province and we have at least found 
it possible to use one based in the province which is better than the record of the Government when 
Members opposite were the Government. 
 
The Struthers Agency is Saskatchewan based and was never used by the previous government and is 
now being used. All of its directors are from Saskatchewan. They are all Saskatchewan born and bred 
and tell me whether that is true of the McLaren Agency? 
 
MR. STEUART: — Tell me if that is true of Dunsky’s? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s not true of you even. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1364 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I agree it isn't true of me. I have made my home here for 25 years.. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I've been here for 64 years. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That's right. Well the Member opposite is 64, I'm not 64. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think we are transgressing on your time. May I say that I am not 
aware of the amount. If the Members opposite wish to put a question like that on the Order Paper, I am 
sure that my colleague, the Attorney General and Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Office, would be pleased to get you the answer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear!. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Robbins (Minister 
of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto by Mr. McIsaac (Wilkie). 
 
MR. E. F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, when I . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — I don't know whether they are trying to keep the applause going until the air time 
starts or not but I can't believe it was all for me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — I mentioned last night in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that the Budget Speech by the 
new Minister (Mr. Robbins) was very lengthy. The Press and the public were perhaps intimidated by the 
length of Speech and the very expensive and glossy appearance of the written copy of the Speech. It is 
only now that the public and everyone is delving through the Speech and really finding out what's in it. 
The Minister did mention on page 30 that 1,100 new jobs were being created in this Speech. This is 
bound to cost over $10 million, or obviously more than that when we talk about the office space that is 
required for these people and the automobiles and auxiliary staff. People are beginning to ask why at a 
time when the population of the province is going down, do we need 1,100 more government 
employees. They are asking this especially because last year we had a large increase in numbers also. 
 
I mentioned last night, too, that people waited with bated breath throughout this lengthy Speech for the 
goodies to come and when the Speech was over they just couldn't believe it, 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1365 

they still hadn't heard about the tax reductions which they were justified in expecting at a time when the 
economy is this buoyant. They expected some relief from the taxes because from every source that this 
Government has for tax revenues, the taxes are up very substantially this year. The people were justified 
in expecting this tax relief and they were, of course, disappointed. 
The Rural Municipal Convention is on in Regina now and I am sure many of the Members on both sides 
are aware that the rural councillors are very concerned about the assistance to the rural municipalities. 
Inflation is overtaking them as it is everyone else and they find that they were neglected almost 
completely last year and the year before. There is very little for them this year and certainly not enough 
to keep up to the inflation factor. With inflation running at 10 per cent and more and wage increases of 
this nature, the RMs and the local governments are running into this problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned last night also that at this time of year people are facing a common 
problem, and that is of making out their income tax returns. It is a distasteful job, however, I mentioned 
last night that most people feel that this is a rather fair tax. I ask you again, really is it a fair tax? We all 
know that this NDP Government has raised our Saskatchewan income tax rate twice in the short time 
they have been in office; at 40 per cent we are now the highest in Canada. Now that is bad enough but 
this socialist Government apparently believes in soaking the low income person at a rate higher and 
letting the rich off at a lower rate. I refer you to the 1975 Income Tax Guide, and certainly everyone has 
a copy of this Guide at this time of year. It is in the mail to all of us and we have had a chance to look at 
it. On page 50, the table shows taxable income, federal tax payable and provincial tax payable. 
 
So let us just take a look starting on page 30 and take a few examples. We notice that a person with a 
taxable income of only $500, this would be a low-income person, pays no federal tax, no tax to the 
Federal Government, but they pay $30.40 to this Provincial Government. We look at $1,000 taxable 
income and we find then that they pay $66 federal tax, $66.40 provincial tax. In other words the 
provincial tax is 100 per cent of the federal tax. We go up to a little higher bracket, we notice that $2,000 
taxable income, the federal tax is $256, the provincial tax $142.40. So the rate collected by the 
Provincial Government is down to 55 per cent. We go on up to $3,000 taxable income, federal tax is 
$456, provincial tax $222, the rate is down to about 45 per cent for this person. We go on up to a taxable 
income of $5,000, we find that the federal tax is now $876, the provincial tax is $390, so the person is 
paying about 44.7 per cent to the Provincial Government. 
 
Now, let's look at someone with a taxable income of $10,000 which is a rather high income, taxable 
income in our area. The federal tax would be $2,096, the provincial tax $882, so now the provincial tax 
is only 42 per cent of the federal tax. So the tax rate has gone down from 100 per cent to 42 per cent as 
the person's income rises. As your taxable income rises the per cent you pay the province goes down. 
The rich pay at a lesser rate. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1366 

Now this is a rather strange action from a Government that professes to care about the poor people in the 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Apparently, Mr. Speaker, they are saying one thing and in actual fact they are 
doing something else. I might say that everyone has one of these booklets and can easily check the 
figures I have mentioned. 
 
I should also, Mr. Speaker, like very briefly to look at the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. 
We all know that it was set up by the NDP without a vote of the producers. We know that it has created 
a marketing mess in this province. We know that producers are not elected to the board. Everyone is 
aware that people are quitting the hog business every day and, of course, the Question is why. A farmer 
in my area recently sold off all his hogs, I talked to him last weekend when I was home. 
I'm sure the Minister would like to hear this again because it is very important and if he would listen 
carefully he would find out why people are going out of hogs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — This is what the farmer told me. He said, "When I have to go to some NDP 
bureaucrat, cap in my hand, and say 'please sir, can I sell my hogs', then it is time to quit. If this NDP 
Government wants hogs, they can raise them themselves." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — We know also that this province is associated with the Manitoba Commission 
through the marketing agency Expork. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) announced this last 
spring, and if you think that we have a marketing mess in Saskatchewan, you should see what is 
happening in Manitoba. 
 
The Manitoba Commission made a disastrous contract with Japan. It is costing Manitoba producers, the 
farmers, between $7,000 and $8,000 per day to subsidize the consumer of pork in Japan. Now do we 
want to share these losses? I think not. The Government in Manitoba is embarrassed by this and they 
want to keep it quiet, but I would like to quote from the farm paper, Report on Farming, January 12, 
1974. It is headlined Winnipeg and it says: 
 

The Manitoba marketing board has recommended that members of the provincial hog marketing 
board swear an oath of secrecy on the details of a contract for a pork sale to Japan. 

 
Now this is rather strange — why an oath of secrecy, Mr. Speaker, it was a bad deal and the Manitoba 
board doesn't want the people to know about it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — I might just also indicate what MLA Warner Jorgenson said about this: 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1367 

He said he considers it absolutely incredible that the Manitoba marketing board should suggest 
that members of the hog board should swear an oath of secrecy. "That's not democracy," he said, 
"It’s a bloody totalitarian regime". 

 
And I think most people would agree with it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, my primary comments and concerns are, of course, in the field of 
agriculture. But there are two items of great importance that I think should be brought to the attention of 
the people of the province. 
 
I have had a number of letters from older couples who are living in a poverty situation in my 
constituency, and apparently the NDP Government is ignoring their problem. I wish the Minister of 
Social Services (Mr. Taylor) was here, because this is in his department. I speak of cases where one of 
the couple is over 65 and one is not. The older person — this is usually the husband — receives the old 
age pension and supplement from the Federal Government, which now amounts to $184 per month and 
this is their total income. They apply to the province for assistance — to the Social Services Department 
— and their needs are assessed in a very meagre manner. The wife may receive from nothing to about 
$75, and I have here some sheets that have been sent to me by people in my constituency who have had 
their needs assessed by the department — one of them, the wife will be getting $7.75 and in another case 
it is $77. In any case, this couple is then attempting to exist on an amount from $185 to $260 per month. 
They can only live in poverty under these circumstances. 
 
As soon as the wife becomes 65 she then receives the old age pension and supplement from the Federal 
Government which brings them to a combined income of $351 a month. 
 
There are hundreds of cases such as this in Saskatchewan. In many instances one or both of the people 
have some physical disability or illness which prevents them from doing any type of work. 
 
All Members of the Legislature, I am sure, know of these cases in their areas. As long as one of the 
couple is the responsibility of this NDP Government they must live in poverty. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — However, when they both become the responsibility of the Federal Government 
they receive a much greater amount of money and they can live in considerable more dignity. Of course, 
their needs are the same in each case. It is a sad situation, Mr. Speaker, when the couple must be denied 
the necessities of life while they sit there and wait for the wife to become old enough to receive federal 
assistance. 
 
The Minister of Social Services — by his own figures – has indicated that welfare is being paid to 
thousands of able-bodied people in this province. The Social Service Department is paying thousands of 
dollars to downtown Regina hotels where people are living on welfare. But he is standing by and letting 
these 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1368 

elderly couples live in conditions below the poverty level. There is nothing in this Budget that indicates 
this deplorable situation will be corrected. 
 
If the Members opposite doubt this, I would be very glad to show them some of the slips that have been 
sent to me by these old couples and some of the letters that I received from them. I have, of course, 
already brought it to the attention of the Department as well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, one other item in the Budget should be noted. This NDP 
Government lowered the drinking age in Saskatchewan to 18 years, and has opened many new liquor 
outlets. Increases in liquor profits have been fantastic. They have gone up, almost doubled in the last 
five years. The NDP are happy to have this money, but they do try to hide the amount. I should like you 
to note this from the Budget Speech, in a deliberate attempt to hide the amount the Minister of Finance 
(Mr. Bobbins) said, and I quote from his Budget Speech: 
 

Receipts from Government enterprises including the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and 
Saskatchewan Telephones are expected to reach $53.1 million. 

 
Why lump liquor profits and SaskTel? Well I think the answer is obvious, Mr. Speaker, they want to 
hide the fact that liquor profits alone, in the coming year, will be around $41 million. A fantastic amount 
of money. 
 
But how much are the NDP willing to spend on the problems caused by this vast increase in alcohol 
consumption? I refer you to Page 71 of the Estimates — $1.6 million to the Alcoholism Commission for 
rehabilitation and education. They make $41 million out of liquor, which causes the problem, they spend 
less than $2 million which is totally inadequate to deal with the problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I only wish that every farmer could get a copy of the Budget and 
look at the agriculture spending. 
 
It said in the Press, on the front page, 46 per cent more for the farmer. Of course, this is not so. 46 per 
cent more for the Department of Agriculture — perhaps, but not for the farmer. Let's just take a brief 
look at some of their spending. 
 
Another $20 million for the Land Bank, a total now of $50 million has been budgeted to grab land for 
this socialist state. $50 million to put free farmers out of business. Page 17 indicates that the expenses of 
the Land Bank Commission will rise from about $1 million to almost $2 million in this coming year. 
Just for operating expenses. They continue to buy prime farm land, often in competition with needy 
young farmers who want the land to make a decent living, and we will certainly document this in later 
debates in this House. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1369 

We are often asked what we would do about the Land Bank, and my suggestion is this: 
 

1. Abolish the program completely; 
 
2. Examine every transaction that they made very carefully; 
 
3. Where the renter was granted a legitimate lease, we would sell him the land at a reasonable 
price and on reasonable terms. 

 
I want to make this very clear. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — We also note from the Budget that the Department of Agriculture staff has gone 
up from 449 to 554, over 100 new civil servants in the Department of Agriculture alone. Most of these 
are in administration — about $1 million is involved and I would like to know if this is more money for 
the farmer? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand here a list of the trips made outside of the province by Agriculture 
Department staff in the first 11 months of 1973. This was supplied to me by the Saskatchewan 
Department of Agriculture and is available to anyone. 182 trips, Mr. Speaker, to such places as Los 
Angeles, Charlottetown, Denmark, Scotland and England, Chicago, Europe, Iowa, Nova Scotia, 
Washington and several to Arizona. Do you think that this is spending for the farmer, Mr. Speaker? Do 
you think it should be increased by 46 per cent? 
 
One of the most desperate problems today on Saskatchewan farms is a shortage of high quality feed for 
cattle. Yet, Page 11 of the agriculture budget indicates that only $40,000 will be spent for grants under 
the fodder-shelter program. $40,000, Mr. Speaker, for 75,000 farmers — perhaps one dollar for each 
cattle farmer. I don't know how much fodder they are going to shelter with a dollar apiece, but this is the 
amount. 
 
If you look on Page 55 though of their Cabinet expenses, it indicates that the Government is spending 
$158,000 on photographic and art services. $158,000 to take pictures for the Cabinet; $40,000 as grants 
to encourage farmers to build for a fodder storage — very strange NDP priorities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I could go into some detail on the South Saskatchewan River 
irrigation program that was cancelled out by the Minister of Agriculture, but I will leave that to some 
other speaker. 
 
We do note, however, that this Budget does not bring back the program which gave financial help to 
farmers hiring students for the summer. This program was started by the Liberals, cancelled by the NDP 
in 1973. Our young people are being deprived of a chance to participate in farm life and to help in the 
worthwhile job of supplying food to a hungry world. They are not going to have the chance to take part 
in this because of the actions of this NDP Government. We have asked the NDP to 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1370 

reinstate this plan, but they have refused to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will not be supporting the Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. T. L. HANSON: (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker and Members of this Assembly, it is 
with great pride that I rise to enter this debate on behalf of the people of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley. We are a 
very diversified agricultural area, with an expanding tourist industry along the Qu'Appelle. This Budget 
is designed to benefit nearly every person living within this area, a Budget for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. The New Deal fulfilled. 
 
Turning first to further strengthening and stabilizing the agriculture industry, I bring your attention to 
our philosophy as a Government — that is to bring about the maximum production per acre, rather than 
more acres per operator. In this year of heavy snowfall and anticipated spring flooding we have 
extended the crop insurance program so that the farmer can insure his land against failure to be able to 
seed. This year our contracts with farmers will approach 35,000, or nearly one-half of the farmers of the 
province. This fact alone helps stabilize the industry when 50 per cent of the farmers have this type of 
insurance. 
 
We have beefed up the FarmStart program to reach approximately 2,000 farmers. These loans, at 6 per 
cent, and forgivable grants, are helping the progressive farmer expand vertically through livestock and it 
is certainly appreciated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To insure farmers wishing to establish we have poured another $20 million into the Land Bank 
Commission for further purchases of land. I might point out at this time that a transposition of figures in 
the Estimates shows that the administration costs were really only $3,750 above last year, a figure of 
$654,270 compared to $650,520 I believe. To emphasize the popularity of this program, we find we 
have between 10 to 15 applicants seeking nearly every parcel available for lease. Sure the allocations are 
not always correct or popular in the local community, but they are done by a comprehensive formula and 
not by political memberships. Formulas are like computers in a sense, they can only reach a conclusion 
based on the information they are fed. 
 
After two years of negotiations we have finally reached agreement with Alberta and Manitoba to 
establishing an agricultural machinery institute at Humboldt. This will be a resurrection and expansion 
of the AMA testing program with satellites in our sister provinces. That was a program that the Liberals 
took a hatchet to. 
 
I know, as a farmer, how much these tests of machines were of value not only to farmers wishing to 
purchase but also to the dealer and the manufacturer. This year $323,000 will be spent building 
facilities, purchasing equipment and recruiting 50 staff members to operate this program. This is 50 of 
the staff members out of the 80 that the Hon. Member (Mr. Gardner) was quoting. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1371 

Suggesting that this testing facility was of major national importance, not only to farmers but to the 
industry as well, we applied to the Federal Government for cost sharing, but did we get it? No! But they 
want us to give them all the oil. 
 
At this time I would like to turn your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the unheralded success of the Hog 
Marketing Commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — Up until this point in the Session, the Liberals have been fairly quiet about this 
Commission. While the Liberal Party opposite holler for provincial assistance for the cattle industry, 
they are now strangely silent about hogs. Remember the furore last year in this House and the barrage of 
'Red Scare' propaganda that swept the province, at public expense, through unconscionable abuse of the 
mailing privileges of this Legislature. That was done by the Liberal Members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — They said Comrade Jack was nationalizing the hog industry, and I wonder why they 
are now so silent? 
 
I refer this House, Mr. Speaker, to a document entitled: Canada Livestock and Meat Trade Report. I 
doubt as to whether the Liberals have ever read this, as they seldom choose to read facts even if it is 
published once a week by Agriculture Canada and accurately reflects all of the livestock marketing in 
the provinces of Canada on a weekly basis. I asked the librarian to select copies at random spacing the 
last four months, and I quote these figures from it. Regarding hog marketings slaughter in the western 
provinces we find that in the week ending March 2, slaughterings in Alberta went up by .1 per cent, 
while in Saskatchewan slaughterings went up by 12.1 per cent as compared to the same period last year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — February 23, slaughterings in Alberta up by 1.7 per cent; Saskatchewan 11.1 per 
cent. And if you think these figures don't mean much I would like to quote the figures on this; Alberta 
slaughtered 2,920 hogs that week; we slaughtered 4,362. We will move to February 2, 1974. Alberta 
declined by 9.3 per cent; we went up by 3.2 per cent. That's a difference of 12.5 per cent. Look to 
January 26, 1974. Alberta declined by 9.7 per cent in their slaughterings; Saskatchewan went up by 2.9 
per cent. January 5 — Alberta only went up by 1.5; Saskatchewan and I think we had two fairly severe 
blizzards that week – we went down by 3.2 per cent compared to a year ago. That is the only time in the 
eight selections that I have chosen that Saskatchewan suffered any loss compared to Alberta. It 
continues on. November 24, we went up by 2.1 per cent over Alberta. November 10, we were 1.9 per 
cent above Alberta. 
 
Then if we look at a different set of statistics, the origin of the hogs that were slaughtered, I think we 
find a more impressive picture, to show that we have actually indeed stabilized the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan. The difference 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1372 

between the two provinces for the week ending March 2 showed a 29.7 per cent increase in 
Saskatchewan as compared to Alberta, 13.1 for another weekly period and for four other random 
selected weeks the percentages of Saskatchewan over Alberta were 5.2, 12.4, 6.0 and 19.6. Now I say 
that these figures show that we have indeed stabilized the hog industry in Saskatchewan and we are 
guaranteeing it again in this Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON:: — We are guaranteeing to the farmer in Saskatchewan that if he does choose to 
diversify under this NDP Government we will back him up all the way. It is pretty impressive 
performance by a Saskatchewan Commission, Government appointed and basically operating within our 
Government's philosophy of orderly marketings, as compared to the Liberals' ideal, the Alberta producer 
elected board. 
 
Sure the producers here have some inconvenience of phoning a day ahead, but I ask you, is this small 
inconvenience not minimal when we consider the advantages of a delay kill premium if your hogs aren't 
slaughtered on the day of delivery or the $1.5 million we inject to guarantee a $57 per hundred price on 
premium hogs, instead of the $44 or $45 per hundred that they are now receiving on the open market 
elsewhere. Again we asked the Federal Government to co-operate in this stabilization program. The 
answer, as with the AMI program, "it is still in Otto Lang's pocket". 
 
We tried to offer the cattle industry an experimental insured price program to stabilize both the feeder 
and the cow-calf industry, but this group, true to their rugged individualistic nature told our people to 
keep our noses out of their business. Surely this attitude is nurtured by the Liberals opposition who 
heckle away while the cattle industry completely collapses. Where is the Federal Government help? 
They even refused to impose a tariff or embargo on American beef now entering Canada and depressing 
our prices. Their only suggested answer is consideration of an embargo on stilbestrol treated beef. That 
is a real solution? The only way we are going to get federal assistance on any of these three mentioned 
high priority programs is to send Otto Lang hunting for a job, if he can't sign the cheques we need. 
 
If they want help with their oil problems, we certainly need help funding these programs, not to mention 
the need for help in financial assistance to industrial development in this province. Surely if we are to 
have a strong and united Canada we must expect fair treatment and co-operation from the senior 
government, no matter what political philosophy either government may have. 
 
I turn now to another important item in this Budget, the urban package. We believe that villages, towns 
and cities need not only more financial assistance but also more local autonomy in deciding priorities of 
spending. We offer first $4.3 million in equalization grants based on the community's revenue base and 
also the costs for difficulty in providing an acceptable level of police service. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1373 

Secondly, $6.1 million allocated, in unconditional grants, $10 per capita per year to be used by the urban 
communities as they deem necessary, not as we the Government tell them. Quite a difference from the 
Liberal years. To relate this closer t home we find that Fillmore with a population of 400, would get 
$4,000; Wolseley with a population of 1,000 would receive $10,000 to be used as they see fit. 
 
Thirdly, we commit $46 million to community capital grants of $15 per capita per year. Simply put, over 
a five-year period a town will receive $75 per person which can make up 60 per cent of the costs of 
capital improvements such as rinks, swimming pools, halls, etc. in their community. To Fort Qu'Appelle 
with a population of 1,600 this means $120,000; to Indian Head with a population of 1,800 people, 
$135,000; to Montmartre with a population of 500, $37,500. To smaller communities the grants are not 
as staggering but I suggest truly meaningful and are appreciated. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — We also continue at a cost of $1.5 million the Open Roads and Mainstreet oiling 
systems. Mr. Speaker, this is an urban package returning nearly $100 million to the urban dwellers. 
These are the benefits of long-term provincial planning and sound economic philosophy. "Where is our 
snow removal grant," the Liberals cry? Mr. Speaker, that Party would criticize anything. We offer one 
dollar in trade for their scratched and tarnished nickel or penny or whatever it was. I want you to 
consider $400,000 in snow removal grants per year compared to at least $20 million per year from us. 
 
While recognizing the urgent need for assistance to urban communities, we haven't forgotten the rural 
municipalities. We add 20 per cent to the equalization grants with a greater share going to those rural 
municipalities with a poor revenue base. To meet the needs of the country we increase the input to the 
main farm access road program by nearly 50 per cent or $2 million. Another half million dollars goes 
into an interim oil grid policy. 
 
I should at this time mention, Mr. Speaker, the new super-grid program which we have had in the 
planning stages for some time and which we unveiled last evening at the SARM convention. We have 
named the SARM president Everett Murphy, the vice-president Charlie Mitchell and the director 
Norman Allan to design a super-grid system in consultation with every rural municipal government. If 
you will recall the success of the Cronkite Commission in developing the first grid program, I am sure 
that these three SARM officials will do a conscientious job equal in every respect to the former 
Commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — Our objective is to develop an oil grid system of high usage roads as deemed 
necessary by those who use and pay for them. This program will be expensive but this Government's 
long term planning and budgeting will reserve sufficient funds to bring this program to fulfilment. With 
gravel stocks fast becoming depleted we must act now to build up market roads for the future. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1374 

I turn now to the highways program and. we find. construction on virtually every highway in my 
constituency, not a hit and miss election construction typical of the Liberal era but major long term 
projects passing through both Liberal and. NDP held seats alike. I haven't got the time to mention the 
individual projects, but I am sure the Minister of Highways will be commenting on them in the future. 
 
This Budget culminates three years of intensive united planning by 45 New Democrats and a dedicated 
staff. I am particularly proud of the programs I have mentioned, as I am a member of the committee 
designing and approving the matters related to Highways, Agriculture and Municipal Affairs. I hope I 
have truly represented the views and needs of the people in my area. This Budget is my testimonial to 
them. I am confident they will not trade this kind of performance for the smooth-talking slick politicians 
who tend to be transient by nature, 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — . . . like the nomads opposite who move from constituency to constituency as the 
odds become more attractive in a different area. 
 
I also want to mention our family income program which is so designed to guarantee to a family 
provider choosing to work for an income well above that received under Social Assistance. Of 
importance to my Indian people is our program to have Indian and Métis court workers to assist the 
people in dealing in the courts where language may be a barrier. Another $500,000 into the bursary 
program. A dental plan for children; kindergarten; day-care assistance. This Government has forgotten 
no one. 
 
I remember one other time when it could be said that the Government had forgotten no one, remember 
Black Friday in 1968, after the election returned the Liberals, virtually every individual in Saskatchewan 
was hammered with a barrage of unfair and unjust taxes, to pay for Liberal mismanagement. As a young 
couple expecting our second child, the actions of that Government cemented my commitment to the 
planning and policies of democratic socialism. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — As John Comer remarked "we have replaced Davy's hand in every pocket with 
savory chicken in every pot. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HANSON: — But alas, all is not well in Denmark. I am greatly troubled as a parent of four young 
children, with our failure as society to cope with the number one health problem. Yes, you may consider 
heart disease as number one, but I consider the abuse and resulting dependency on alcohol a most 
serious problem today. By far the greatest number of personal problems requesting my assistance are 
caused by or related to improper use of booze. We have 20,000 problem drinkers, 14,000 of whom must 
be considered alcoholics, every one of these directly affects four others. That in total affects nearly 
100,000 or one-tenth of our population. Sales of liquor will reach 100 million this 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1375 

year, our profits $40 million. But what of the other costs to the public? How much of our hospital costs, 
accident costs, welfare, policing costs are related to alcohol and its results? Some interesting facts 
surface in the LeDain Report on the non-medical use of drugs, and I quote from page 404: 
 
Of some selected crimes, alcoholics and problem drinkers were involved in 33 per cent of the murders, 
58 per cent of attempted murders, 54 per cent of manslaughters, 39 per cent of rapes, •42 per cent of 
other sexual offences, and 61 per cent of assaults. 
 
Yes, we are increasing the support to the Alcohol Commission to $2 million. I thank the Minister for 
that. But must we not do more? I am arranging to take members of the Alcohol Commission to the 
beautiful Fort San complex in the coming weeks and hopefully we can establish an in-patient treatment 
centre there. It could be a first step. 
 
At least 20 per cent of our liquor profits must be channeled back into alcohol education and 
rehabilitation programs. The major breakthrough can only come when the public faces this problem 
seriously as the number one cause of heartbreak, hardship, financial ruin and death. I, as a parent, and an 
elected representative must do what is right and needed, not what is popular with society today, which I 
believe in many respects has abdicated much of its moral and spiritual responsibility. 
 
Returning to the bright side of things I want to emphasize once again how proud I have been to have 
played a part in designing the programs for our people characterized in this Budget. I remind the citizens 
of this province that all these programs with no increase in taxes really means something. What would 
Liberals do if they were capable of ever bringing in such a Budget? They would go for an election 
naturally because surely they could never meet the challenge of implementing programs of this 
magnitude. I prefer to think of this Budget as simply the third Budget of a four-year plan at which time 
we will once again offer the Saskatchewan people a "new direction for progress". Once again we will 
receive their support to march ahead with long term sound basic financing and policy development. Mr. 
Speaker, I will enthusiastically support this Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY: (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, having paid quite close attention to previous 
budgets brought down in this House let me tell you, Sir, that I have no doubt this Budget is bold, 
imaginative and beautiful. This Budget is not perfect, of course, but it is one I know is being accepted by 
all the people of Saskatchewan. Who am I to argue with the Chamber of Commerce official who has 
publicly stated, "This Budget is not inflationary?" Who am I to argue when a housewife from Saskatoon 
stated that programs mentioned in the Budget would save her family a goodly number of dollars? Who 
am I to argue with a farmer just out of Saskatoon who told me, the Budget is one of the fairest he can 
recollect? Mr. Speaker, it fulfils the promises made by the New Democratic Party prior to the last 
election, and for this our party can be proud. As for Members opposite I can well understand why they 
appeared to be very pale when the Budget was brought down the other day. I can well understand the 
predicament they will find themselves in in trying to explain to 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1376 

their constituents why they are opposed to this Budget which puts into play time-honored principles of 
security, justice and equality. 
 
But before I go on, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the Hon. Wes Bobbins on his recent 
appointment to the position he now holds. He certainly is well suited for the position, for we all know 
him to be a wizard at finances, yet he has not lost what I like to call the common touch. 
 
While I am at it, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the newly elected Member for Regina 
Lakeview, Ted Malone, and also I should like to congratulate Don Cody and John Kowalchuk on their 
recent Cabinet appointments. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that nearly $46 million has been ear-marked 
for capital projects for urban centres, large and small. I think this is an excellent program whereby urban 
municipalities will be able much more readily to construct such things as office buildings, rinks, 
swimming pools and other capital projects. Now this is not to imply that this program of 875 per person 
will benefit urban people only. In reality, it will benefit rural people, too, for in most urban communities 
rural people utilize to a great extent urban facilities near them, and this is as it should be because of the 
interdependence between rural and urban. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to know that this Government will be allotting to each city, town and village 
an unconditional grant of $10 per person to be spent by councils as they see fit. Surely this is an 
indication that this Government believes in the good judgment of our councils. Mr. Speaker, when one 
considers these two grants I have just mentioned, together with improved equalization and police grants 
as well as a program of much-needed assistance in urban transportation, one can easily see that urban 
councils will be able to hold the line on any mill rate increases. In fact, many will be able to decrease 
their mill rates without any loss of services to the people whom they serve. Mr. Speaker, the 20 per cent 
increase in equalization grants to rural municipalities is most welcome. The feature I particularly like 
here is the fact that those rural municipalities which have a weaker tax basis will receive more 
assistance. This is only fair, for there is too much disparity in the services which our rural municipalities 
are able to provide their people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that property improvement grants will again be increased this year to provide 
taxpayers relief from direct taxation. While I certainly welcome these grants, I must say I was 
disappointed to note that renters will not be able to share in these grants. I believe house renters are 
taxpayers; in fact not only do they pay the taxes indirectly on the houses in which they live, but they pay 
the profits to the owners as well as the actual payments on the houses. It is time serious consideration 
was given to assisting renters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome the increased financial assistance proposed in the area of alcoholism. Now I am 
not one to argue with the new public education program related to alcoholism, 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1377 

but I do believe that this is not what is needed as much as more financial assistance to the centres where 
alcoholism is treated. I believe that for these centres there are long lists of people waiting for treatment. I 
believe that these waiting lists are where the problem is. I believe the public has almost reached the 
saturation point where any new public education program may be a case of money misspent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the other day one of the Opposition Members criticized the profit the 
Saskatchewan Government makes on liquor sales in Saskatchewan. Surely he must know that on a per 
capita basis it is probably lower than for most other provinces. At any rate if I heard him correctly, I 
thought he was implying that liquor prices should be lowered. Mr. Speaker, doesn't he know that lower 
liquor prices means more consumption? Now why would he want more people to drink more liquor in 
this province? Mr. Speaker, I for one am opposed to the suggestion of the Member opposite that liquor 
should be made more readily available. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It was the Member for Moosomin. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — The Member for Moosomin it was? Thank you very much. He spoke for the 
whole group over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to see that $6.6 million will be placed into the Workmen's Compensation 
Accident Fund to assist in the granting of increased pension benefits. I commend the Government for 
this act of what I call justice. I believe it is appropriate to remember our workers who receive varying 
degrees of disability either of a permanent or of a temporary nature. While I am on this topic, Mr. 
Speaker, may I commend the present Minister of Labour for this just pension improvement plan for 
injured workers. For too long these workers have been relegated to the bottom rung of the economic 
ladder. They deserve every consideration given them and probably more. A far cry this new level of 
benefits will be compared to the peanuts which were tossed their way under the former Liberal regime 
which directed half of them to welfare because they thought it was cheaper, financially speaking, 
because in that way the Federal Government picked up half the cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that in the field of health great strides are being made what with 
premium removal, dental care for children, more Level IV beds and increased attention to assisting the 
disabled to train for new jobs. For these things I heartily commend the Minister of Health. 
 
However, there is one area where I am concerned, and that is the condition of some of the washroom 
facilities in various establishments found throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I will be the first to 
publicly admit that most establishments provide good washroom facilities. But there are some that are 
terrible. In fact, I have been in some that, I am sure, must have caused patrons to lose their appetites. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, for the protection of the general public I would suggest that the 
Minister of Health look into the 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1378 

possibility of checking some of these establishments a little more thoroughly, more often, and with the 
view of boarding up those establishments not willing to co-operate. Yes, Mr. Minister of Health, you can 
go around with your boards and hammer and nails. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That means more civil servants. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that once again there is no provision for the removal of 
the five per cent sales tax on children's clothing. I know such a removal would probably cause a host of 
administrative problems, so I have an alternative suggestion, which certainly is not new. Could this 
regressive tax be taken off certain items of clothing for all, children and adults alike? If even this small 
step was to be taken, I am sure that mothers all through the province would hail it as a step in the right 
direction. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That wouldn't be fair . . . 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — But it would be fair to people. And while I am on this subject, may I ask that 
serious consideration be given to the removal of the same tax on all reading material? It would seem to 
me in one sense this tax can be considered a tax on learning and not in keeping with principles of this 
Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that there will be a dramatic increase in spending this year in the 
general area of agriculture. It would seem to me that this hefty increase will consolidate and strengthen 
the various programs this Government has put forward to promote more stability in this industry – to 
help take more of the risks out of agriculture. And for this I commend the Minister of Agriculture who, 
being a farmer himself, well understands the problems of farmers. 
 
It's at this point, Mr. Speaker, that I should like to say a few words on some of the remarks made by one 
Hon. Member opposite. He was using the old scare tactics once again. He implied that this Government 
would soon own all the agricultural land in this province. Mr. Speaker, this is a lot of nonsense. Old 
scare tactics will not work in this day and age, and they_ are an insult to the intelligence of people. 
These same tactics are an insult to the many people who, because of age or misfortune, were able to be 
helped by the Land Bank. Mr. Speaker, I say to the Hon. Member opposite, take a stand against Land 
Bank land, take a stand against Government-owned community pastures, but don't resort to 1930 scare 
tactics. This is 19?4. People don't buy that gibberish "in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, still in the field of agriculture, I wonder if this Government should not be taking a closer 
look at what might well be a potential vegetable industry in this province. Such an industry might very 
well bring much needed diversity in the growing and raising of food. It could well benefit Saskatchewan 
farmers, and it could well benefit Saskatchewan consumers who, for the most part, have to be content 
with imported vegetables, some of which should not be allowed into Canada in the first place due to 
inferior quality. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1379 

In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I should like to mention the possibility of a program of incentive grants to 
present and potential growers of vegetables. Along with this could very well be a government program 
of providing initial subsidized storage space as well as a program of assistance to those who might wish 
to start up or expand processing facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I interject at this time, to make to this Government a plea for consideration for a 
retroactive snow removal grant to be paid to urban and rural municipalities in light of the terrible winter 
we have just experienced? And if this is not possible at this time, may I suggest that in future, hefty 
increases in these grants on a permanent basis be considered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that operating grants to schools will be increased considerably to $114 million this 
year, up $18 million. It's plain to see that the education of our children has a high priority with this 
Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, related to the education of our boys and girls, may I be permitted to offer a suggestion 
which has intrigued me for the last number of years. Why can't we offer our students, possibly at one or 
two centres such as Saskatoon, a place where they could actually see and touch the many wonderful 
things about which they study? I refer to such things as what might well be called articles of the world 
about which children study but never come in contact with. It would seem to me that this real life 
exposure to such things would make these things much more meaningful to our students. In this way, 
they would better be able to appreciate the things of other peoples and, in turn, become better all-round 
citizens now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of appropriate funding by this Government for the provision of 
kindergarten and universal driver education in our schools are solid pluses in favor of this Government. 
Parents and students alike will certainly be in favor of programs such as these. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to note that a family income program to assist needy families will 
be put into action shortly. As ex-chairman of the Special Committee on Welfare, I particularly like this 
program because it follows very closely one of the recommendations of that Committee. Mr. Speaker, I 
have always thought that special consideration should be given the working poor, the single parent 
family and, generally speaking, the victims of our high powered and materially oriented society. 
 
I am also very pleased to note that a new day care program will be introduced. This program whereby 
.subsidies may be paid in relation to a family's income is in keeping with this Government's policy of 
social and economic justice for all. Mr. Speaker, can you imagine how this day care program will be 
received by those families where the mother must work to make ends meet? Can you imagine how this 
program will be received by single parent families where, under present conditions, just to get out of the 
house for awhile is almost out of the question? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to publicly commend the Minister of Highways for the numerous road 
programs in Saskatoon-Hanley constituency this past year. For this we are thankful. But I 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1380 

do want to mention that it is my intention to keep advocating the inclusion into the highway system of 
the River Road running south from Saskatoon to the South Saskatchewan River Barn. The former 
Liberal Government did not.. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — . . . listening to you Paul. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — You can listen to this though, the former Liberal Government did not keep its 
promise to do this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I hope this Government will, and the sooner the better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to relay to this House the one common vital concern of almost all people in 
my area. That concern is the high cost of living coupled with runaway, inflation. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of this province want action from the only Government in a position to really take action to fight these 
two problems, and that is the Federal Government. The citizens of this province wonder why the Federal 
Government does not seem willing to put monopolistic oil corporations in their places relative to prices 
of petroleum products. The citizens of this province wonder whether the Federal Government's Plumptre 
squad should be blaming chicken farmers for the high cost of food instead of the real culprits, the 
middlemen and the food chain stores. Mr. Speaker, they wonder why the Federal Government does not 
take real action to keep the cost of housing from becoming a total nightmare. Mr. Speaker, I wonder, 
too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few words on the remarks of one Member opposite who seemed to imply that this 
Government is not just in awarding such things as contracts, concessions and other benefits. Mr. 
Speaker, I am not going to name names at this time, but the people of Saskatchewan surely know who 
got the goodies when the Liberal regime was in power. Mr. Speaker, many know who tried to horn in on 
the Boy Scouts and Cubs' concession stand when Blackstrap was opened; many know that a certain 
village was allowed to go hopelessly into debt to keep up a Liberal front for the last election; many 
know who you had to be or know in order to gain certain favors and concessions before the last election. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Wilf Gardiner. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Oh, I wouldn't mention Wilf Gardiner; that is a soft spot over there. Very 
sensitive spot. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will not be fooled by such ridiculous statements 
by Members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you are no doubt aware 1 think this Budget is a people's budget; one that is geared to the 
day to day needs of the people of this province. Therefore, I find it extremely difficult to understand why 
Members opposite oppose it with their amendment unless they fear repercussions from those who 
contribute heavily to their coffers — giant businesses and corporations who really call the shots for 
Members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and opposing the onerous Liberal amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1381 

HON. E. KRAMER: (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I have some difficulty today, I was 
bothered with a little stomach flu before I came in here this afternoon and I still haven't completely 
recovered. I want to say this, that it got worse for the first fifteen minutes this afternoon. There was a 
distinct feeling of nausea developed at some of the remarks that were made, which I will refer to a bit 
later. 
 
I want to congratulate our new colleague the Hon. Wes Robbins on his masterful delivery and on the 
Budget itself. In all the years that I have been associated and have had the privilege and pleasure of 
being associated with the Government of Saskatchewan, that incidentally is since 1952, there have been 
many good years, some bad ones, there have been many good budgets and some not so good, but never 
in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, has a budget been received with so much enthusiasm by the 
people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — So much good will, so much happiness, that Budget that is before us today. 
Response from our urban centres, from rural areas, from homeowners, people generally, is most 
favorable and most gratifying. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are saying that Saskatchewan has arrived and I certainly agree. 
 
Turning to the opening remarks this afternoon of the Member for Moosomin, which as usual deserves 
very little comment. But because they were on the air and because some people are probably not as well 
acquainted with the Member for Moosomin and the veracity of the statements he makes in this House, I 
think probably I should correct a couple of them. 
 
He mentioned the hog marketing service and the Hog Marketing Commission both in Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan. He talked about a totalitarian set-up that was forcing people out of the hog industry. Mr. 
Speaker, these people opposite ought to be the last ones to ever mention the word hog. After the way 
they handled the hog industry during that long lean hungry seven years that they were in power, with 
hog prices down to 15 cents! That group of people over there and the former Provincial Treasurer, the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition now, and all of those people who supported him, those new ones, very 
few that are still here, and those that are unlucky enough to be sitting there now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the people who allowed the hog farmer to go into debt, considerable debt and 
then allowed him to suffer and stew and go broke. It was only a little more than three or four years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — How about the feed lot operator? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite have a physical difficulty they can't talk when 
they are standing up. I have the floor, I believe, and we will get to them a bit later. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1382 

Let's take a look at the prices then and all of those hog farmers in those days who couldn't even get 
insurance from Saskatchewan Government Insurance office for a hog industry. For some reason or other 
the Liberals didn't even trust them with insurance, they were so desperate. 
 
It seems strange to me that the Member for Moosomin never mentioned Alberta. The fact is that Alberta 
hog farmers are going out of hogs faster than anywhere else in this country, certainly in western Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The fact that we have a Hog Marketing Commission and a guarantee on prices that 
hogs are being bootlegged into Saskatchewan now in order to take advantage of the Saskatchewan Hog 
Marketing Commission and the prices in Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is that in private 
enterprise, Alberta where things are supposed to be so good the hog farmers have never been in more 
trouble than they are today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — doesn't go well with me and will not be accepted very well with hog farmers of this 
province when they hear the kind of speeches that were made by the Member opposite, the Member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Since we have heard a few comments on the Budget we have heard the last one to speak on that side of 
the House who was the Member for Moosomin. I understand he has a hearing problem too, among 
others. I heard he went home from a meeting one time and he said to his wife, “did you hear all those 
oh’s and ah’s”? I understand his wife said,, “All I heard John was oh, and what an ass." He certainly 
portrayed that critter well. Mr. Speaker, with all the asinine behaviour and speeches over there, I don't 
know of a group of people that deserve and need two veterinarians more. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to go into all of the detail of the highway program as it 
has been traditional, but I will be tabling the highway program as soon as I take my seat. I understand 
from the Whip that he has made a commitment which is going to cut down my time to some extent this 
afternoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If I may Mr. Speaker, say a few words about the highway program. 
 
This year we have the largest Budget in the history of the province, some $14 million higher than last 
year and as other speakers have said, other speakers from this side of the House, have indicated that we 
have tried to distribute our highway program across Saskatchewan as fairly as possible. We have not put 
all the money, and we are not spending all the money, on super-highways, neither are we decreasing the 
budget from those 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1383 

necessary arteries that carry the commerce of this province and carry the commerce of Canada. It is a 
program, this year, which is again ambitious and imaginative. It is a program that will aid in balanced 
development of the total provincial economy. It is a program which demonstrates confidence in the 
province and its people. 
 
When I conclude my remarks and table this document I believe all the Members, even Members from 
opposition seats wall be pleased, some of them have done considerably better than those that are 
represented by the Government Members. Not because they are Opposition seats, Mr. Speaker, or 
because they are Government seats but because they fall within the program of development that is good 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
The program continues with the philosophy that all areas and people of the province are entitled to travel 
on roads of a good standard. We intend to continue modest spending and extension as well on the 
four-laning throughout and across Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe that we can say, in Saskatchewan, that we are far ahead again of our two neighboring 
provinces. I hear people occasionally say, when are you going to start moving west of Swift Current, or 
when are you going to get to the Manitoba border? Well, I could answer, I suppose, and the glib answer 
would be that we would be glad to meet the governments of Alberta and Manitoba when they are 
prepared to build more four-laning in those provinces, because it might even be dangerous, Mr. Speaker, 
being accommodated on two-lane highways and hit Saskatchewan and onto four-lane highways and then 
narrow down again to get to Alberta. It just might cause a little difficulty. 
 
I do hope that the sister provinces will continue, and the traffic will continue, to warrant some 
four-laning in the neighboring provinces. 
 
A lion's share of our capital program for extension and improvement of two-lanes, and are for two-lanes. 
This, in the southern areas will cost about $46.5 million, completing about 490 miles of grading. It 
should further complete about 510 miles of oil treatment and 640 miles of paving. We will be spending 
on rural service centres about $1.5 million and spending will bring service under Operation Open Roads 
to 94 more communities; 142 communities already are served under Open Roads and 236 total 
communities will be served by the end of 1975 fiscal year under our Open Roads program. 
 
Our Operation Mainstreet will take the dust proofing, hard surfacing into the main streets of every town 
and village over 150 if they are less than three miles from a highway. 150 more communities under 
Operation Mainstreet; 184 communities are already served, total 334 communities by the end of 
1975-76. 
 
Re: highway extensions — there are a number of grid roads in the province that are not the most heavily 
travelled roads, Mr. Speaker, but they are links between one community and another that the rural 
municipalities take very little interest in. Areas that are what I call, orphan areas. They are sections of 
grid road or areas that should be grid road, that are used mainly by people outside the communities, 
traffic that originates in places other than the municipality that is responsible for them. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1384 

I feel that we must handle this at the provincial level, that there should be some of these connections 
taken into the highway system. They will not be the high traffic count areas in many cases. The high 
traffic count areas, I think, will be taken care of by Municipal Affairs through super grids, but we will be 
looking at some of the connecting roads. One of them was mentioned, the grid south of Saskatoon to the 
dam, by the Member for Hanley, and I believe that roads like those probably do deserve provincial 
attention and if we can possibly manage them, we will attempt to get some of those into the highway 
system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Urban assistance — as you know there was a study made of the urban development 
in Regina called the Regina Environs and Transportation Study, completed nearly two years ago. We 
intend to continue with a similar study in Saskatoon, and we are allocating approximately $100,000 for 
that kind of urban study. This is to determine, to take a far reaching look at what development there 
should be and determine the needs of tomorrow. 
 
Urban transit is a serious problem and has been for some time with large financial deficits in urban 
transit so $1 million will be allocated this year to assist the cities in their transit problems. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There will be capital expenditure in rolling stock and some more direct 
subsidization in passenger assistance. 
 
Air strips are becoming more and more necessary and in the southern part of the province, again, we will 
be allocating approximately 8150,000 this year towards assistance to municipalities, in providing good 
air strips. I think that it is important for air ambulance and other emergencies, both winter and summer, 
that we do upgrade our airstrips wherever possible. I know that we have had suggestions from the 
Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) and other Members throughout the province that suggest that 
these are needed and we are certainly going to move in that direction as quickly as we can in 
co-operation with the municipalities concerned. 
 
Traffic safety is a problem and I am very pleased and very interested to read and I want to congratulate 
the Members on both sides of the House for the work they have done on the Legislative Committee on 
Traffic Safety. We certainly hope and we are going to get a tremendous amount of advice from the 
Legislative Committee on Highway "Traffic Safety. However, wherever possible we have not waited in 
areas that are obvious. This year we set up a Traffic Safety Division, headed by an engineer. He is a 
chap that we got from the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Popoff. He has a great deal of experience in both urban 
and rural traffic problems. It is a full-time job for him and for his staff to identify areas of danger, 
hazardous areas, throughout Saskatchewan and to do whatever is possible to build safety into our 
highway system in the new construction. This is a job that has been needed, a division that has been 
needed for a number of years. I believe that thus far we are the only province that has set up a special 
Highway Traffic Safety 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1385 

Division. I certainly hope that our neighboring provinces will be doing likewise. 
 
At the Highways Ministers' conference in Dauphin, last fall, there was a great deal of interest in our 
division and I do believe that before too long — I believe British Columbia has already started, Alberta 
and Manitoba will also be moving. Now the advantages there will be to pool our resources as we are 
pooling them in agriculture, such as the agricultural machinery testing centre, pooling our ideas in order 
to reduce the ever-increasing hazards of highway driving, and not only highway driving but, highway, 
street and ordinary urban municipal road driving. 
 
It should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about highway safety that less than $0 per cent of 
our accidents in Saskatchewan occur on our highways. The greatest by far are in our urban areas and, 
secondly, the rural ones. We have to talk about, not only highway safety, but safety in general. I hope 
that we can expand this branch and co-operate with the cities and the rural municipalities in upgrading 
safety in all areas that vehicles travel. 
 
Historic site accesses are going to be of a great deal of value to our tourist industry and I am sure that we 
will be working closely with the new Minister, of not a new department, but a combination of two 
departments, in tourist development. We will be looking at and building roads to historic sites that will 
be of a tremendous advantage to our tourist industry. 
 
When I talk about the tourist industry, Mr. Speaker, I am not talking about people outside of the 
province entirely. The best tourists that we have, the people whom I am interested in, are the tourists that 
are going to go from one part of Saskatchewan to another on a sort of 'see Saskatchewan first'. I suggest 
to the people of Saskatchewan that they have many things in their own province that they haven't even 
dreamed of if they would only look around and make next summer's holiday a 'see Saskatchewan' 
holiday. There is much to see in the North and in the South and I invite all people of Saskatchewan to 
visit some of our great historic sites, great natural sites, natural beauty both in the North and in the 
South. From the Big Muddy Valley and the Cypress Hills to the northern part of the province, you just 
can't beat Saskatchewan when it comes to good outdoor living. $1,800,000 has been allocated for this. 
 
We are hoping that the Qu'Appelle Valley scenic route will soon be ready. We are going to be building 
some of the road, No. 247, in Grayson Bridge, Bird's Point area. There will be some highway built there 
this year. But the danger again here, Mr. Speaker, is that if we go in there with a highway and simply 
plough through, the way highways have always done, we would probably be destroying more natural 
beauty than we would be creating. Highways don't necessarily create beauty. 
 
I believe that it is possible, in co-operation with the Department of the Environment, to provide a road 
up to full 300 miles of the beautiful Qu'Appelles, that will allow people to travel at a reasonable pace 
through that Valley and see that beautiful, natural geographic feature of our prairies. I think this will be 
done. I certainly hope that before too long the Federal Government, Department of Regional Economic 
Expansion will provide help. That department is doing some great things 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1386 

in assisting development areas in Saskatchewan in many ways. 
 
They have established, I understand, a full time DREE office in Saskatchewan now with — careful now 
you fellows over there — with 142 civil servants that will be serving Saskatchewan and they will be 
enlarging and advising and actually exploring new areas . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sounds inflationary. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Sounds inflationary, someone said. Well, according to the philosophy over there 
anything you do for people is inflationary. However, I believe that in co-operation with the federal 
Government, whether it be the Canadian northlands programs, the regular general agreement under 
DREE, the industrial expansion or the tourist expansion, the Qu'Appelle Valley, these programs, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly can be, and will be, good for Saskatchewan and good for Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We are going to move forward with a bridge program across the larger rivers of 
Saskatchewan. We hope to locate bridges in areas that have become, sometimes, a bit of a hazard. Dams 
upstream and downstream on both the North and South Saskatchewan have created situations where the 
ice is not nearly as safe as it used to be. Last winter, for instance, at Maymont for the first time the ice 
went out in the middle of the winter. We discovered in fact I had a letter from the Department of 
Highways in Alberta, indicating that we ought to be warning people on the North Saskatchewan that 
sudden releases of water in the North Saskatchewan, upstream, could create some hazard by increased 
flow and that we ought to be keeping an eye on those winter crossings; at Meridian, Maidstone, 
Maymont, etc. 
 
Lancer ferry crossing has already had warning signs on it for a number of years on the South 
Saskatchewan and there are probably more downstream at places like Gronlid, Birch Hills and so on. All 
of these areas are hazardous when you have changed the natural flow of water. This does necessitate 
even more bridges at strategic places across our major rivers. 
 
Northern roads — the Minister of Finance mentioned our, northern road program and he indicated that 
$10 million would be spent on northern roads this year, the developing of northern roads. That, 
incidentally, is about $10 million more than was ever spent during that long, dreary, seven years under 
the Liberals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — These people who say that we are doing nothing in the North. 
 
MR. LANE: — You are doing lots, all wrong. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — All right you go up there and tell them, Mr. Member for Lumsden, you go and tell 
them it is all wrong. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1387 

MR. LAKE: — They know it. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, we will be proceeding — it may be wrong, you know, it may be 
wrong for us to be spending $6 million on upgrading the highway from Waskesiu to La Ronge. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, this could have happened ten years ago. This could have happened eight years ago, 
if these people have had not spent millions of dollars on roads going nowhere, for nothing, on roads like 
the Primrose or the Anglo Rouyn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they had created those roads rather than wasting the money on idle whims and political 
propaganda, those roads are still there, a monument, Mr. Speaker, to the failure, to the absolute failure of 
that Liberal regime. The Primrose Path in the North, the Anglo Rouyn road in the North, where they 
spent $5 million of our money, Mr. Speaker, in order to subsidize a mine that got us $90,000 in revenue 
and left us a hole in the ground. That's the efficiency of that party over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, you'll continue to hear it, Mr. Speaker,-you'll continue to hear it every time you raise your voice 
against anything in criticism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed and we will develop and continue to develop roads for people, not for 
rip-off overnight enterprises like Anglo Rouyn that came in here into the province for only one purpose, 
to milk the rich copper ore at our expense, nothing else and leave us with nothing. Nothing but a hole in 
the ground, Mr. Speaker. And a road leading from nowhere to nowhere. A $3 million road, that $3 
million road that shouldn't have cost any more than $l million. That's another story. I'll tell that too, if 
they'd like me to tell it, I've told it before. Another rip-off, another rip-off. You bet, another rip-off for 
your friends in the contracting business at that time. Oh yes. 
 
MR. D. F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North): — Tell us about those houses in La Ronge. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, those houses in La Ronge, sure I'll tell you about the houses in La 
Ronge. In order to do what is necessary and to bring about programs in northern Saskatchewan, to 
provide . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If we are going to provide services to the people of the North, they have to have a 
place to live. It may be all right for Liberals to let them live in a teepee, but if we're going to have people 
working there, for the native people, we're going to provide housing for them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — And we're going to provide it at cost. And, Mr. Speaker, we're not going to build 
them in the same manner as the former Minister of Public Works did. And I'll tell that story too if he'd 
like me to tell it. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1388 

Mr. Speaker, we are building housing up in there for less money than they are building in the city of 
Regina and better. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We are also moving, not just north, not just north of Waskesiu with one 
super-highway, we have completed a road as far north as 422 miles north of Prince Albert and 
fortunately because we had some civil servants, people working for us, on a government crew that 
completed that road six months in advance of estimates, we were able to get over land surface which we 
would not have been able to get over with the heavy snow fall this winter, over the ice. That commerce 
went into Gulf mine site this winter over land all the way. And I'm pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that 
the final 80, between 80 and 100 miles was completed at a cost of $21,000 per mile. Lowest ever. This is 
no super-highway, I'll be the first one to admit, but it's getting the commerce over the road, and that's a 
whole lot better than the first section of the road that we used to hear some stories about, that was built 
at about $70,000 and $80,000 a mile, by a private contractor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not really blaming the private contractor too much. I think he was faced with some 
difficulties there and some poor direction and some poor advice in places, but on the whole, it was to the 
credit of the engineering staff of the Department of Highways and to Mollard and Associates 
Consultants who selected the route to the Gulf mine site, that we got this road in at that kind of price and 
with that kind of efficiency. It's a real compliment to Alt. Morgan and his crew, of the Department of 
Highways that they should have got there in the time they did, efficiency of that kind and the dedicated 
service rendered to the people of Saskatchewan can't be paid for just in dollars and cents. 
 
While I am at it, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that we have also moved this winter, and moved very 
well, with winter construction, on a road between Green Lake and Meadow Lake, two private 
contractors between Green Lake and Meadow Lake, a government crew between Beauval and Green 
Lake, several miles have been built in winter construction and we have been able to do that at a better 
rate and I hope for a better price than summer construction. Last year, you people will remember, a good 
many of our contractors just couldn't turn a wheel because of excessive rainfall, especially in the 
northeast, in the Hudson Bay and the Carrot River area. In fact, we had to move some of them 
altogether, for the summer, but by using the winter in northern construction we have taken advantage of 
a situation and taken advantage of nature, a natural situation and we are making good headway. 
 
I just received a note before I got up to speak. Two contractors, North Sask. Construction and Potts 
Construction have about 60 per cent of their contract completed and that was all winter work. A 
Government crew has been working in a real tough area, south of Beauval, and they have been operating 
there all winter. They are going to be leaving a good deal of that area during the summer, we are not 
going to continue with much summer construction because of muskegs and sloughs. 
 
In tough construction, building a good base road, this crew is building at a rate of about $26,000 a mile 
in winter 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1389 

efficiently moving dirt. Once again we can be mighty proud of the government crew and of the private 
crews that are braving one of the toughest winters in history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not have as much time as I thought I was going to have. Apparently, there is a 
Whips' arrangement on time, I have a considerable amount more that I should like to say. But when I 
hear the Members opposite crying about no reduction in taxation and that we are not doing anything 
right, I just can't understand them. I say that that is asinine and I say that that is not true. I say that it is 
completely ridiculous that any Member, even though he is an Opposition Member should get up and 
make that kind of statement. Here we are in a province, Mr. Speaker, where cash farm receipts reached 
an all time high of $1.5 billion. Personal income up 25 per cent over 1972, nearly $3.5 billion. Labour 
income is up over ten per cent, per capita income is up 26.2 per cent over 1972. Investments are up 
nearly ten per cent in Saskatchewan. These people talk about tax reductions. We know the kind of tax 
reductions that they provided Black Friday, 1968, when they came back to office and raised every tax in 
sight. The Leader of the Opposition who at that time was the Minister of Finance, reached into the cribs 
of the baby, his sticky fingers went in, I don't know if they were sticky before they went in or when they 
came out, but he even placed a tax on the soap for babies' diapers, taxes on soap, taxes on kids' hotdogs, 
taxes on everything. Then they have the nerve, Mr. Speaker, to get up and say that we haven't reduced 
taxes. 
 
Well, I should like to ask all those people who received a tax cut of $72 on their medicare premiums last 
fall if that was a tax reduction. Fifteen million dollars for the people of Saskatchewan in just one item. 
Millions of dollars in more services, millions of dollars. They talk about increased civil servants, yes, 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to have more civil servants if we're going to carry out programs. We've set up 
entire new departments and I'm proud that we have. We're going to have civil servants show up now 
who have been on the payroll for years, hundreds of them in my Department that have been short 
changed for years, Mr. Speaker, because they were called temporary staff. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The Liberals had seven years to take them into service. Hundreds of them were 
cheated, men who were retiring just this past summer, and I say it's a crying shame, with 42 years of 
service and a retirement fund of $11,000. And now when these people are added to the civil service, 
when they come out as full time workers, then we hear the screams of the Opposition and the Press, look 
at all the civil servants, hundreds of them have been added that should have been added years ago, 
because the Liberals didn't have the intestinal fortitude to put them on full time. Well, we're putting them 
on full time, Mr. Speaker. We're proud of that and we're proud of the new departments that have been 
set up and the service that's being provided to the people of Saskatchewan. And that is why, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to support this Budget. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1390 

MR. D. F. Mac DONALD: (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, it seems rather peculiar that when the 
Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) rose to take his place in this debate that he said the remarks of the 
Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) were not worthy of commenting on and then oddly he took about 
15 minutes to try and defend the position of his Government. I will also say that the remarks of the 
Minister of Highways are not worthy of comment and I mean it and therefore I do not find it necessary 
to defend our position against some of the nonsensical statements that he made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I enter this debate, I should like to congratulate the Minister of Finance (Mr. Bobbins) 
on his appointment to the Cabinet. As the Member knows I have a high regard for the personal integrity 
of the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre. I would wish, him well in his endeavors as Finance 
Minister. Mr. Robbins is going to need a great deal of luck. The position of Provincial Treasurer is a 
very tenuous position in the Blakeney Government. We have had three years of NDP Government, we 
have had three provincial budgets and we have had three different Ministers of Finance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The first two Ministers of Finance have failed and they have been replaced. 
The area in which the two former Ministers failed so miserably is in the area of economic development 
and diversification. It is no small wonder that they keep searching for a new Minister of Finance who 
might show some little success in his field. I am able, at this time, to inform this Legislature that our 
new Minister of Finance will just as surely fail as did his predecessors. This certain failure in the field of 
economic development and diversification should not be considered a personal failure of Mr. Bobbins. 
We should not blame Mr. Robbins, because of any lack of intelligence or because of any lack of effort. 
We can blame the imminent failure of Mr. Robbins on the fact that he is operating within NDF 
philosophy. He is operating within a philosophy that has absolutely no chance to succeed, with the 
problems of creating economic development. 
 
Our new: Treasurer, in his Budget Speech, very bravely devoted a considerable amount of time on s 
section of his speech that he entitles, Economic Development, and after nine pages he summed up by 
saying that this was the balanced development program. Fe must have had his tongue in his cheek even 
he said that. This section of the speech may be considered humorous, if it were not so pathetic. Pathetic 
in that it shows the people of Saskatchewan how little they have, under NDP Government, of achieving 
diversity within our province. 
 
The only items that the Minister of Finance could announce that were of any real significance in the 
future economic development of Saskatchewan were, and I'll list them. 
 

1. Department of Regional Economic Expansion Development Agreements. 
 
2. General Development Agreement between the Province and Federal Government. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1391 

3. Joint Provincial-Federal Development program for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Only three significant programs, all federal programs in nature. 
 
The most significant program that will be undertaken by the NDP in this province to encourage 
development is, and this may well tell us something about the NDP, is a program to restore and preserve 
Saskatchewan's heritage. 
 
In other words, one of the most significant measures suggested by the Blakeney Government to develop 
our economy, is to resurrect the past. 
 
Certainly, our history is important and should be preserved, but to suggest that this be the basis of 
economic development is typical of a party that is bankrupt of mature economic thinking. 
 
The economic planning and development of the NDP is similar to that of the socialist government in 
England. It is the enactment of these policies over a period of years that has brought proud England to its 
knees. These same policies undertaken by the Blakeney Government will hinder and set back our 
economic development in this province for years. 
 
We have seen some of the results of the NDP policy. 
 
In the last six months, while 27 new businesses established in Manitoba and 99 established in Alberta, 
only 15 businesses established in Saskatchewan. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have had even fewer businesses established, than has Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick. 
 
Premier Blakeney talks about development in the North. In the last six months, while Manitoba saw five 
new firms in the woods industry and Alberta saw 25 new firms established, we in Saskatchewan had 
only one expansion in our woods industry. Some of this is because of discriminatory and backward 
policy of the NDP, and some of this is because of the attitude of the NDP towards the business 
community. 
 
This negative attitude toward the business community was summed up by Mr. Engel, the Member for 
Notukeu-Willowbunch, when he was speaking on the Act to establish a Saskatchewan Development 
Fund. 
 
We should remember that Mr. Engel was supposed to be the closest thing to a business man that the 
NDP has, and as such he was appointed by Mr. Blakeney to be Chairman of the Legislative Committee 
for Small Business. 
 
Well, this Member said in this House, on March 6, 1974, and I quote: 
 

But, the one point I want to make is that I don't really worry if it is going to cost the private 
sector something. 

 
This statement typifies the feelings of the NDP toward business. It is a narrow and immature way of 
thinking. It is no wonder that development in our province is being hindered. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1392 

While the section of the Budget Speech concerning development may be viewed facetiously by all of us 
that know better, I must say I was a little upset about the suggestion in the Throne Speech, about the 
importance the NDP attached to the agricultural sector. 
 
The headline in the Leader-Post said in big, bold print, "Farmers to get 46 per cent More". That headline 
is very misleading. The farmers are not getting 46 per cent more, but they are getting 104 more 
employees in the Department of Agriculture. They are getting nearly 100 per cent more costs of 
administration for the Land Bank. They are getting another $20 million of Land Bank money to take 
away their land. No, the farmers are not getting 46 per cent more. I am sure that most farmers would 
agree that they do not want any more of what they have been getting from the Blakeney Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I think we should consider just how much concern the NDP have for our farm 
industries. 
 
About a week ago as the beef industry was experiencing the worst disaster in their history where was the 
concern of Mr. Blakeney and Mr. Messer when we suggested that this situation be discussed in this 
House. The Blakeney Government refused to discuss the emergency situation. I say that this refusal was 
calculated and was part of the overall strategy of the NDP who hope to see the cattlemen crumble. 
Traditionally the cattlemen do not support the NDP. And we can be sure that they are not very likely to 
do so again after the record of the last three years. This bothers Mr. Messer. He knows that the cattlemen 
are a strong force in this province. He therefore, has embarked on a calculated campaign to harass the 
beef industry in the hope that they will succumb to the pressure and become a somewhat weaker force. 
Bluntly he is willing to see our basic industry weakened in order that he may be able to obtain some 
political advantage. 
 
Let's examine the record of the last three years to see why Mr. Blakeney didn't want to talk about the 
problems of the beef industry. 
 
This record includes the recent announcement of a drastic increase in community pasture fees. This is 
the second very sizeable increase in pasture fees since 1971. The Minister admitted in this House that 
the former Liberal Government had contained the fee to a low and equitable price for our cattle industry. 
Now in times of crisis the NDP intend to raise the fees to unreasonable and unjustified levels. 
 
We have seen a discriminatory policy whereby farmers over the age of 65 are not allowed to use the 
facilities of provincial community pastures. These people are told that they are too old to be useful or to 
contribute in the cattle industry. We have seen the rental rates for pasture lease land increase 
dramatically every year since the NDP took power. 
 
We have seen harassment as older farmers and ranchers have tried to sell their land and with it, the lease 
rights being transferred. The NDP want all leases transferred to the Land Bank. We have seen a policy 
of the NDP whereby the sale of 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1393 

lease land was stopped — denying ranchers the opportunity to take ownership of the whole of the 
amount of land that they need to form an economic unit. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan imposed the estate tax on our people. This particular tax will affect 
our farmers and ranchers more than any other group in our society. This fact was realized by the Federal 
Government who made concessions in the capital gains tax — at about the same time that the NDP 
imposed the estate tax in Saskatchewan. This was nothing but a tax on widows, a detestable and 
damaging tax. 
 
We have seen in Saskatchewan an increase in the horned cattle tax. Mr. Messer increased the tax in 
Saskatchewan, at the same time as the Government of Alberta took it off. This tax does not accomplish 
what it was intended to do and as it is discriminatory the cattlemen asked that the tax not be increased. 
Their desires were ignored. The cattle industry is forced to pay this unreasonable tax to the NDP. 
 
In 1970 cattlemen asked for the right to develop a fund known as the Cattle Marketing Voluntary 
Deductions Fund. This was granted by the former administration, and a board of producers was 
established to spend that fund in the interests of the cattle industry. In 1972, Mr. Messer passed an 
amendment to put on the board a representative of a consumer association. This was done against the 
express wishes of cattlemen and resulted in a political hack being appointed by the Minister to oversee 
the spending of cattlemen's money. And it is cattlemen's money. 
 
The program for livestock loans under The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act, 1970 will discontinue in 
July of this year, and will be unavailable to established farmers. This was another good program of the 
former Liberal Government. This was a program that greatly helped to develop our livestock industry in 
the province. A program to assist established farmers to diversify. Another good program stopped. 
 
The irrigation project at Outlook was stopped. Livestock people looked forward to this project to ensure 
quantity and quality of feed in the future. Their hopes are dashed by stopping the Outlook project. 
 
We saw a program of buying bulls for community pastures instituted where people were appointed 
buyers by the Minister of Agriculture because of their political affiliation. We trust that in light of 
resulting improprieties, this practice will not continue. 
 
Mr. Messer also threatened people who were in the business of selling purebred bulls, that all such bulls 
for sale to the province would have to be semen tested at their expense. He was forced to back off from 
this position, a position that would have created unnecessary cost to the farmers. 
 
We have now seen the introduction of a provincial feed grains commission which will add to the costs of 
feeding cattle. All producers with 100 head must now register with the commission and get involved 
with Government red tape and expense before they will be allowed to buy grain. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1394 

We have seen a refusal of the Blakeney Government to implement a program of feed freight assistance 
as is being done in neighboring provinces. This again was a policy of the former Liberal Government in 
years of extreme shortage of hay and straw. Certainly this year, with shortages and skyrocketing costs, 
this program should have been, and in fact still should be implemented. 
 
We have seen suggestions from the Minister's office that farmers and ranchers should pay more money 
to their hired help than they as owners should expect to receive. This is the answer proposed for the 
difficult problem of hiring farm labor by the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Surely, the greatest sign of indifference to the plight of the livestock industry came a couple of weeks 
ago. Mr. Messer, suggested that if the feedlot owners were not able to make suitable profits, they should 
boycott the buying of replacements and thereby force down the price received by the cow-calf operator. 
In other words he suggested passing on the problems down the line to the rancher. I can tell the Minister 
that this suggestion if followed would put the cow-calf rancher out of business. The Minister of 
Agriculture intimated that he was concurring with the Cattlemen's Association in this suggested boycott 
of feeders. The Cattlemen's Association was quick to deny any such foolish suggestion. 
 
The Minister then explained that he was reacting to what he had thought the cattlemen were saying, but 
if he is so naïve as to think the Cattlemen's Association would ever suggest a boycott of their own 
product, then Mr. Messer is truly out of touch with the livestock industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The cattle industry was shocked by the Government purchase of 
Intercontinental Packers. They have learned to be very concerned when the Government intervenes in 
any part of their industry. The cattlemen have good reason for this fear of Government intervention as 
they watched the disastrous results from the Nixon freeze on beef prices. 
 
Saskatchewan cattlemen see as their greatest threat, The Natural Products Marketing Act. The Blakeney 
Government wants a cattle marketing board and the cattlemen are resisting it with all their energy. The 
Blakeney Government hopes that the present financial crisis will force the cattle industry to their knees 
and will therefore submit to government control and in particular, a cattle marketing board. 
 
Therefore, it can be seen that all of the examples I have given you are part of a calculated campaign 
against the livestock industry. 
 
As I said at the beginning, the farmers do not want nor could they stand, 46 per cent more of what they 
have been getting for the last three years. 
 
I should like to say a few words about assistance to urban municipalities. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1395 

One of my main priorities since entering this Legislature has been financial aid to urban municipalities. I 
have consistently, both before and after being elected advocated a program of unconditional grants to 
city governments. Needless to say, I am pleased to see this Budget contain this provision. The amount of 
unconditional grants shown in this Budget are not high enough to do the job needed. And I might add 
that grants previously made to cities for snow removal and police protection have been discontinued. 
 
Therefore, the effective grant will be much less than the $10 per capita that was announced by the 
Treasurer. This announcement is actually a little misleading to the public. I have not calculated what the 
optimum figure that will be needed is, but I suspect that is something like $30 per capita. 
 
However, I will repeat that I am pleased with the announcement because I feel that this commits the 
Government of Saskatchewan to a principle. Now that this principle is established we will have to see 
that grants are increased so that cities are able to reduce property taxation to a level that is consistent to 
maintain services directly related to property. Property taxes should not have to sustain services to 
people. They should be levied to provide services to property. 
 
As the Member for Moose Jaw North, I am also delighted with the provision to develop the Moose Jaw 
Wild Animal Park into a provincial zoo. This, again, is overdue and has been promised for some time. 
This will mark the culmination of a most worthwhile community project started by the Moose Jaw Lions 
Club and continued by the community. I had the pleasure of serving on this board of the Moose Jaw 
Wild Animal Park for some time. 
 
I should also like to comment on the addition of 1,100 new civil servants. There is no question in my 
mind that this represents irresponsible spending by the NDP Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I should also like to suggest that before hiring new civil servants the 
Government opposite should be prepared to give fair treatment to existing employees. I refer to labor 
service workers who have been forced to work more than a 40-hour week. The Government should not 
be allowed to exempt itself from labor laws. Exemptions may be made by the permission of the Minister 
of Labour to employees in the private industry. However, before exemptions are allowed in private 
industry — both management and labor must agree. 
 
This Government has not followed this/practice. Labor service employees did not agree to this 
exemption. The Government forced them into it. 
 
When I asked in the House the other day if the Minister of Labour would intervene, he said that he was 
willing to rely on the collective bargaining process to settle the dispute. This Mr. Minister is nonsense. 
Labor service workers should not be required to negotiate this right. It is their right by law. This 
Government must recognize that right, they don't have to negotiate it. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1396 

May I finish by saying that the Minister of Finance has stated that there are no tax increases in this 
Budget. 
 
This may or may not be true. But by the same token, as this Government is about to receive windfall 
revenues there are not tax reductions. Our revenues can be considered windfall because of the very high 
prices for our wheat and other agricultural products. These returns that farmers are getting will not likely 
continue. We are already seeing some signs of declining prices. 
 
What this Budget has done — and has done very surely and definitely — is to build in tax increases into 
the near future. 
 
This Budget is committing our province to programs that will be difficult to sustain in years of normal 
revenue. This Budget commits us to a number of non-productive programs. These programs can only be 
sustained in the future by tax increases. 
 
Therefore, by the very fact that the Blakeney Government commits us to unproductive programs instead 
of reducing some of the regressive taxes — indicates to me that the Blakeney Government itself is 
committed to a policy of ever rising taxation. And should that fact surprise anyone? 
 
I close by saying that I wholeheartedly support the amendment of the Member for Wilkie and if, as Mr. 
Robbins suggested, he would be willing to fight an election on this Budget – then I suggest and urge the 
Premier to call an election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If he feels that he is ready I can assure him that the Liberal Party is ready, we 
are ready to form the Government and I would just as soon form it in '74 as in '75. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN: (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate my colleagues on their appointment to the Cabinet. The Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. 
Robbins) and the Hon. Minister of the Department of Co-operation (Mr. Cody). They have added to the 
quality and the stature of the Cabinet. I am sure that their contributions will be well rewarded by the 
Government over the years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Needless to say it is with extreme pleasure that I take this opportunity to 
endorse and support my Government's 1974-75 Provincial Budget. 
 
Never in the history of this province has a single budget offered so much to so many people in 
Saskatchewan. This Budget makes it possible for the Government to further honor, and in fact, 
completely fulfil the commitment made to the public in June of 1971. 
 
I want to congratulate my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Finance for his very able presentation of that 
Budget. I 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1397 

commend this Government for fulfilling its New Deal for People and on behalf of the residents of the 
Shellbrook constituency, I say thank you, for the many positive and innovative proposals which are 
contained in the Budget. 
 
I also wish to address a few remarks to our friends opposite. I can only say that I sympathize with the 
finance critic who found himself faced with the insurmountable task of attempting to offer any 
justifiable criticism. He did criticize, indeed he did. But I suggest the justification for that criticism was 
indeed hard to come by. 
 
So far as this Session, we have at times seen a very faint glimmer of hope for the remnants of the Liberal 
Party sitting to your left, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There have actually been a couple of occasions when a flicker of credibility emanated from across the 
way and I challenge all Members across the way to build on that faint hope and to improve their 
credibility by joining Members on this side of the House in unanimously supporting this Budget of the 
future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I understand the predicament faced by Liberal politicians who have to debate 
this program of progress which so sharply contrasts the 'bogus' budgets, that 'black Friday' budget of the 
1960s which was produced while they sat here on the Treasury benches. However, if there is one thing 
the Opposition cannot afford, it is a further loss of credibility. I invite them to shed their political 
overcoats and let their consciences guide their actions in the final vote on this Budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document takes on two very significant characteristics. On one hand it recognizes the 
economic and social potential of Saskatchewan and its people and then makes it possible for the 
province to achieve its full potential by offering the necessary mechanisms and the funding to develop 
that potential. 
 
Presently we find ourselves riding on a wave of economic buoyancy. The very favorable spin-off 
generated by a healthy agricultural sector coupled with the unique position we are in with respect to the 
energy crisis are admittedly points in our favor. However, as this Budget points out in the clearest of 
terms this Government is not willing to gamble that these conditions will continue in the months and 
years ahead and that we must develop the types of programs and policies which will ensure greater 
stability for the people of Saskatchewan in the future. 
 
In the last couple of years it has been made abundantly clear that the Province of Saskatchewan cannot 
rely on Ottawa for the support programs necessary to protect the provincial interest during the periods of 
recession which come from time to time. 
 
The Federal Liberal Government's ineptitude in dealing with meaningful agricultural programs, in 
dealing with transportation discrimination, in resolving the inflation issue, and in combating the realities 
of unemployment are all arguments against expecting support from that Government. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1398 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the shortsightedness at the national level farm cash receipts were at an all time 
high last year, personal incomes were up by over 25 per cent, retail trade increased by over 13 per cent 
and 8,000 new jobs were created within our provincial boundaries. 
 
I am, therefore, confident and I have no reservations about predicting today that we are for the first time 
on the threshold of turning the corner and leaving behind the ‘have not’ image which has plagued our 
economic and social growth over the years past. 
 
I want to specifically deal with two or three areas of this Budget. However", before going into any detail 
I want to suggest to our Members on this side of the House that we do not delude ourselves by any false 
sense of security which might be so easy to adopt as the result of today's economic boom. We admit 
there are still problems to be faced, and we must resolve the other matters which require our attention 
and we must be committed to continue our mandate which is to improve the quality of life for each and 
every citizen of this province. 
 
As opposed to the Liberal Party and their preoccupation with power for the sake of power and their 
empty slogans of 80,000 new jobs, heavy water plants, Volkswagen plants, pulp mills, which meant so 
much to them and so little to the people of Saskatchewan, we believe this New Democratic Government 
has chosen a much more responsible course and I have little doubt that my contention will be 
overwhelmingly confirmed by the people of Saskatchewan when the next provincial election is called. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my time moves along I want to refer briefly to the many programs that this Budget 
includes for the general progress of our province and then turn my major remark to the Budget and what 
it will mean for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It has been mentioned by many of my colleagues, and will be continued to be mentioned, that over 46 
per cent increase in the agricultural budget demonstrates that this Government is committed to place 
financial support where this province's primary industry is located. I commend the Minister of Finance 
for providing so much funds, so much funds for the development of our agricultural industry which is 
the backbone of our province.’ 
 
Emphasis on the tourist development and on Industry and Commerce and the new look in Industry and 
Commerce is, indeed, a welcome addition to the Budget. 
 
Government assistance to municipalities, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is an unprecedented move in Canada to 
assist our urban and rural communities to meet the problems of inflation and to improve their facilities 
to accommodate and serve their respective citizens much better than they have been able to do in the 
past. 
 
In respect to education and the allocation of $114 million to unit boards, this permits us, as a 
government in three successive budgets, to include 100 per cent of the increased costs of that education. 
The boards then did not have to refer or defer those payments onto the taxpayers in their municipalities. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1399 

Health Services, the Denticare program is another program that will be first in the history of Canada as 
have been other health programs in this province been made first in priority over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I want to contrast the program 
of this Budget with what the Liberal Party did or indicated that they had done over the years of their 
development in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time on this topic. It is not my intention to belabor past events in the 
North, however, I want to make it perfectly clear that more than ever we are confident about the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I want, on behalf of all northern residents, to thank 
this Government for the very positive and generous consideration it has given to northern people 
through the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We have progressed a long way in two short years since the Department came 
into being. Since its inception DNS has weathered the storm of controversy and criticism forwarded by 
political interests including the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite the unique problems we have faced, in establishing this new Department, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
we are winning the battle. Yes, there are problems and there will undoubtedly be many more in the 
future, however, we have recorded many successes as well. This latest Budget will be a tremendous 
boost towards the achievement of further goals which have been set by this Government for the people 
of the North. Mr. Speaker, there is a growing optimism and confidence in the North by northern people 
of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
For generations, frustrations and despair intensified as governments continued to perpetuate colonial 
philosophies in the North. Skepticism grew as governments continued to pursue a route of insensitivity 
and shortsightedness. It is difficult to understand the reasons why. However, it is perfectly clear that 
governments of the past were very reluctant to commit themselves to any comprehensive development 
program for the North, both in terms of economics and in terms of social needs. 
 
In the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, in this House we have reiterated the history of events in 
relationship to the adoption of the single agency concept and the events relating to the establishment of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a reiteration of those events is unnecessary only to say that the attitudes of this 
Government and the attitudes and position of the Liberals opposite have remained basically the same. 
Members on this side of the House continue to have confidence in the Department and "What it is 
attempting to carry out. Liberals on the other side have married themselves to the shortsighted position 
that DNS is not the answer and that the abolition of the Department is the only answer. 
 
That position, perhaps, is understandable considering the seven years that you fellows were in office, the 
seven years of no progress in the North when they sat on this side of the House. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1400 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It is understandable why they feel the way they do when one considers their 
deplorable northern track record that developed or emanated out of that government. Mr. Speaker, it is 
not too difficult to foresee the reasons behind their stand. I do regret, however, that the Opposition 
chooses to continue its policy of playing politics with the people of Saskatchewan. It is regrettable that 
they are opposed to helping northern people realize their potential in the North. It is regrettable that the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan is opposed to a people first policy. That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly where 
they stand. Their record in the North consists of nothing more than resource giveaway and a vague 
promise that things will be better in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things are better, things are better in the North, but it is in spite of the former Liberal 
Government and not because of it. I never cease to be amazed at the northern experts sitting on that side 
of the House and the handful of 48-hour experts who claim they have a grasp of the problems we are 
now facing in the North. And who claim they have identified all the northern ills. But I have yet to hear 
for the first time any suggestion of a solution to those problems although you have raised much 
criticism. I invite you, anyone of you who are left to offer debate in this House, to stand and offer the 
position of your Party with respect to development in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) got up in this House and attempted to conjure up 
some support for his negative and misleading observations. 
 
What puzzles me is, does he really believe that these problems were not with him and with his 
Government when,-he was sitting on this side of the House? Were all of these problems, or all these 
economic problems and the social ills studied and discussed by his Cabinet when he was sitting in the 
front benches over here? And if they were why didn't they do something when they had the chance to do 
it? 
 
MR. STEUART: — We did! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, you did. I urge the public of Saskatchewan not to be misled by the 
shallow ramblings from Members opposite when they talk about the North. I urge the Liberal Members 
to listen and the Waffle Member from Saskatoon University (Mr. Richards) to end their charade, quit 
playing politics and join Members on this side of the House who are doing whatever possible to provide 
a better quality of life for the people of the North. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Somehow the Opposition feels it is strange that a degree of controversy has 
erupted since the Department was set up. Liberals seem to feel that the fact more and more people are 
starting to become more vocal is wrong. But they do not realize, or at least they won't admit, that it was 
this Government which established the very mechanisms to allow northern people to have more say in 
their destiny and to speak up. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1401 

Time does not permit me,-today, to trace the total northern story but I tell you, Sir, and all Members in 
this Assembly that I am pleased with and will continue to encourage where possible an even greater 
dialogue with northern people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to make specific reference now to the budgetary provisions for my Department. 
Without a doubt these proposals will win the widespread approval of most all northern people. We are 
not saying that it is enough, however, it reaffirms our commitment and the commitment of this 
Government towards northern people. As the Budget states, the additional sun of $500,000 for economic 
development grants is perhaps the single most significant item in the northern budget. 
 
A new Northern Economic Development program to supplement the grant program will further add to 
the sincere attempts of this Government to promote economic activity among northern residents. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — Who is paying for that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Who pays for that? Yes, economic development is perhaps our biggest 
challenge and is the major thrust of northern initiative. No one will argue with the fact that we still have 
a long way to go, in fact, we are only beginning, however, the important thing is that we are doing 
something, we are concerned, we are providing leadership, we are providing capital assistance and we 
are making progress. There is no government which in two years is going to completely reverse the 
dependency patterns which have existed in the North for over 200 years. 
 
No legislature or bureaucratic structure will succeed in developing, promoting and establishing 
economic programs for northern people unless northern people are given a meaningful input into the 
very policies and programs which are developed. That, Mr. Speaker, is what this Government and what 
this Department is now doing. 
 
Meaningful consultation forms the basis for our northern economic program. Assistance and guidance is 
available and encouraged, however, the fundamental point remains clear that the Department has in the 
past and will in the future, encourage local people to determine their future destiny. 
 
I remember too vividly the arguments in this Assembly put forward by Members opposite when we 
debated the Budget a year ago. I waited with anticipation for the northern critic, the Member for 
Athabasca (Mr. Guy) to give the House some reliable assessment of the budgetary commitments to the 
northern part of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, what position did he take during the debate? Did he talk 
about the North? Did he offer his views on how the money should be spent? Did he articulate the 
problems as he saw them and offer solutions or alternatives? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: (Milestone): — He is coming up. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, Mr. Speaker, this was last year's budget. No, Mr. Speaker, during the 
ramblings of the Budget Address just one year ago, he didn't even mention the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. I am afraid that his attitude towards the North has not changed. In fact, his decision to 
not seek re-election 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1402 

in the area which he claims so much concern about, indicates that his concerns are superficial and his 
motives are nothing less than political. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I challenge him, Mr. Speaker, to participate in this debate and be honest with 
himself and be honest with the public. Does he agree, or his Party, with these budgetary proposals for 
the North or not? He can't have it both ways. Either he supports such things as local autonomy, and the 
Leader of that Party said that he didn't support local autonomy — he didn't support economic 
development funding, he doesn't support northern housing, he doesn't support school and hospital 
construction, he opposes it. He tells us, while he sits there on his soft chair that he doesn't agree. I 
challenge him to clear the air once and for all where his Party stands with respect to the North. 
 
Let's not hear any more of the criticisms, but let's hear some proposals. Get up in this Legislature and put 
your Party's position before the people of northern Saskatchewan as well as the rest of Saskatchewan, I 
suggest. However, if you choose to be silent about what is proposed for the North, and that would be a 
pleasant change, I could hardly fault you as it poses as a very difficult task to criticize this latest 
Government commitment for the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has always puzzled me how Members opposite can so consistently blind themselves to 
the positive developments unfolding in northern Saskatchewan. Their consistent attack on the 
Department might cause some people to actually think that little or nothing positive is taking place in 
this part of the province. Liberals and other political pressure groups conveniently delete reference to 
many of the economic and social advancements being recorded as the result of our Government's 
commitment to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to place our record of accomplishments in northern Saskatchewan before this 
Assembly and the public once again. 
 
To begin I think it is necessary to remind this House that it was the former CCF Government of this 
province which launched studies into the advisability of adopting a new approach towards northern 
Saskatchewan and that was as early as 1958. It was a Task Force Report under the Liberal Government 
which similarity recommended that special attention was necessary, by the Government, to resolve the 
inherent problems related to the North. 
 
Before we were elected to Government by the Saskatchewan electorate our position was made clear. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Not in the North. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, in the North. Our Party was enthusiastic about the potential for economic 
and social improvement in the North and that commitment was made during the 1971 election 
campaign. I am proud to tell this Assembly that we are honoring that pledge, we are moving forward and 
we do have the support of the majority of northern people. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1403 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Athabasca feigns his concern over what he calls the dictatorial approach of 
the Department. Never have I listened to such nonsense. It was this Government which, for the first time 
in the history of these people, made it possible for northern people to have a greater input into their own 
destiny. It was this Government which established the necessary mechanisms to encourage local 
autonomy and greater decision-making powers. Is the Opposition opposed to the Northern Municipal 
Council? Is the Opposition against the expanded emphasis being afforded to local community authority? 
Do you oppose the concept of elected school unit boards as opposed to appointed government boards? 
Do you oppose the encouragement and establishment of an adult education committee and welfare 
committee in northern communities? Yes, they do! 
 
Mr. Speaker, never in the history of the North have northern people ever been given the opportunity they 
have now for greater input into the direction which they will follow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yet Liberals in this House, Liberals across Saskatchewan like to pretend that 
such consultation and local autonomy doesn't exist. During this debate, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition has 
carried on its barrage of criticism by attacking economic development in the North. We still have a long 
way to go, yes, we do. I agree with that. However, for any Member of this Assembly to claim that 
nothing is being done, that welfare is rampant, that the Government is insensitive to the desires of the 
northern people to work, is nothing less than sheer hypocrisy. 
 
Compared to the seven non-years of economic development between 1964-71 I am indeed proud of 
what we have accomplished by the department in two short years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS;: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We do not have all the answers, to the obvious physical and social problems 
which we are facing, however, that in no way deters us from continuing to press for more jobs for more 
people in the North. 
 
This Government does not attempt to sweep these problems under the rug as was the case with the 
Liberal Government conveniently ignoring the problems of northern 'people. I am confident that the 
modest success story which has been developed since DNS was established and will intensify in the 
North and in the months and years ahead the social and economic inequalities will only be a memory. 
No, Mr. Speaker, our economic development thrust does not grab flashy headline's, equal to those 
promising heavy water plants, or Volkswagen plants or pulp mills. However, I assure this House that our 
initiatives are much more than the empty sloganeering which the Liberal Party is so famous for. 
 
Why don't DNS critics like to talk about Beauval? Why is it they don't like to talk about the operation at 
Beauval where close to 100 northern residents are operating a very successful post-cutting operation and 
having reduced the welfare figures considerably in that community, almost to nil? Why don't Members 
opposite talk about the economic development fund which 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1404 

since its inception last summer has been responsible for the creation of over 200 new Saskatchewan jobs 
in such ventures as wood cutting, tourist operating, boat building, trucking, trapping, fishing and other 
like programs in the North — 200 jobs, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. Speaker, you will not hear facts from 
across the way because the Liberal Party does not like to be reminded of the sharp contrast which exists 
between DNS and what they didn't achieve in their seven gaunt years of power. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: — We'll listen, give us.. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well why don't you listen then? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year's capital construction program proposed by the department is projected to 
establish 390 full time jobs as a result of construction activity in the next fiscal year. Do you know how 
many people are employed in that pulp mill that you take so much credit for in Prince Albert"? In 
addition to the 390, 200 jobs will be created as a result of the accelerated northern housing program. The 
new initiative this Government is placing in the tourist industry will provide record numbers of new jobs 
for northern people. The fisheries development program just announced recently is the start of another 
major initiative which will spark more employment and better incomes for northern fishermen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Opposition are whistling in the dark in their attempt to convince the general public that 
the department is doing nothing to promote northern economic development. 
‘ 
There are other major advances as well, we have been criticized for our northern housing program, a 
program which will construct 625 houses over the next five years. 
 
MR. Mac DONALD: — Who makes the profit? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We don't go to Ad Fab to get our houses built. 
 
With the prospect of a northern population doubling by 1980, it is obvious that this program will not 
satisfy the need which will be created in the future. However, are we to be criticized for proceeding at a 
pace equal to our capability, to the northern capability, to construct these units, giving local people an 
input into the actual construction and thereby creating additional employment? Your proposal, in the last 
year you were in office, was not to build those houses in northern Saskatchewan but to go to your 
friends in Ad Fab and purchase them. That was your proposal. 
 
I want to go down a list of achievements, Mr. Speaker, which I believe have added to the northern 
economy and which is helping the North to compare more favorably with the opportunities that we have 
in southern Saskatchewan. The Prospectors' Incentive program relates to the lives of about 70 northern 
native peoples. New emphasis on adult education and training programs, five new mobile trailer units 
being sent into the various communities of the North to teach plumbing, electrical trades, carpentering 
and many of the other trades. The La Ronge Community College for the first time and the additional 
moneys that have been allocated this year. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1405 

Regional Adult Education offices have been opened in three other northern communities for adult 
education. Five hundred and twenty-seven applicants, Mr. Speaker, if my memory serves me correctly, 
for those adult up-grading classes. Bursary programs for northern people being defined and developed, 
additional child welfare workers and probation officers being placed in the field. A dental care program 
for the west-side communities has recently been finalized and will include new facilities at five northern 
communities. A child care centre under construction .at Sandy Bay, a first in the history of the North. 
The first medical health officer on the job, the first time in the last ten years. Four sewer and water 
programs to be built as outlined in the Budget costing $2.2 million. Five new wells completed in five 
different communities. Saskatchewan Power Corporation rates reduced in the North to compare with the 
southern residential rates. A continuation of an accelerated transportation and improvement program. 
Area co-coordinators in place in each of the five administrative electoral areas. Buffalo Narrows 
gymnasium and science facilities near completion. All there was from you fellows were promises, 
promises, promises. For the first time in the history of Buffalo Narrows a gymnasium will be built for 
the school children there and science facilities will be completed, hopefully this year. 
 
Portable classrooms completed in five northern communities where there were no facilities for schools. 
The children had to be taken out of the communities and provided schooling in some other place. Funds 
approved and planning under way for a gymnasium at Sandy Bay.. 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . nothing done . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Listen carefully, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. You say there has been nothing 
done up there! 
 
Tenders have been called for a new school at Ile-a-La-Crosse. A major school addition which was 
designed, Mr. Speaker, by a treaty Indian architect at the initiative of the local people at Ile-a-La-Crosse. 
The list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just part of the list. There are other things going on in the North. There are positive 
initiatives being launched continually and the important thing to remember is the fact that progress is 
being recorded with local people involved at almost every step of the way. We are recording significant 
change in the North, change which has never before taken place or never before happened. There are 
those who feel we are not moving fast enough and there are those who feel we are moving too fast. 
There are still doubts in some minds with respect to the course of action which is being followed. I will 
not argue or condemn those feelings. However, what I do question is there a motive? What concerns me 
greatly is the fact that some political forces including the Liberal Party continue to play their partisan 
politics with the people of northern Saskatchewan. I can only hope that this charade will end soon. 
Members on this side of the House will not be side-tracked by the insincere ramblings of Members 
opposite. We believe we have a job to do in northern Saskatchewan, we will continue to work with 
northern people, for northern people with or without the support of those partisan politicians. I urge the 
northern critic and his colleagues to tread carefully when they assess this Budget and assess the situation 
in northern Saskatchewan. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1406 

Later in this Session legislation respecting northern economic development will be presented which will 
reinforce our commitment to undertake a further comprehensive economic development package. I can 
tell this Assembly that increases in funding for economic development, housing and construction will 
average up to 1,000 per cent increase. 
 
Yet the Liberal Party feels that DNS should be abolished. Mr. Speaker, I at any time will put this record 
of performance against anything ever done in the North for northern people, particularly the seven years 
that you were in office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I only hope that those concerned about the North and concerned for northern 
people will recognize the futility of issuing criticisms which are not consistent with the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, might I just add a few comments with respect to some of the expenditures itemized in this 
Budget, expenditures which will further assist the department to promote northern economic and social 
equality. The allocation, Mr. Speaker, of $850,000 to Northern Municipal Council marks the fulfilment 
of our commitment to extend local government and local decision making in the North. Never before in 
the history of this province has any government taken this approach. We believe it is the right direction. 
We have confidence in the Council which has the elected responsibility to administer the funds and we 
believe that the fund will alleviate many of the ills that have persisted for generations in the North. 
Already modest success stories have been recorded and I am sure that many more will be recorded in the 
months and years ahead. 
 
What is the Liberal approach towards economic development? Do they have an overall policy or only a 
blind loyalty to the fuzzy animal known as the free enterprise system? What about their northern 
economic program? Simply stated their policy boiled down to nothing more than promises of pulp mills 
which according to the Liberals would solve the major economic and social problems in northern 
Saskatchewan. We certainly don't need to go over their northern economic record in the North, other 
than to repeat the fact that it was a total sellout and indeed it was a failure. 
 
Turning it around it is fair to ask what we are doing and how our approach to northern economics differs 
from those to your left, Mr. Speaker. There are many examples which could be cited here today, but let's 
chose just one. I mentioned this earlier, as you know, the Prospector Incentive Plan as started by the 
former CCF Government continues to operate successfully today with close to 70 northern natives 
participating in this training program. Mr. Speaker, 70 native people being trained as the first step 
towards a new northern mineral development program. This program has never grabbed any flashy 
headlines, it doesn't create fanfare and praise from the politicians on this side of the House or on that 
side of the House. But what it does is provide employment and train people for a more sound economic 
future and it does contribute favorably in helping northern people experience pride in what they are 
doing. Do the Liberals think this is a good approach? That's not what your Member for Athabasca says. 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1407 

Do they like the idea of training northern people to help them alleviate their social and economic 
problems? I want to quote from Hansard, just to refresh our memory. February 1,1973 and remind this 
House of the comments of the northern critic, the Member for Athabasca, who said: 
 
It was unsuccessful prior to 1964 it was unsuccessful last year and there is no reason to believe it will be 
any more successful in the future. 
 
And he went on: 
 
It would be far more practical to provide assistance and incentives to companies with expertise and 
experience. The chance of success would be greater and the taxpayers' risk would be smaller. 
 
Typical Liberal style thinking. Turn over the prospecting to the large multinational corporation, give 
them the incentives and let them go at it alone without any regard for the well-being of local people and 
their hope for self improvement. No way, that is your approach! 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . none! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Oh, yes there is. The Member for Athabasca talks about risking the taxpayers' 
money and training native people under this program. Mr. Speaker, never before have I ever listened to 
such empty reasoning. This Government believes that any investment in the people of northern 
Saskatchewan is indeed a good investment if that investment will lead to a better quality of life for these 
men and women and their families. Liberals worry about risk, this Government believes and has 
confidence in people. Where were the Liberals and the northern critic when they were risking our money 
in their infamous Doré Lake Pulp Mill? Where were these concerned elements within the former Liberal 
Government when they sold the people of Saskatchewan down the river in selling out our forest 
resources? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I am afraid this little game which the Liberals keep playing in this Legislature is 
finally catching up to them. I am not challenging their right to criticize, however, again I urge them to be 
constructive and to be positive, offer alternatives and for goodness sake be sincere. 
 
We have come a long way in two short years. The problems of building an administrative structure 
capable to meeting the expectations of the uniqueness of the North is a big job in itself. I believe we 
have assembled a staff and established a morale which will add immeasurably to the task which lies 
ahead of us. 
 
I am disturbed when I see partisan political motivations attack the competency and dedication of the 
very people who are doing their level best to promote a better northern Saskatchewan. These attacks are 
unjustified, uncalled for, and even below the marginal political standards of the Liberal Party. 
 
I would hope that special interest groups adopt a more positive working relationship with the 
Department in its attempt to build on the successes already achieved in the DNS. 



 
March 13, 1974 
 

 
1408 

Mr. Speaker, I am also very encouraged by the Budget increases proposed in the field of northern 
education. The proposed $700,000 increase in northern school grants, the $200,000 expansion grant for 
the La Ronge Community College and the $800,000 allotment to enlarge and improve educational 
facilities in the North will certainly be welcomed by northern people and by all Members of this 
Assembly. 
 
To promote economic development with public money carries with it the responsibility of government 
to ensure that services and standards of living are up to the level that we can encourage stabilization of 
population. Our commitment to undertake as earlier mentioned a $2.2 million sewer and water program 
in four northern communities reflects our intentions to carry through on our commitment in that area. 
 
The emphasis on providing funds to improve and to construct rinks, community centres, fire halls and 
the like, is long, long overdue, but is being done and that is thanks to this Government. This Government 
is also taking the positive steps to promote a viable tourist industry in this province. As I said earlier we 
find ourselves faced with the realization that the aesthetic qualities of life are there, however the 
secondary steps must be developed. A new and more responsible approach towards the construction and 
the expansion and the improvement of roads and airstrips is defined in this Budget as well. Along with 
this, this Government is prepared to appropriate $150,000 for the construction and improvement of 
camping and recreation sites in the North. That's a 300 per cent increase over last year. For the first time 
as announced by my colleague the Minister of Highways, the paving of the road to La Ronge indeed will 
be a tremendous boon to the tourist industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is a progressive Budget, and the very generous provisions relating to the North 
receive our wholehearted endorsation and backing. 
 
I should just like to add a word with respect to the misunderstanding and the distortion relating to the 
northern welfare. It was mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition when he sat in his seat during this 
debate. Over and over again, Members opposite keep harping that welfare payments are either not high 
enough or there is too much welfare, or there is no incentive to get off welfare, or welfare is a problem 
which is not receiving adequate attention by the department. 
 
Let me just bring forward a few statistics. Let me just give you a few. 
 
The Budget states clearly that the caseload for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan recipients was reduced 
dramatically across the province last year — by ten per cent with 2,230 fewer Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan cases in Saskatchewan than the year before. This is the provincial average. However, these 
significant changes are improved in northern Saskatchewan where most recent statistics indicate the 
number of unemployed employables was reduced by 19 per cent — not ten per cent, but 19 per cent — 
Mr. Speaker, and welfare expenditures correspondingly dropped by two per cent. And that was in a 
period when we were going into the winter season from September to January, when they should have 
been, by all previous indications, going up. Yet the Liberals try to paint a 'doom and gloom' picture 
attempting to portray northern Saskatchewan as an area where 



 
March 13, 1974 

 

 
1409 

welfare is on the upswing. 
 
When Members opposite start criticizing the northern welfare conditions I suggest that they should 
remember the fact that of those on welfare, over 85 per cent are unemployable due to unfortunate 
circumstances under which they live. 
 
As one goes through this Budget and studies the provisions for northern Saskatchewan I have full 
confidence that these welfare statistics will decline even more significantly in the next few months, as 
our programs come into force. 
 
In general terms, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a Member of this Government, a Government which in 
less than three years has virtually fulfilled its New Deal for People. 
 
Specifically, I am very pleased and optimistic about the economic and the social improvements which 
will unfold in the upcoming months as a result of this Budget. 
 
I must say that I wish this Budget had come during an election year, as the Member for Moose Jaw said, 
as I am confident of what the results would be. 
 
However, I am equally optimistic that when the next Budget is handed down by the New Democratic 
Government, it will be equally well received by the people of Saskatchewan as recognition that this 
Government is committed to bringing about a better quality of life for its people and is a Government 
which can be trusted to carry out its mandate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I offer to you and the 
Members of this Assembly my wholehearted support for this Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 o’clock p.m. 


