



















































Hansard: April 23, 1974


2589 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Seventeenth Legislature 

56th Day 

Tuesday, April 23, 1974. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

ANNUAL REPORTS FOR YEAR END MARCH 31st 

 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Government, perhaps in particular in this case, to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer). 

 

I am wondering if there is any possibility of us getting the annual report, particularly for the Land Bank and 

perhaps some of the others, with the year end March 31st? I presume they have been working on these 

reports and we've had some three weeks past the March 31st deadline. I am wondering if there is a possibility 

that these might be available? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to be able to accommodate the 

Member in his request. I believe that the information is now being compiled. It may be that it is completed. 

If it is I will have no argument about providing it. It may not be in the form as we have normally found 

annual reports, but I would have to investigate to see whether it would be possible for us to have it in its final 

form, put together and printed. I just can't say at this point in time. I know because of a conversation with 

one of the Land Bank Commissioners a week ago that the information was being compiled, but I can't say 

whether it is completed at this time. 

 

ORDER-IN-COUNCIL — CROP INSURANCE PLAN 

 

MR. GARDNER: — I just might suggest on that that it would certainly be a help to us and to all of the 

Members in Estimates if this could be provided. 

 

I should like to ask a separate and different question of the Minister of Agriculture. I noticed an 

Order-in-Council, dated March 29, 1974 and I'm not sure if I read this properly, and the proper significance 

of it. It seems to be setting up a fully fledged Crown corporation for the operation of the Crop Insurance Plan 

in the province and this is fairly significant fact and I haven't seen any mention of it in the Press. I wonder if 

the Minister would clarify what is actually meant by this Order-in-Council. 

 

MR. MESSER: — It is in fact doing what the Order-in-Council says, setting up a Crown corporation under 

The Crown Corporations Act and we hope that it will give the crop insurance system more flexibility in 

carrying the coverage to farmers in Saskatchewan for their crops. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2590 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE — PUBLIC SERVANTS 

 

MR. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish to direct a question to the 

Minister in charge of the Public Service Commission. I saw a report in the paper the other day where 

political organizers from British Columbia and Saskatchewan were campaigning in the Prince Edward Island 

election and I should like to ask the Minister if there are any public servants from Saskatchewan who have 

taken leave of absence to go to Prince Edward Island? 

 

HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I can only answer, none to my 

knowledge. 

 

MR. GUY: — A supplementary question. Would it not be normal to suggest that public servants from 

Saskatchewan going down to Prince Edward Island would take leave of absence in the normal way, or is it a 

practice of the NDP to let their civil servants run wild throughout the country without any knowledge as to 

where they are or know what they are doing? 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member knows that it is the practice of this Government to be 

above-board and if any civil servants want leave of absence they must ask for it. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

RETURN NO. 180 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. W.E. Michayluk (Redberry) for 

Return No. 180 showing: 

 

(1) Whether the following are employed by the Government of Saskatchewan: Don 

McMillan, Iona Hartwell, Erna M. Stirner, E.A. Anka, L.D. Osczevski, Valerie Rose, Jerry F. 

Bigham, K.E. Mackie, R.C. McMahon, Ian Potter, Sylvia Baker, Irene Banks, E.J. Reed, 

David G. Abbey, B.A. Hindel, Kenneth Pontikes, R. Meldrum, W.H. Horner, V. Nicholls, 

G.J. Darychuk and A. Svetkov. (2) if so, (a) those employed in the Premier's Office; (b) if not 

employed in the Premier's Office, the capacity in which they are employed by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a word or two. 

 

The subject matter of this particular Resolution refers to advertising or public information from the 

Legislative Assembly and Mr. Michayluk or the Member who originally moved this took great pains to point 

out that the Opposition had spent something like $800 to issue a publication to the public of Saskatchewan, 

and took great exception to the Opposition spending $800. This is very strange from a Government that has 

turned around and spent something in the neighborhood of many millions of dollars in public advertising. 

You know, I think of one particular TV ad that I investigated on the Automobile Accident Insurance Fund on 

one television station in the Province of Saskatchewan, was 

 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2591 

$550 for one particular ad. And then the Member turns around and criticizes the Opposition for doing its job 

of turning around and passing out information and reporting on the Session to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think of Service Printers and I don't go through and review all the things about Service Printers, nor will I 

go through the Commonwealth issue again. But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take a moment and talk about the 

exclusive media centre, established for the NDP, down in the basement of this building. It's a very, very 

strange thing that during the Session that where every backbencher in this House is an individual Member 

and has equal rights and equal responsibilities and yet for some reason the Government has turned around 

and established . . . 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, if I can, I'll state my Point 

of Order as briefly as I can. I note that the Member now is speaking about the media centre. I would say with 

respect, Mr. Speaker, my Point of Order is that this is not relating to the topic which is the consideration of 

employees of Executive Council. Nor, Mr. Speaker, can it be said that it is in rebuttal of anything that has 

been said today. I think the earlier comments made about advertising could be in some form of rebuttal to the 

Member for Redberry. But certainly the media centre is new material which in my respectful submission to 

you, Sir, is out of order and I would ask that you so rule to the Member. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I want to point out that the subject matter of 

this Resolution is related to public information and reporting of an individual Member to the constituency of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. I want to point out that the Member who originally introduced this motion 

talked about no. 1, the cost of mailing by individual Members of this Session, he talked about the subject 

matter of mailouts of individual Members of this Session. I suggest to you, Sir, that the exclusive media 

centre downstairs, which is being set up and operated, strictly from the beginning of the Session until the end 

of the Session, and is there for the private use of Government Members to send out public information about 

matters that concern this Session, is of the exact same subject matter and I am merely replying to the 

Member for Redberry when he introduced this particular motion. I can appreciate that the Attorney General 

is sensitive and the Government is sensitive about this very sensitive issue. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Point of Order raised, I believe that when the Member for Redberry introduced this 

motion on strict interpretation, a lot of his statements in debate were not in conjunction with the motion and I 

believe that it makes it impossible for me to rule that replies or comparisons are out of order. So as long as 

the Members relate themselves to expenses and publicity, due to the type of an introductory speech we had 

on this motion, I think I shall have to allow the debate. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. Speaker, if there is any one thing 

that should be of major concern to Members, all Members of the House, is the establishment of this 

exclusive media centre downstairs. In fact, it is rather interesting, members of the Press have complained 

that 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2592 

after attempting to interview a Cabinet Minister or individual Member of the Government, that they have a 

great deal of difficulty. They have to stand in line while members of the exclusive media centre stand up and 

take pre-recordings which is not legitimate news. 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — On a Point of Order, I don't think that the interview of any of the 

reporters which are here representing the news media has anything to do with the question I put on the Order 

Paper. My question was the misinformation which this legislative report contains and the number that were 

sent out under the franking privileges by the Leader of the Opposition. It has nothing to do with the media 

centre or with the reporters interviewing Ministers or the Members of the Legislative Assembly. My concern 

was the misleading information in this pamphlet and the number that were sent out under the franking 

privileges. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Hon. Member will realize that Motion for Return No. 180 does not mention 

franking privileges, it does not mention pamphlets but his speech did. And if Members in introduction of 

motions bring in extraneous material, others replying have the same right to answer him. So I have no 

alternative then to say that the Member is in order. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, On a Point of Order again, exactly what you said, you said they have a 

right to reply to it. Where was the media centre mentioned or even alluded to that there can be a reply? There 

was absolutely no mention by anybody on this side. This is brand new material. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I 

think the Member has pointed out and rightfully so, that he did in fact have an Order for Return on the Order 

Paper dealing with franking privileges and the pamphlet which he just showed us in this House is a pamphlet 

that was sent out under the privileges that are provided through the franking privileges. He related to that 

specifically, Mr. Speaker, and therefore he was in order and you were correct, I submit, in your allowing that 

discussion in his statement of the other day. I think what the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) is 

bringing up today is not related to anything like the pamphlet which is related to the franking privileges and 

therefore he is out of order in bringing in that kind of new material. 

 

MR. J.C. McISAAC (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, surely the Member for Milestone in 

referring to a media centre for the use of MLAs and Members is also talking about legislative news. It's a 

franking privilege under a different frank, I don't know what you call this one. But it is the same thing under 

a different name. And surely it's just as much in order as the Member's reference to a legislative report or any 

other kind of report by Members. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would suggest to Members if they want Motions for Return and the Member for 

Redberry was discussing the franking 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2593 

privileges or pamphlet sent out, then a Motion for Return should have referred to those matters, not be 

referred to in a speech. But this Motion for Return No. 180 does not mention franking privileges, it does not 

mention pamphlets sent out by Members, but his speech did. And therefore it's not proper rules to allow one 

Member to make a speech and not allow others to rebut, so I have to allow the Member to proceed. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I hope that settles it. I want to get back to the 

subject matter. 

 

Perhaps the thing that should disturb the Members of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan, that the 

Government would use taxpayers' money to establish down in the basement of this building an exclusive 

media centre which has as its specific purpose to disseminate NDP propaganda to every radio station and 

newspaper and small newspaper in the Province of Saskatchewan. And the most insidious part of it, Mr. 

Speaker, is that it has been established for the exclusive use of the NDP Members, not the Government. It is 

a part of the democratic tradition of this House that every Member is on equal status, that the only Members 

that belong to the Government are the Treasury Benches. It is also inconceivable that the Government should 

turn around and treat one segment of this House differently than the other segment, or one side of this House 

differently than the other side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the backbenchers are not part of the Government they are exactly the same as Members on this 

side of the House and to establish for $2,000 a week on exclusive services for them, to disseminate, Mr. 

Speaker, I say it's an insult to the Press. Here we have in the Press gallery 12 or 15 press people from all over 

the Province of Saskatchewan who have a responsibility to report . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You're blind. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Blind yes, yes they're not blind to you. You're blind, that's right, because you don't 

have confidence that they are going to report your NDP propaganda, you want to report to the constituents of 

Saskatchewan exactly what you want. Mr. Speaker, I say it's an attack on the credibility of the Press and also 

it's an insult to the people of Saskatchewan, that the NDP should organize a propaganda machine to 

disseminate the kind of information that they want, Mr. Speaker, under the guise, yes, under this disguise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was rather interesting, the newspaper report "Exclusive Media Centre use May Cause 

Controversy." It was rather interesting the man who made the comments, Mr. Jack Kinzel. "Oh, no," he said, 

"we don't want, this is not for the Government or the Opposition Members, why we give them $24,000 a 

year to run their office." Twenty-four thousand dollars, whereas it takes the Executive Council under the 

Premier probably $750,000. And when the Member for Redberry says it's inaccurate, we begin to find more 

and more people everyday, for example, the other day we found Mr. Bruce Lawson, $1,400 a month. The 

Leader of the Opposition had three additional ones the week before. We are beginning to think it's hopelessly 

inaccurate. We've got to do a complete revision of it. We certainly can't keep up to the number of new civil 

servants being hired by the Government. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2594 

But, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this exclusive media centre is perhaps the worst thing that this Government 

has done in contempt of the Legislative Assembly, as contempt for Members of this House, as contempt for 

the Press and the fact that they were restricted to the use of the Government Members, is the worst aspect of 

it. And I'm going to suggest to the Members of the Government and the Treasury benches that they 

immediately cancel this service, push it right out. And to think, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers of this 

province are having their money used to set up this kind of thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many other things to say on this and some of my colleagues have, so I beg leave to 

adjourned the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 19 — SASKATCHEWAN LAND BANK TRANSACTIONS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed amended Resolution by Mr. E.F. Gardner 

(Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly congratulates the Government of Saskatchewan for providing full details 

of transactions of the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission in the Commission's Annual 

Report; and further, that this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to continue in 

this present manner to disclose the details of all Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission 

transactions in the Annual Report. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I was a little disturbed. It was my impression that we had voted the other day, because 

I was a little disturbed to look at the Order Paper today and see under my name a resolution congratulating 

the Government of Saskatchewan for something. I suspected that something had been left out some place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not going again into too many details on the Land Bank or too much information on it. One 

or two speakers did mention the fact that we have said publicly that we would review some of the 

transactions of the Land Bank and I might say that this was our chief reason for asking in this House, on 

several occasions that we be provided with information about those transactions where leases have been 

granted to someone who didn't have the most points under the allocations system. I think that this is very 

important information to have because anyone who is granted a lease with the most points under a fair 

allocations system, of course, is assumed to be the most deserving person and we would have no objection to 

that particular person obtaining the land. In fact, when we become the Government we will immediately 

offer to sell these people the land at very reasonable terms, a long term basis and certainly a reasonable rate 

of interest. There is no doubt about this part of our platform. However, in those cases where someone has got 

the lease that didn't have the highest number of points under a fair allocation system, then, we would want 

certainly to look a those transactions to indicate if the proper person did receive the lease. I think that this is 

very important that this information be made available to the people in the province. As you know this has 

been denied by the Minister of Agriculture that 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2595 

we are just not going to be supplied with this information. 

 

If there are cases throughout the province where political interference has occurred in the transfer of the 

granting of these leases, I think it is for the advantage of everyone involved to know about this. If this 

information had been provided to us it would certainly have solved many of our problems. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I feel one of the biggest issues throughout rural Saskatchewan is still the Land 

Bank program as put forward by this Government and we all know that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Messer) has said on a number of occasions that he wants to change the land tenure system in the province. 

He has made this statement in public on numerous occasions. It's been reported in the Press and he goes on 

to explain this. He doesn't believe that farmers should have the burden of owning their own land; they 

shouldn't have to tie up their capital in land and that this burden of ownership shouldn't be placed on the 

farmers of the province. 

 

Now this is just a difference in philosophy of course to the Liberal philosophy. We don't believe that land 

ownership is a burden. I would think that this is one of the key issues at this time in rural Saskatchewan. The 

people of the province, the rural people, particularly farmers are going to have to make this decision certainly 

before another election. They are going to have to decide if they want the land tenure system, the new land 

tenure system as proposed by the Minister of Agriculture and the NDP whereby the farmers of the province 

will be tenants; where the Government will own the land and the farmers throughout the province will 

simply rent this land from the Government. 

 

You will recall that they have already spent and budgeted about $50 million to purchase land. Even at today's 

prices this is buying a lot of farm land in the province. 

 

I would think that the people certainly at election time, the farmer, is going to have to make this decision. 

Which does he prefer? It is a pretty clear-cut decision, I believe that the farmers will have to make. They are 

going to have to decide on the one hand do they want the change in tenure system that the NDP and Mr. 

Messer are proposing or do they want the traditional system whereby the young farmer gets an opportunity to 

buy and own the land that he is going to farm. That he is going to own it and have the opportunity to pass it 

on to his children and his grandchildren in the future or is he simply going to be a tenant for all of his 

working life on the farm and walk away with nothing when he retires at 60 or 65. I would think that this has 

boiled down to a rather simple issue as far as the rural people are concerned. We have people in this 

province who have come to Saskatchewan from central Europe, from the British Isles, from many places, 

they came here for one reason only and that is to have an opportunity to own their own parcel of land. 

 

I think that when those people sit down and try to make this decision, it is going to be a fairly easy one for 

them. They, in many cases, or their ancestors left parts of the world where they didn't have an opportunity to 

own their own land. Where they had a land tenure system similar to one that the Minister of Agriculture is 

now promoting in Saskatchewan. I don't think they're going to choose the change in land tenure system that 

the Minister proposes, I think they are simply going to say we want the traditional system where a young 

person has 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2596 

the opportunity to buy and own his own land. I don't think that they are going to feel that it is a burden to 

own your own land and have your own farm in your own name and pass it on to your heirs if you so desire. 

 

In closing the debate I would just say that I am pleased at the comments that have been made by Members on 

both sides of the House because it does get the issue in the proper perspective. It gives us an opportunity to 

see the basic difference in philosophy. We can see the land tenure system as proposed by the NDP as 

opposed to the land ownership system that we propose and I feel that this is a fairly clear-cut decision that 

will have to be decided by the rural people in Saskatchewan, certainly at the time of the next election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS - 31 

 

Blakeney Michayluk Faris 

Meakes Byers Owens 

Smishek Thorson Mostoway 

Romanow Whelan Gross 

Messer Kwasnica Feduniak 

Snyder Carlson Comer 

Bowerman Engel Rolfes 

Kowalchuk Robbins Lange 

Brockelbank Tchorzewski Feschuk 

MacMurchy Matsalla Flasch 

Pepper   

 

NAYS — 12 

 

Coupland Grant MacLeod 

Loken MacDonald (Milestone) MacDonald (Moose Jaw) 

Guy McIsaac Wiebe 

Boldt Gardner Malone 

   

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON WELFARE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): That the 

Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare be now concurred in. 

 

MR. H. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few more words to say on this 

Committee. I don't know whether we did that much good. A lot of the things were implemented by the 

Government before we wrote our Report. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2597 

There are a few things that I am concerned about and one of them is that I am very much concerned about the 

build-up of the bureaucracy in Welfare. 

 

It seems to me today it takes 25 to 30 people to do the same job that one did not more than ten years ago. 

This is very evident in the Meadow Lake area. On top of that the system has been changed so that a great 

number of recipients received their cheques direct from Regina. They are on the payroll as Welfare officials 

call it. 

 

I am very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the rapid trend towards the welfare state in this country. While the 

Members opposite who were on the Committee recommended a guaranteed annual wage, I have to oppose it. 

If, Mr. Speaker, I could be assured that it would do away with all the other social crutches such as our 

welfare system as we know it today, unemployment insurance and many others, I may be able to go along 

with it. But I am certain that it would be just one more agency added to the backs of the taxpayer. I think the 

way we should be looking, Mr. Speaker, and if we want to guarantee anything, I think we should be 

guaranteeing job opportunities for all the people of Saskatchewan so that they can take their rightful place in 

society. 

 

This new program that has been brought out to help the low income people might be all right. I sincerely 

hope that it can be used for that purpose and not just another extension of the welfare system. 

 

I know a lot of people who are on low income. They are there because they are sincerely trying to earn their 

own living. They are a proud people who are not going to go and ask for help, even though they may be 

entitled to as much or more if they were on welfare. A lot of those same people would be very insulted if we 

went to them and said, here, we will give you a hand out. They would possibly appreciate more if we were 

able to channel them into a little better job rather than give them a little extra money for income. 

 

By and large, Mr. Speaker, while I think the Committee was a good thing, I just don't think we came out with 

the right type of recommendations. I think of doing away with the hardship clause which virtually allows 

everybody in Saskatchewan whether they want to work or not to apply for welfare. I don't think this to my 

way of thinking is good. If a person is able-bodied then he should be entitled to earn his own living and I 

don't think the taxpayer should be asked to carry the load. 

 

I think of a write-up I noticed in the paper at Thompson, Manitoba where a fellow had turned down quite a 

few jobs, one of them they said at $10,000 a year. They went to the appeal board and the appeal board said 

that the welfare had to pay him. I just don't think that is right in this country. I don't know just what the 

answer is. If a fellow won't work as in this case, then he should go hungry I suppose, and he would finally 

get back on the track and start to earn his own living. 

 

The easier we make it for people to be on welfare I think the rougher it is going to be on the country. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, we do have our reservations. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2598 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. MacDonald (Milestone). 

 

FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON BUSINESS FIRMS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Engel (Notukeu-Willow 

Bunch) that the Final Report on the Special Committee on Business Firms be now concurred in. 

 

HON. W. ROBBINS (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments with 

respect to the Special Committee on Business Firms. 

 

I was pleased and privileged to be a member of this Special Committee. I wish to make it crystal clear to the 

Members of this House that I have no particular bias in relation to either private or public enterprise, and I 

frankly think that if members on the Committee did exhibit biases one way or the other this was detrimental 

in terms of results that might be obtained in terms of that particular Committee. 

 

I should like to make some reference to comments of the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane). I am sorry he is 

not here this morning. 

 

I note in an April 20th edition of the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Lane is quoted as saying that there was a correlation 

between the days on which the Committee held meetings in Regina and Government caucus meetings. He 

said on those days Government members left the meetings early, explaining they had to attend the caucus 

meeting. I specifically deny that that ever happened in my case. I never left a Business Committee meeting to 

attend a caucus meeting. I admit that there were caucus meetings called following the Business Committee 

meetings but I invariably stayed through the Business Committee meeting and did not go to the caucus 

meeting while the Business Committee was meeting. 

 

I note that the Member for Lumsden makes comments with regard to expenditures of various members of the 

Committee. And as reported in the Star-Phoenix I note my name is also included here as receiving $2,285. 

He also points out that he himself only used $1,520. There is a simple explanation for that, he missed 

one-third of all the meetings. It is pretty hard to run up an expense allowance if you don't attend the 

meetings. 

 

Secondly, I would point out that a goodly number of the meetings were held in Regina and obviously a 

member having to come a fair distance had mileage costs where the member who lived in Regina wouldn't 

involve himself in mileage costs. 

 

I would also like to point out that I believe the Member for Wascana made the comment that every member 

in their own way made a contribution to the Committee and its meetings, and I am sure that is true. But I 

suggest that the Member for Lumsden made his biggest contribution when he wasn't in attendance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I am not critical of the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) whom I 

did think made a very reasoned and useful contribution to that Committee. Frankly I think he made a much 

better contribution when the Member for Lumsden was absent. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2599 

I should like to make a few comments with respect to the financial aspects of our Committee meetings and 

the points that were raised by business enterprises across the province. 

 

First of all, I think I should state, Mr. Speaker, that I am convinced that the business community very much 

appreciated the opportunity of attending Committee meetings and presenting their views. Personally, I would 

much prefer to see many more viable individual business operations in this province. I think all of us realize 

that there are a great number of the limitations that apply to general business operations and individual 

business enterprises as related to the agricultural industry. If the agricultural industry isn't viable it is pretty 

difficult to have reasoned viability among business firms that are operating in their rural communities. All 

we need to get in our agricultural industry is a surplus of products which are not saleable at a particular time 

or a limitation of production by reason of the fact that we have drouth or hail or insect damage and the 

businesses which service that industry find themselves in grave difficulty. 

 

I think that is something that we all realized on the Committee and I think that is something that is not 

readily or quickly changed. 

 

Presentation and briefs made to our Committee clearly indicated that the major problem for the independent 

entrepreneur lay in the field of financing. While business people in the larger centres have this problem, it 

appears particularly acute for business operations in smaller centres. Specialized financial requirements in 

the field of risk equity and working and inventory capital are needed. 

 

A goodly number of people appearing before our Committee felt interest rates were unreasonably high. The 

Committee met with a number of representatives of a number of financial institutions to discuss business 

financial problems. These representatives contended that there was no shortage of capital but they clearly 

indicated that viability, management capability and risk involvement factors meant that capital may well not 

be available to those contemplating business operations without an adequate plan or with insufficient 

managerial skills. 

 

That is not an easy problem to solve. It is easy to state it but it is very difficult to find the solution for it. 

 

The Committee found that a considerable amount of criticism was expressed relating to the Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation. A good deal of that criticism fell into two categories — the length of 

time required to process applications and to provide an answer, whether that answer was negative or positive 

and the inconvenience related to location of office and personnel in Regina. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Lumsden was quite critical, suggesting that the members of the 

Committee pushed the idea of business representatives throughout the province. I make no apology as one 

person who made that suggestion and no one suggested to me that I make that suggestion. I simply made the 

suggestion as I felt it was reasonable; that we might have business representatives located in various 

locations of the province, who would act somewhat like Ag Reps do in relation to the farming industry, and 

that these might be useful. I see 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2600 

nothing wrong with a member of the Committee making a comment such as this to which business people 

often responded quite favorably. Although the Member for Lumsden pointed out that no one in the business 

community particularly raised that item, they certainly responded to it quite favorably. 

 

We recommended that a specific group be made responsible for those enterprises which would require small 

loans. The Committee felt that loans to smaller businesses should be restricted in size and they suggest what 

they felt was a reasonable ceiling. The fact that that ceiling happened to correspond with the amount of 

money that was available to people on FarmStart loans, shouldn't I think, create any problems for anyone. 

 

Decentralization of small loans administration was specifically requested and, again, this was done on the 

basis that we felt it would speed up the processing of those applications that might come to that agency. We 

feel that the regional offices should be permitted to grant a moderate level of loans perhaps up to $20,000 

without reference to the central office. We considered the difficulties in obtaining financing for smaller 

businesses and we came to the conclusion that they definitely required special assistance. 

 

We suggested that loans to smaller enterprises should carry the lowest interest rates, with provision of up to 

90 per cent financing from provincial sources, presumably through SEDCO or some such agency. 

 

In providing venture capital we felt and recommended that a buy-back provision should be available to the 

principals involved or to other business people who might be interested in an operation. 

 

The Committee concluded that deferral of interest and principal for the first 18 months of the life of a loan, 

was a reasoned arrangement to assist in overcoming start-up difficulties and we recommended that approach. 

Interest would not be forgiven but would accumulate during the deferral period and the term of the loan 

would have to bear relationship to the life of the depreciating asset. 

 

We were particularly interested in finding a method to assist in transfer of ownership. This problem is not 

unlike the problems related to intergenerational transfers of farm land in this province. It is obvious that 

despite the fact that the Opposition is opposed to the Land Bank this is at least one means of creating transfer 

of land from one generation to another, which is a very severe problem in this province. A similar situation 

occurs with respect to the business enterprises in those rural communities serving agriculture and our 

proposal was designed to assist transfer of ownership from the owner who might be wanting to retire because 

of health or age and turn the enterprise over to a younger person. 

 

The difficulty, of course, is similar in that the younger person has grave difficulty in raising the necessary 

capital to enable him to enter that particular line of enterprise. 

 

We also suggested a business whose gross revenue was below $250,000 may well be classified in today's 

market place as a relatively small business. Such businesses would merit the lowest available loaning rate, 

which would decline as the size of the community decreased. Now that seems a bit unusual but the proposal 

was made specifically to meet, what we felt, was a 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2601 

rather unusual situation. The rate would of necessity bear reasoned relationship to current borrowing costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think any member of the Committee felt that this Special Committee on Business Firms 

would have all the solutions by any means in relation to business problems, but I think that it did serve a very 

useful purpose in going about the province and providing the opportunity for business people to come before 

that Committee, to present their problems and make some suggestions with respect to what they felt might be 

solutions. 

 

The only regret that I had in relation to the Committee was, and I say so specifically, was the actions of the 

Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane). I felt that the Hon. Member for Lumsden from the beginning, did his 

utmost to be critical in terms of the Committee; to bring in a lot of political considerations which should not 

have been there, and I, for one, did not approach that Committee with any political bias whatsoever and I 

wish to make that crystal clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I certainly support the Final Report and I am hopeful that many of its recommendations will be exceedingly 

useful in increasing the viability generally of independent business enterprises in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.W. ENGEL (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion I should like to say that I 

appreciate the remarks of the Committee members who took part in the debate. I think it is obvious for those 

who listened as to who did all the work in this Committee. 

 

The Members on the Government side stood up and reaffirmed the positions they took when we were writing 

our Final Report. They talked about what the report contained and what particular areas of interest that they 

had and the areas that they really wanted to see implemented. 

 

I won't comment that much on what the Member for Lumsden said. I believe he tried to raise a smokescreen 

to camouflage his own activities in his work in the Committee. The Member who just took his seat, the 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins) did a good job in clobbering that Member in the remarks he made. I feel 

it is too bad that the work of this Committee was frustrated the way it was by members, and I will say that 

members on both sides got quite political many times. 

 

When we look at the committees that were set up by this Government during the last three or four years, I 

served on two committees, the Agricultural Committee and this Business Committee, and when I think of 

topics like the Committee on Highway Safety or the Committee for Liquor, they had topics that had general 

appeal to all members. I really appreciate the fact that these committees didn't get involved in that kind of 

political hassle like we had. 

 

When we got involved in this Committee, for a long time most of the public and particularly the Members 

opposite felt that when you talk about business you are somehow talking about something that was just in 

their own ball park on that 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2602 

side of the House. I think that it is too bad that they had this attitude and that they tried to convey this kind of 

an attitude while they were out in the country. I feel that we have proven beyond a shadow of a doubt, that 

that image is not true any more; that the NDP are not the enemy of the businessmen. 

 

I think that by this Final Report of the Business Committee we have proven that we are concerned about the 

problems that they face; we have given the businessmen a fair hearing and we have looked for solutions to 

their problems. The Members who have spoken have outlined and have done a very good job as to what they 

feel the solution should be. 

 

When I look back over the comments of the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) and I just want 

to refer to two comments that the Member made regarding our Business Committee and the Final Report. 

The one statement that he made and I am reading from the transcripts: 

 

The report was nothing more than a collection of papers. 

 

I think that in itself indicates how much work and how much of his homework he really did. It is too bad that 

he didn't go into the collection of papers and study the material that we were summarizing and become more 

personally involved. The second comment I would like to refer to is the one he made regarding the meeting 

that was to be held at Moose Jaw. He said that we wrote a letter to every person who had an E&H tax 

collection responsibility and notified them of the meeting. He was partly right in that case. I did write a letter 

on behalf of the Committee to everybody that had an E&H tax, but this letter — and I have a copy of it here 

before me that is filed with the Clerk's office and he let me use it for this purpose — said this letter was 

written and it states that: 

 

The Committee was soliciting briefs and letters from interested organizations and individuals 

regarding the problems faced by, and the need of services of business firms. 

 

If you wish to submit a brief or a letter you should indicate your intention to the undersigned 

before August 15, 1972. I would encourage you to appear personally before the Committee in 

order to present and discuss your brief. If you are able to do so would you indicate this to the 

Committee. 

 

The Committee is prepared to hold public meetings in various centres in the province during 

September and October in order to achieve the fullest representation. The number and 

location of these meetings will depend on the number of parties indicating a desire to make 

oral presentations to the Committee. 

 

When the Committee had to decide where to meet Moose Jaw wasn't on the list. I will agree with the 

Member that I phoned, but if he thinks that I am that powerful like he mentioned in his debate here, that by a 

phone call we got that many out, all I did was to phone the city to see if they had any intentions in the 

Chamber of Commerce and he said that they were sincerely interested in a meeting. By the number of briefs 

they had and the volume of material that we received in Moose Jaw, I for one, feel that it was a very 

worthwhile meeting. I think that the Member for Moose Jaw North did an injustice to his fellow 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2603 

businessmen in that city for inferring that it wasn't a worthwhile meeting and that the views that were raised 

there were not worthwhile. I think that he was wrong in that aspect and I feel that we received very much 

valuable information and some follow up work from the people at Moose Jaw. 

 

I, for one, support the recommendations of the Final Report, Mr. Speaker. I believe this is a blueprint for 

long range development in this province. 

 

We advocated a change from natural growth to an industrial based economy and I think that if these changes 

follow through like the Minister of Finance has assured us that as one in the Treasury Benches will work for 

that end, that we will see that kind of a growth take place. 

 

We pointed out, and I am summarizing here, that the small businessmen required more help than larger 

firms. Another area that I want to mention is that the improved economic conditions that we are facing right 

now have not, in general, been felt by many of the small businessmen who find themselves in short supply, 

possibly by design. 

 

I should like to reiterate the tourist potential that this province has. This is a good Report, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would encourage every Member of this House to support this motion, that the Final Report of the Business 

Firms be now concurred in. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

PROGRESS REPORT ON HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino) 

that the Progress Report on the Special Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety be now concurred 

in. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity earlier to commence 

speaking on this and then time ran out and I wasn't present when the opportunity afforded itself again. 

 

As I mentioned in my opening remarks, I really don't think the public is concerned, too concerned, about the 

slaughter on the highways. My reason for saying this is that there seems to be very little publicity given to it. 

Death is not nearly as startling as it was 25 years ago and there are so many catastrophes in today's society 

that two or three people meeting their demise on the highway doesn't seem to attract the public attention that 

it did previously. 

 

Even though this may be the case I wouldn't suggest that we, as legislators, ignore it. 

 

This Committee was set up under three headings — education, engineering and enforcement. We were given 

an opportunity to indicate our preference as to which of these sub-committees we would like to work on and 

I had no difficulty in picking the enforcement one because I feel that is probably the most important aspect of 

trying to overcome the disregard that the driving 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2604 

public have for their fellow drivers and pedestrians. 

 

Education certainly must play a role and I think that it is an ongoing role that we have to recognize here. It is 

certainly a helpful role, but let's not kid ourselves, it is a very slow process. The results are going to be 

discouraging, frustrating. When you think of the few people in Saskatchewan who have availed themselves 

of the opportunity of taking a defensive driving course, it would indicate the attitude of the average driver, 

that they feel that this is not really necessary that they are pretty good drivers. Also I think there is an 

inherent daring in a man's makeup that education is going to have difficulty in overcoming. If it wasn't for 

this daring attitude of mankind Christopher Columbus would probably never have discovered this continent 

nor would people have landed on the moon. So I think it is part of our makeup and part that we can't do 

without. It is necessary but hopefully we can do something about keeping it under control. 

 

In the field of engineering I feel that it is somewhat adequate. I can't see our province spending untold sums 

to try and build highways adequate for the loose nut who may be driving a vehicle. I think most of us 

recognize that under adverse conditions we slow our vehicles down and exercise caution. And the better we 

build our highways probably the less necessity there is for this slowing down, but at the time there is going 

to be more disregard for the necessity of slowing down. 

 

A province with only 900,000 people and the greatest number of miles of road of any province in Canada, I 

think must recognize its limits as far as engineering improvements are concerned, because there will always 

be someone who will exceed the safe driving standards of the road. There is always a country road that 

certainly was not intended to accommodate the foolhardy driver. 

 

The four lane highway is about as safe a structure as can be made but in spite of that man seems to be able to 

overcome those safety features and either cross the median or ran into someone who has either stopped or 

slowed down ahead of him. So it would seem to me that enforcement is most effective means of overcoming 

some of our problems. I believe that it is a quick educator. I can't think of anything that will educate people 

as quickly as enforcement. I think it is an effective deterrent. If it wasn't for the potential penalties there 

would be many more violations, I think, of our highway traffic laws. The most of us are law abiding citizens 

either through background or education or because of our fear of penalties. 

 

I think we all get a little tired of watching the crowds gather around the pubs and drinking places particularly 

on Friday and Saturday nights and if we really wanted to slow down the drinking driver or at least the 

drinker getting into his car and driving, there would certainly be a great field there for picking up people. 

And this is the sad part that our society doesn't seem to recognize fully the dangers inherent in over-drinking 

and driving and they pour out of these drinking places, particularly on the weekend nights and no doubt there 

are a good many of them over .08. But for some reason the police enforcement, the law enforcement officers, 

do not make it a point to check on the people coming out of these places. I don't know whether the Liquor 

Commission would be enthused about it being done either because it would probably have a deterrent effect 

on 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2605 

the consumption of liquor. We seem to be a mixed up society when we encourage people right and left to 

drink and with no prohibition on them leaving these establishments and getting into their vehicles and 

driving away. I would think that an occasional drive and picking up people coming out of these 

establishment would have its effect and I would hope that something might be done in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated previously, I was pleased to be on a non-political committee but even the 

Highway Safety and Traffic Committee can turn out to be very political. Because I think the important factor 

is just how far the Government or we, as legislators, are prepared to go on recommendations that might 

emanate from that Committee. I realize that all Committees get pretty enthusiastic about their work, the 

Business Committee, the Welfare Committee, the Liquor Committee and all the other committees that have 

been set up, all get carried away a bit with the importance of their work and the remedies that they propound. 

We saw evidence in this House of the Chairman of the Liquor Committee being very frustrated and 

disappointed in the lack of action by the Government on some recommendations of that Committee, and I 

fear that this may happen in the case of the Highway Safety and Traffic Committee. The true meat of this 

Committee and the results will depend on whether the Cabinet Members, particularly, and the Government 

opposite give this matter priority No. 1 or priority No. 73. I don't expect that they will give it priority No. 1. I 

think that I am a little bit too realistic to expect the Government is going to place this ahead of all the other 

priorities. I would hope that it wouldn't be priority No. 73. I would hope that it would land somewhere in 

between. I think the Government Members, the frontbenchers particularly, should make their feelings known 

to members of the Committee as to their reception of this Committee's recommendations or feelings and I 

am glad the Attorney General is coming in because I believe he and his seatmate are the important ones as to 

what may result from the Highway Safety and Traffic Committee. Because if the Cabinet is not receptive to 

take some action we have wasted our time and we are not going to even begin to cure some of the hazards on 

the highways. As I said, Mr. Attorney General, I would hope some of the frontbenchers, the Cabinet 

Members, would make their feelings known to the members of this Committee and in particular the 

Chairman, so that he won't become overly enthused to the point where we feel that the final recommendation 

should be priority No. 1 over all other priorities of the Government. 

 

As I pointed out, the field of enforcement I think is a very important one. I have voiced my opinion in this 

Legislature before that I think that we live in a too permissive society but I realize I don't have too much 

support. I think Mr, Boldt would support me but I don't know whether I have too many other ones or not. But 

I think the example that was cited in the paper the other day would bring out the point that I wish to make. I 

believe the chap's name was Papp, I'm not sure, but it was reported in the Press that he was finally caught on 

13th Avenue after a 60 mile an hour chase, endangering the lives of several people including the lives of 

pedestrians and motorists, as you can imagine going down 13th Avenue at 60 miles an hour. When he was 

apprehended he was found to be inebriated which was bad enough but he was also driving while suspended. 

Now, personally, I think that for a chap like this the only way to get the message over to him would be a 

public horse whipping and if no one else would undertake to do it if I can borrow Mr. Pepper's bullwhip, 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2606 

I would be willing to do it myself. I don't think and irresponsible individual such as that who would drive 

while suspended at 60 miles an hour on a city street, inebriated, has any sense of responsibility whatsoever. I 

doubt very much whether education or rehabilitation is going to help that chap. But I dare say that some real 

penalty that will make him suffer physically might make him a little bit more considerate the next time. I 

don't know. 

 

I feel that we must zero in on two categories. The drinking driver I think should be shown no mercy 

whatsoever. I think the suspended driver who insists on driving should be treated the same, no mercy 

whatsoever. I think there is some merit in speed reductions. It certainly has been evident in the United States 

and the reduction in highway speeds show a reduction in traffic fatalities. I don't know why everybody is so 

'hell-bent for election' to get from here to there and when they get there they find that they really don't have 

to get there as early as they thought they did. They have nothing to do and have nothing to do with their time. 

In some cases it's spent imbibing and they would probably have been better off if they spent a little more 

time driving on the highway at a more conservative speed. I don't expect that the Government will receive 

this too enthusiastically but I nevertheless feel very strongly that the highway speeds are too high if we are 

concerned as legislators about highway deaths. If we are not then leave them the way they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude on a word of explanation about a program that I believe the Hon. Member 

for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) referred to as ASAP, which is the Alcohol Safety Accident Project carried on 

in Phoenix. This came about as a result of studies in the United States by the National Highway Traffic 

Administration of the Department of Transportation. They felt that they just must take corrective action 

against the problem of the drinker who insists on driving. There are 35 projects set up in various states and 

the one in Phoenix seemed to attract the most attention as far as were concerned and probably the most 

attention throughout the world because a lot of states and jurisdictions have visited that activity to see the 

results of it. The overall objective of the program was to achieve significant reduction in alcohol related 

crashes resulting in fatalities, injuries and property damage. Also the aim was to generate public support and 

stimulate State and Community programs. The project was financed by the Federal Government for 3 1/2 

years by about $2.5 million and the 3 1/2 years will be concluded this September. It comprised a series of 

integrated counter-measures involving many community agencies directed toward the apprehension and the 

rehabilitation of the problem drinkers who insist on driving. The counter-measures include enforcement, 

judicial activities, rehabilitation, public information and education and finally, the very important one, 

evaluation of the project. 

 

The enforcement has been increased in the Phoenix area to properly apprehend more of the problem drinking 

drivers and test new techniques and equipment and hopefully to catch them before they have caused any 

suffering and damage. The upped the police force, the motorcycle officers and the automobile patrolmen. 

One important strengthening was in the judicial area where there was additional court personnel appointed 

and there is a considerable amount of plea-sentencing done. I noticed that a member of our Attorney 

General's Department, Mr. Piragoff, 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2607 

the other day made mention of this and suggested that possibly we should be looking at it in Saskatchewan. I 

presume the Attorney General has it under consideration. 

 

Another very important program in this was a volunteer probation officer program where people suffering 

from the desire to drink and drive were turned over to a voluntary citizen or a citizen under a voluntary 

program for a period of several months, hopefully to educate him in new ways and habits. The rehabilitation 

part of it involved a number of agencies including the university and hospitals. There is an assessment of 

attitudes and people who are found guilty of driving while intoxicated were required to take a four-night 

course of instruction, it might even be limited to one night depending on the seriousness of their offence. In 

some cases they merely were supplied with literature and hopefully received some benefit from that. The 

general aim was to develop a more responsible attitude towards drinking and driving. I doubt very much 

whether the ASAP program in Phoenix would have had very much effect on the case that I cited on 13th 

Avenue last week. 

 

There is considerable co-operation by the public and the media in the Phoenix area. Co-operation is very, 

very good and the dissemination of public information is quite widespread. The Industrial Engineering 

Department of Arizona University is doing an evaluation so that probably by the end of this year or early 

next year they will have a good assessment on the effects of the program and whether it should be continued 

or extended. 

 

I think as far as our Committee is concerned that it made us realize the extent to which our neighbors to the 

South are going in their efforts to try to cope with the problem common to many industrial countries besides 

their own including our own country. Some portions of the program certainly can be adapted to 

Saskatchewan. I think the Committee felt that it was not practical to incorporate in total into any 

recommendations that might be emanating from the Committee. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I just want to once again appeal to the Government Members to let their feelings 

be known to Committee members so that when the Committee does come down with its final report we can 

be realistic in our report and recommendations. I think it has to take two forms, one is for immediate action 

and one over a long-term period where the recommended co-ordinating agency, whatever form it might take, 

would ride herd on the long-range program so that we wouldn't lose sight of the necessity of continually 

hammering away and also probably eliminate the necessity of periodic committees such as our own, being 

set up. I feel that with two of these committees now having examined the problem so extensively that there is 

really no necessity for a repetition of this for a good many years, if ever, providing a co-ordinating and 

continuing agency is established. Unless the Government is prepared to look favorably on the establishment 

of such a co-ordinating agency I would feel that the hope of a worthwhile number of solutions to our 

problems are quite remote. Because legislators have a tendency to forget the urgency of these things once we 

adjourn and then about three or four years later someone suggests that it is high time we had another 

committee to investigate it and about all we can do is review the same material that we have had before us in 

the last year. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2608 

I think that covers all I wish to say and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before this debate is closed I wish to say just a few words. I 

am the last member of the Highway Traffic Committee to speak. I can assure you that my remarks will be 

brief. What has already been said in the debate has covered very well I think what the Committee is all 

about, the briefs that we have had presented, the studying that we have done on our own, the trip to Phoenix, 

the problems that we have been faced with, some of the suggestions that have been made to us by the people 

who are interested and who have presented briefs to the Committee. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

really only the beginning for this Committee. What we have done to date has not had very much value in 

cutting down the deaths and the accidents that have occurred on the highway and what it all boils down to is 

this report is only a progress report and the real success or failure of this Committee will be dependent upon 

the recommendations that we will be able to put in the Final Report. 

 

I think the responsibility lies very heavy on our shoulders to come up with recommendations that will 

reverse the present trend of more accidents and more deaths on our highway system. And if we can do this 

then I suggest that our Committee will have been a success. It is certainly, and I am sure I speak for all 

members of the Committee when I say this is the intention and the hope of the Committee. However, it is 

going to be a very difficult task to come up with solutions because these recommendations that we make to 

the Government today must be I think first of all reasonably acceptable to the public, as we must have the 

co-operation of the general public in any Highway Traffic Safety program, if it is going to be successful. Any 

conflict of enforcement with the public I don't think is in the best interest of highway and traffic safety. I 

have some doubt about the remarks of my colleague who just took his seat about police cars sitting outside 

of bars and taverns to pick up people as they come out. I am sure that for the first few weeks the number of 

.08s or whatever it is would increase but I am sure that the conflict that would develop between the 

enforcement agencies and the general public with that kind of treatment would not, in the long run, do very 

much to improve the reduction in numbers of intoxicated drivers or impaired drivers on our highways. I 

think we have to come up with a more realistic approach with the same end in mind of getting these people 

either educated or in some manner to get them off the highways before they have reached the level when they 

are not capable of driving their vehicles. 

 

I think that any recommendations must be enforceable. The recommendation or the suggestion has been 

made that perhaps .08 should be reduced to .06 or even .04, and there is no question in my mind that at .04 

and .06 perhaps there are some drivers who are not capable of handling their cars. However, at the present 

time we have not seen a good job of enforcing the .08 so I can't really see that anything is to be gained by 

lowering it to .06 or .04 until we come up with a solution to how we are going to enforce the present level of 

.08. I am sure that if we can get all, and I say all, the .08 drivers off the road and keep them off the road, we 

will have gone a long way to solving our problems on highway traffic as they relate to the use of 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2609 

alcohol. 

 

So any recommendations that we make to the Government must be enforceable otherwise we are not going 

to solve very much of the problem that faces us. I think that the recommendations must be realistic and 

flexible and I think this is where a great deal of committee work will have to be done in coming up with 

recommendations that fit these requirements of being flexible and realistic. I hope that we can come up with 

some recommendations that are new, that have not been tried in other areas or perhaps have been tried in 

pilot projects and can be refined to fit the situation as it exists here in Saskatchewan. 

 

There is no question that our recommendations are going to require some stern measures to be taken. But I 

think these measures can only be taken in the context of public education. No matter how severe the law is 

or how strong the enforcement is, without public education to make the motoring public aware of the hazards 

that they create when they don't drive according to the law, and the hazard that they face from other drivers, 

who are not driving according to the law, until that is accomplished I don't think we shall have a long-term 

solution to the problems of highway traffic and safety. 

 

I think that after all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, that success will only come when the travelling public are 

concerned and determined to reduce accident fatalities. As I say all the laws and regulations and programs 

won't help if the public won't co-operate with them. We must convince the public once and for all, that it is 

in their own best interests to obey the traffic laws, not to drive while suspended, not to drive while under the 

influence of liquor and all the other problems which we have had related to us as being examples of what 

create traffic hazards on our roads today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some other comments that I should like to make so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 26 — GUARANTEED MONTHLY INCOME FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution of Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon 

University): 

 

That this Assembly calls for immediate government consideration of guaranteeing minimum 

monthly income levels for seniors citizens of $350 per individual and $500 per couple, as 

recommended in the Report by the Senior Citizens' Commission. 

 

MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words to this 

Resolution. 

 

First of all I want to say that I completely support the principle contained in the Resolution. I am not sure if 

the figures of $350 per single and $500 for married persons over 65 is exactly the right amount, but I realize 

that this was the 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2610 

amount suggested by the Commission and I am willing to accept that figure. I also would be in agreement 

with possibly of a phasing in of this type of figure, $350 and $500. I am not adamant that it be done 

immediately or that that be the exact figure. But I feel very strongly about the principle contained in this 

Resolution and I support it. 

 

In my mind the treatment given to our senior citizens by society today is nothing less than shabby. I think 

that we should have a real concern. I won't concede to anyone that the principle involved in this Resolution 

is a socialistic program or welfare program. It is a program that incorporates, in my mind, just common 

decency. 

 

There are some Members of this House apparently who feel that senior citizens do not have right. But in my 

mind there is no question at all that this Legislature has a duty to provide for better treatment of our senior 

citizens than is currently being done in this province. 

 

We are talking about senior citizens of this province. We are talking about the people who helped to build 

this province. We are talking about people who have already made their contributions in this province. We 

are talking about people who have made possible the way of life that we enjoy today and now many of them 

live in poverty. 

 

These same people have set the stage for the prosperity that we are today enjoying and in this very day they 

are not able to enjoy the prosperity which they set the stage for. It is a fact that in this province today we now 

have financial resources that could provide for adequate treatment of our senior citizens. We now have great 

revenues from the oil industry; we now have a very buoyant economy; we now have decent prices for our 

grain and other agricultural products. We do have the financial resources today to provide for better 

treatment of our senior citizens and I think that we do have that revenue because of the contribution made by 

many of these same senior citizens that are today living in poverty. 

 

Many of the senior citizens that are in poverty today find themselves that way, not necessarily because of 

anything that they either did or did not do. In fact some of them are living in poverty because of the things 

that we are doing today. The NDP Government of this province can take its full share of the blame for 

causing inflation, that is causing so much hardship to a lot of the senior citizens. 

 

There is no government in Canada that is spending money any faster, and in many cases, not too wisely, that 

is helping to cause a bad situation for many senior citizens. Many of the senior citizens, as I said, who are 

living in poverty have made a great contribution already in their lifetime. And at the time they were making 

these contributions pensions were not available to them. They did not have pensions set up that they could 

contribute to. 

 

The same person today making the same type of contribution to our society will be building up a pension and 

will not have to live in the same type of poverty as some of our senior citizens are today. A lot of people who 

are in poverty are senior citizens today, in fact they thought they had made adequate provision for their 

retirement. They put a little bit of money 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2611 

away. I suppose back in 1945 in those years that people retired and had a nest egg of $4,000 or $5,000 they 

thought that that was really something. Four thousand dollars or $5,000 to them in 1940 or 1945 was a pretty 

good chunk of money and they likely felt very secure. And the inflation that is rampant today has just wiped 

out the savings that those people had thought they had put away for their retirement. 

 

Make no mistake about it the inflation that is rampant today is caused by the succeeding generation and no 

one in this House can be excused of helping to fan the fires of that inflation which is helping to spur on the 

incidence of poverty of our senior citizens. 

 

The Government opposite has taken some steps for some people in our society and I think of increasing 

minimum wages. They have increased the number of holidays for our workers. Now we have a plan for our 

working poor. We have increased our welfare payments; we have even put on premiums for hogs. These 

programs are fine for all of these people who will benefit, but the senior citizens are not going to benefit 

from higher minimum wage, in fact, the same higher minimum wage is going to cause some hardship to 

many senior citizens who are retired. Certainly the plan for assisting the working poor is going to help a 

good many people who may need help but, again, it is not going to help the senior citizen as obviously he is 

not working. 

 

A good many of these programs will simply add to the costs of goods and services and therefore cause more 

inflation and further reduce the position of the senior citizen. 

 

I think it is important to senior citizens to be recognized and recognized for the contributions that they have 

made. I think it is the duty of every one of us in this Legislature to make sure that our senior citizens are able 

to live in dignity. We must do what is within our power and I think that now we do have the power, with the 

present economy and our oil revenues and so on, we now have the financial resources in this province to 

provide a small degree of dignity to our senior citizens living in poverty conditions. 

 

We presently provide some degree of dignity to small groups of our senior citizens population. I would bring 

to mind the example of senior citizens' housing and there are different instances of highrise senior citizens' 

housing. I would suggest that in these cases many of the people are paying rents in the highrise apartments, 

for example, of $50 per month. I would suggest that Governments are subsidizing this to the tune of $100 or 

$150 a month. This is fine for those people who are fortunate enough to get into a senior citizens' highrise or 

some other such accommodation. But what about the many senior citizens who are unable to get into these 

subsidized housing units? What about the senior citizens who do not want to live in a senior citizens' home 

for one reason or another? Do they not deserve to get some assistance also so that they can have some degree 

of dignity? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is a shameful act to continue to ignore the senior citizens and the plight that they 

are finding themselves in. There is one thing that seems to me to be as important as anything else, that the 

working poor, the person on welfare, the person on the minimum wage has one thing in common with some 

of the senior citizens, they may be existing in 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2612 

poverty but they have one thing that separates them, very distinctly from the senior citizens who lives in 

poverty. Most people have some hope that their condition will improve. The person on minimum wage at 

least has some hope that he will get a better job or that things will get better, or that whatever conditions 

exist that are keeping somebody on welfare that these conditions will change. They have hope. The senior 

citizen has no hope that things will change. He has to exist on what our society is willing to give him. 

 

I would also say that the estimate of $75 million, I think, was made that this type of program would cost, I 

think this is far out of line. I don't know what the cost would be but I think that it would likely be closer to 

$25 million or $30 million, taking into account federal contributions and so on. I would also remind this 

House that this program undoubtedly gets smaller and smaller in future years, most people retiring now and 

more people in the future will have adequate pensions to retire on. A need for this type of program in the 

future will cease to exist, I would hope. 

 

I should just like to comment very briefly on the remarks made by the Attorney General when he entered into 

this debate. I would have to say that I was very disappointed in the remarks of the Attorney General. I 

believe that he spoke for himself and for the Government. There have been very few comments made by 

Government Members. They made very little contribution to this debate. The very fact that Members 

opposite would not second the motion should tell us something about how they feel on this type of thing. 

 

The Attorney General made some mention that this is all right for British Columbia to do, a program like 

this, because they are wealthy and it is a different situation. Then he went on to say that senior citizens all 

over this country should be treated equally, not differently. He doesn't take into account the fact that 

minimum wages are different all across this country; that provisions for holidays for workers are different all 

over this country; that this Government is going to undertake a program for the working poor, so that the 

working poor won't be equal all over this country. I don't know why he says that senior citizens have to be 

treated equally. 

 

We can treat our senior citizens the way we feel that they should be treated. If they are not treated that way in 

Ontario or Manitoba, well that is fine, but we have a duty and we have the resources now to treat our senior 

citizens the way that we would like to treat them. 

 

The Attorney General spoke for about half an hour and in my mind he didn't address himself to the question 

of senior citizens and what the province can do for them, hardly at all during that half hour. He talked abut 

what wasn't done for the last six or ten years. He talked about what Ottawa wasn't doing and what they 

should do. I would remind the Attorney General that this Resolution calls for the Provincial Government to 

consider giving the deserved and merited assistance to senior citizens. It does not call upon the Federal 

Government to give assistance. 

 

This Resolution was for this Legislature to consider what we should do or what we could do or what we 

should not do. I would have to take it that the remarks of the Attorney General 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2613 

indicate that the Government opposite is not willing to consider that they have any obligations to senior 

citizens in this province. I have to say that I was very disappointed. 

 

The Attorney General, in my mind, answered for the Government and that it intends to do nothing, we 

should blame Ottawa and they are not going to take any action to help the cause of the senior citizens of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would strongly support the Resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to say a few words on the 

Resolution pertaining to senior citizens. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting the way this particular motion was worded. The motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly calls for immediate government consideration. 

 

Unless there is a word missing, it says 'government consideration.' Maybe the Member (Mr. Richards) 

intentionally worded it that way because last year, as it was pointed out, he did support a resolution which 

urged the Federal Government to increase the senior citizens' assistance. I think that the Member for 

Saskatoon University believes that that is the right step to take so that we can have some uniformity right 

across this country in regard to senior citizens, as we would like to see, for the working poor and those on 

welfare. 

 

If that is what the Member for Saskatoon University intended, that the Federal Government should give 

consideration, I wholeheartedly support the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find the remarks of the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. MacDonald) rather humorous, 

because the record of the Members opposite when they were the Government in regard to their assistance to 

senior citizens is well known. One needs only refer to a few editorials that were contained in the Leader Post 

and the Star-Phoenix and I am just going to refer to one and I think it very clearly shows the attitude of the 

Liberals when they were in power. Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely convinced the only reason that the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) moved the motion and it was seconded by the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. 

Grant) last year, which was identical to the petition presented by the senior citizens as brought into this 

House by the Member for Nutana Centre (Mr. Robbins), the only reason, Mr. Speaker, they moved that 

motion was because they felt they could get some political advantage in moving that motion. They knew that 

they would have absolutely no responsibility for carrying it out and if they were the Government they 

certainly would do nothing about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe possibly that this is what the Members opposite feel and I want to read to you what 

the former Minister of Health said to senior citizens when he was the Minister. When the Saskatchewan 

Pensioners and Senior Citizens' Association met with the Minister of Health and pleaded with him to do 

something to assist senior citizens his reply of course was that they would do nothing. The senior citizens at 

that time pleaded with the Hon. Member that he should abolish 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2614 

utilization fees on Medicare. His answer was, No. They asked him to abolish hospitalization utilization fees, 

his answer was, No. They asked him to enable pensioners to get lower bus and rail travel rates and his 

answer was, No. They asked him to give bigger exemptions on personal income tax and his answer was, No. 

They asked him to also exempt senior citizens from paying taxes for school purposes and his answer was, 

No. After the interview the Minister was interviewed and this was his reply: "We said there would be no 

change." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this clearly indicates the attitude of the Members opposite. We need only to go to 

some of the things that they did not do when they were in power. The minimum wage up to May of 1971 or 

April of 1971 was only $1.25 an hour in this province. In seven years it had only reached $1.25 an hour. 

Since we have formed the Government the minimum wage as of July 2nd, 1974 will be $2.25 an hour and in 

my opinion, Mr. Speaker, even that is much too low. 

 

But what do the Members opposite have to say about the increase of the minimum wage? The Member for 

Lumsden said it is inflationary. The Leader of the Opposition said it was inflationary. What is their attitude 

towards the poor? Give them as little as you can get away with. Mr. Speaker, when it came to people on 

Welfare exactly the same thing applied. Give them as little as you can get away with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can these Members support a Resolution like this one we are debating today and at the 

same time when the Welfare Report recommends a guaranteed annual income, the Members opposite 

opposed it. What does the Senior Citizens' Report say on the guaranteed annual income and I want to read 

from page 17: 

 

We urge the province to continue its efforts federally towards the establishment of a 

guaranteed annual income program for all people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a guaranteed annual income would give senior citizens what we are discussing in the 

Resolution today but the Members opposite opposed that. On the one hand they say they are in favor of 

helping our senior citizens and yet on the other hand they opposed the very recommendations made in the 

Welfare Report which would have given our senior citizens a guaranteed annual income. Mr. Speaker, to me 

this is completely contradictory. 

 

Members opposite, and we only have to listen to the Member for Albert Park (Mr. MacDonald) when they 

criticize this Government in giving the members of the Power Corporation a 15 per cent and giving the 

teachers an eight or nine per cent . . . 

 

MR. MacLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege, I am sure that the Hon. Member doesn't want to 

read something incorrectly into the record and, therefore, when he suggests that the Hon. Member for Albert 

Park criticized the Government for giving 15 per cent increase to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

people, he is totally in error. I have not criticized it, I have in fact been very pleased with it and I am sure he 

doesn't want to make that mistake. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That's a debating point and 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2615 

it shouldn't be raised as a Point of Order. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, if the Member for Albert Park would only listen a little more and not be so 

eager to talk I would have told him that he criticized the Government giving Power Corporation members 15 

per cent and at the same time giving teachers only eight or nine per cent. You must wait until I come to the 

end of a sentence before you know what I am going to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 15 per cent that is given to Power Corporation members gives them on the average about 

$1,000 increase per year. The teachers on an eight or nine per cent increase also received over a $1,000 per 

year. The point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the policy followed by the Members opposite when 

they were the Government on using a percentage increase is simply not acceptable to me and to the 

Government on this side. When they were the Government they gave hospital workers a six per cent 

increase. A six per cent increase on $300 meant an $18 increase per year. Yet at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

they were quite prepared to give doctors a six or seven per cent increase and very often they received a 

$2,000 increase. My point, Mr. Speaker, is that we should get away from these percentages and talk about 

flat rate increases. What I should like to see, Mr. Speaker, is a flat rate increase not just in Saskatchewan but 

right across this country, so that top people who are making $40,000 to $50,000 a year are not receiving 

$3,000, $4,000 or $5,000 annual increases whereas those on a lower income only receive a small dollar value 

increase each year. Therefore, I should like to see that a two or three per cent escalator clause as applied to 

senior citizens is done away with and that we talk about flat rate increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not sure whether the dollar value is why we should be debating but the principle, Mr. 

Speaker, to me is that all senior citizens in Canada have the right to a guaranteed annual income and should 

not be based on the wealth of individual provinces. I don't think any Member in this House would say to the 

people in Newfoundland or the people in Prince Edward Island, to the people in Nova Scotia, because your 

economy can't support $350 per senior citizen and $500 per couple, therefore, you cannot have it for your 

people. That's why, Mr. Speaker, it has got to be a federal program, a federal program which is subsidized by 

the rich provinces and, Mr. Speaker, that is why I should like to see this Resolution amended so that the 

Assembly urges the Federal Government to implement the program 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite said that this Government is completely insensitive to the needs of 

senior citizens. Let me, Mr. Speaker, review for them what we have done since 1971. The budget in 1973 did 

away with hospitalization and medicare premiums. Mr. Speaker, we increased the Property Improvement 

Grant for all citizens, including senior citizens. In last year's budget, Mr. Speaker, we gave financial 

assistance for hearing aids. It paid the nursing component of Level III care for senior citizens. It established a 

Housing Corporation which gives assistance to senior citizens. We increased our activities in the area of 

Meals on Wheels and Homemakers. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this budget last year set up a committee to 

investigate the needs of the senior citizens and let me say if the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) acts 

as rapidly on the Senior Citizens' Report as he did on the Welfare Report, the senior citizens have much to 

hope for. 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

 

2616 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is fair to say that this Government has not forgotten its senior citizens and it 

recognizes that their plight is serious and that more help is required so that our senior citizens will be able to 

retire in dignity in the community in which they wish to reside. Therefore, last year I recommended to this 

House that we cannot just speak on economic terms. We must also take into consideration the recreation 

facilities, we must take into consideration housing facilities and we must also take into consideration 

facilities for senior citizens in small communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make a comparison between what the Budget of 1974 under this Government has done 

for senior citizens as compared to what the Members opposite did when they were the Government. Benefits 

to senior citizens under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan — Liberals paid $4 million, the 1974 Budget $6.8 

million. Grants to Special-care Homes — Liberals provided nothing in 1970-71, we are providing $5.4 

million. Community Services to the Aged — Liberals $60,000, we are providing $850,000. Construction 

grants to Special-care Homes — Liberals provided $525,000, we are providing $990,600 or almost $1 

million. Yet, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite say we do nothing for senior citizens. 

 

The opposite, Mr. Speaker, is true, whereas they gave a total of $4.6 million in their last budget, we are 

giving $14 million to senior citizens. Over and above the benefits provided by the Department of Social 

Services are the following, Mr. Speaker: Senior Citizens' Home Repair Program — $3 million; Low Rental 

Accommodation for Senior Citizens — $605,000; abolition, as I mentioned before, of hospitalization and 

medicare premiums, a saving to senior citizens of $3 million. In 1970-71 the Liberals charged these same 

senior citizens $2 million annually in deterrent fees and if you add the deterrent fees and the medical care 

premiums together, it cost the senior citizens under the Liberal regime half a million dollars more than they 

ever received. And they claim that they are in sympathy with senior citizens. I think the record shows 

otherwise. 

 

Totalling all the programs, Mr. Speaker, all the programs, not counting Low Rental Housing, Property 

Improvement Grants, our Government is providing some $22 million for senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we look at nursing homes and special-care homes this Government again is taking some 

action. In 1973 we provided grants of $1.80 per day for Level II, $4.80 per day for Level III. This year the 

grant will be $3 per day for Level II and $7 per day for guests in Level III care. At the same time we will 

provide funds to pay for 80 per cent of any deficit incurred by a non-profit home this past year. This will 

allow them time to adjust and to get on to the new system so they can manage to make a break-even position 

in the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to say this Government is insensitive to senior citizens is simply not facing the facts. We have 

taken significant steps to help our senior citizens. We believe that you cannot look at senior citizens' 

assistance only in financial terms but that you must look at it in its totality. Therefore, we have looked at 

recreation facilities, we have looked at nursing care homes, we have looked at senior citizens' housing, and 

Mr. Speaker, I think this Government under the capable leadership of Allan Blakeney can be justly proud of 

its programs for senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, I would simply suggest that 



 

April 23, 1974 

 

2617 

we continue to urge the Federal Government and I do have some hope in the Hon. Marc Lalonde, and I 

would suggest to the senior citizens to direct their attention to the Hon. Marc Lalonde rather than to the 

Members opposite, because I am absolutely convinced that the Members opposite will treat the senior 

citizens the way they treat the people on minimum wage, the way they have treated people on welfare, they 

are not concerned with the welfare of these people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some further remarks that I should like to say on this particular Resolution, therefore, I 

ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South) moved second reading of Bill No. 115 — An Act respecting 

the Canadian Institute of Management. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, for second reading of this Bill I have distributed to all Members of this House the aims 

and purposes of the Canadian Institute of Management, Saskatchewan Division, and therefore I will not take 

the time of the House in further deliberations on the principle of the Bill. I think everybody can read the 

material. So, Mr. Speaker, I will move that Bill 115 be now read a second time and referred to the Select 

Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to introduce to you and to 

Members of the House a group of 35 Grade Eight students in the west gallery. Their teachers are with them, 

Mr. Sturtz from Bredenbury High School and Mr. Farquharson from Saltcoats. These students come here 

almost every year, it's almost every year that we have had a group of students from this particular school and 

I am very pleased to see them come again this year. 

 

It might be noteworthy at this time to mention that the driver, Mr. Russell McNutt, sitting up in the gallery, 

is a grandson of the former Member for Nipawin, Mr. T.R. McNutt, who served in this Legislature between 

the years of 1952 and 1956. His great grandfather also I understand was the first Speaker in this Legislature 

and I think that we should recognize the young man up in the balcony. 

 

I am sure that all of you will join with me in welcoming them here and wishing them a happy day here today 

and hope that they learn a little bit about the democratic procedure. I am sure you will join with me at this 

time. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:27 o’clock p.m. 


