






















































Hansard: November 28, 1975


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session - Eighteenth Legislature 
12th Day 

 
Friday, November 28, 1975. 

 

506 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like through you to introduce to this 
Legislative Assembly, a group of students from the Elrose Composite High School. Seated in the east 
gallery are 30 Grade Twelve students from Elrose. I consider this to be a very important group of 
students. Not only do they come from my hometown but also they are students from within my school 
unit. 
 
Accompanying these students we have two parents, Glen Walker, and Earl McKnight and they are in the 
capable hands of Leroy Beilhartz as the driver. I understand they have had a busy day in Regina and that 
they will be leaving this Assembly at approximately 3:00 o’clock for further visitations in the city. I am 
sure that this Assembly joins with me in welcoming them here and in wishing them the very best of their 
trip home this evening. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you a fine 
group of students from the high school at Yellow Creek. Yellow Creek is in my constituency and they 
have been great for sending groups of students to the Legislature over the years. They are led here today 
by their principal, Mr. L. Matson, and their teacher, Ted Magis. They are accompanied by Mr. Sergio 
Montivearo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to see these students come. I hope they keep the practice up. 
They’ve never given it up ever since I started here in the Legislature. I hope their trip here will be an 
educational one and that the Members will be on their best behaviour so that their trip here will be one 
from which they will take home great memories. I also want to wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, I made an error in my introduction. I should just like the opportunity to 
point out the error that I made. I failed to mention that the students from the Elrose Composite School 
are being conducted today by their teacher, Mr. Babonich. Sorry, Mr. Babonich, not recognizing you in 
the original introduction. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

507 
 

STATEMENT 
 

FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL FINANCE MINISTERS’ MEETING 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should 
like to report to the House on the federal-provincial Finance Ministers’ meeting that I attended In 
Ottawa two days ago. 
 
I want to assure the Members of the House that I made it very clear to the federal Minister of Finance 
that Saskatchewan is deeply concerned about the problem of inflation in Canada and that we are 
prepared to co-operate with the federal government in brining inflation under control. It is well known 
that Premier Blakeney has on may occasions called for a program of selective price controls in Canada 
for several years. We recognize that no program is going to be perfect and certainly no program can be 
painless. What Saskatchewan has been saying since October 24th is that the federal plan must be a 
balanced one and equitable in its effect on all Canadians. This, Mr. Speaker, is the position that I 
repeated at our conference. 
 
I made a number and I believe to be constructive suggestions to make the federal plan fair and workable. 
First, I asked the federal government to have the Anti-inflation Board require prior approval for price 
increases for certain key commodities. That would be far more effective than the current intention of 
asking only for prior notification of price increases. 
 
Secondly, I asked for an excess profits tax on corporations. This measure is absolutely essential to 
ensure that the price and profit guidelines are followed. 
 
Third, I asked that a surtax on excess professional income be imposed on those professionals whose 
1975 income is in excess of $30,000 a year. The tax we have suggested would amount to 25 per cent 
points over the present federal and provincial marginal tax rate and would be applied to increases in net 
professional income in excess of the allowable $2,400 per year. 
 
A substantial majority of the province’s thought that the federal proposal was too weak and that some 
form of limit on the professional income was required. Several provinces supported the income surtax 
proposal. 
 
Fourth, we suggested that the current $600 or $3.50 per hourly minimum was too low and should be 
raised substantially. 
 
In addition to these specific points, Mr. Speaker, I have stressed our government’s concern that the 
detailed wage controls will be interpreted in a narrow and inflexible manner that could have a negative 
impact on Saskatchewan’s expanding economy. With respect to the form of our participation in the 
federal program, we said that we were not prepared to make a specific commitment at this time. The 
federal government has declined to show the regulations to the provinces until the Bill is passed and 
proclaimed. Before we make a final commitment on our participation in the program, we want to show 
the details. In addition, we said that the three year term of the proposed federal-provincial agreement 
was too long. It is unreasonable 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

508 
 

to expect the provinces to commit themselves for three years without the ability to withdraw from the 
program if the program is obviously failing or if the economic development of the province is being 
severely curtailed. We suggested that the term of the agreement be limited to 12 months or perhaps 18 
months with the possibility for an extension. I should like to make it clear that a number of the provinces 
wanted a shorter term for the agreement and wanted to see the regulations before committing their 
governments. The federal government accepted our argument on the need to see the regulations and 
admitted that they were in no position to sign any agreement until their legislation comes into effect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will outline three forms of participation in the federal program that are available to 
Saskatchewan and for that matter to all provinces. 
 
First, we can put the provincial public sector under the control of the federal Anti-inflation Board. 
Secondly, we can set up our own Board to enforce the federal guidelines. Third, we can set up our own 
board and establish provincial guidelines in essentially the same spirit as the federal guidelines. 
 
It should be understood by all that we would be co-operating with the federal government and 
supporting the program under each of the three alternatives. As soon as we are able to review the federal 
regulations and have a response from the federal government on the changes we proposed, we shall be in 
a position to inform this House on the form our participation will take. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments on the 
Minister’s speech. I certainly wish the Minister and the government would make up their minds. We just 
finished the night before last voting on a Throne Speech and in that Throne Speech it made very specific 
reference that the province of Saskatchewan would be co-operating with the federal guidelines. Last 
night the Premier got on the television and said the Minister was misinterpreted, that the province of 
Saskatchewan would be co-operating with the federal guidelines. Now the Minister gets up in this House 
and says, we are not prepared to make a specific commitment at this time. I don’t know how the Premier 
interprets that but I do know that I interpret that the province of Saskatchewan is not prepared at this 
time to accepted the federal guidelines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to comment on a few of the things that the Minister indicated. First of all, I, 
too, and I think the Liberal caucus and all the people of Saskatchewan would agree with the Minister in 
suggesting that $600 for the low income people is too low a minimum if we are going to try to eliminate 
poverty and raise the standard of living or bring relative equality in income levels across Canada. I 
certainly will agree with that. I am afraid I do not agree with the Minister when he talks about a surtax 
on professional employees and I would say that this is only my thinking but one of the very real 
problems that is being created by a surtax is an attempt to equalize working conditions among 
professionals and it certainly would remove initiative. I think of a dentist or a doctor in a small 
community who is all by himself and if he wants to work and look after the clients, the people, and the 
response and wants to work 10 or 12 hours a day to serve his community, in reality the 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

509 
 

surtax would destroy that opportunity or that initiative. 
 
I should like also to suggest that I think the idea of prior approve of the Anti-inflation Board for any 
price increase in the Dominion of Canada is a very difficult policy to implement. First of all, as the 
Minister well knows, a vast number of commodities that are used by the Canadian consumer are 
imported into the Dominion of Canada and, of course, we have very little control over that. The 
difficulty of stock, of imports, of other commodities that have a fluctuation, particularly food. I think 
there are great number of farmers in this place and if suddenly the price of cattle and the price of 
livestock on the hoof went up ten cents, I would hate to say that before the farmer could get benefit of 
that ten cents that he would have to have prior approval of the Anti-inflation Board when the farmers 
and the livestock operators in the province of Saskatchewan and western Canada are almost starving to 
death and are on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 
I would also like to suggest and I hope, that the provincial government will not establish its own 
guidelines. I have no concern about whether or not the signed Section 4(3) or Section 4(4) as long as 
they are related to the federal guideline and try to operated federal guidelines within the province of 
Saskatchewan. But for the province of Saskatchewan to establish its own guidelines and every other 
province in Canada to regularize and provincialize inflation control or attempts to control inflation in 
Canada would destroy it. Inflation in Canada is a national problem and sure there are regional 
differences and that is one of the great difficulties that the federal government is having at this time in 
attempting to bring about some kind of continuity and legislation to look after the historical differences 
and so forth that they have made. But to turn around and provincialize guidelines to establish our own in 
each province in Canada, I think would destroy the fight against inflation before it began because every 
province in Canada is going to come up with, we have exceptions, we have difficulties, we have 
problems, and then the whole concept of a national battle against the number one worry of Canadians 
today, inflation, would be destroyed before it began. So I do hope the Minister will take that under 
advisement and that the government will consider very carefully the implications of ten provinces each 
setting its own guidelines to suit their own specific needs and problems. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, may I add my 
comments to the Minister’s speech. 
 

COMMENTS ON STATEMENTS ALLOWED BY ALL PARTIES 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Member makes further comment I might just draw Member’s attention 
to a practice in the House that has existed in the past. It is quite in order for a Minister to rise and make a 
statement. The practice has been that the Leader of the Opposition or some such Member of the 
opposition also rise at that time and make a comment on the Minister’s statement and that would be the 
end of the matter for that day. I would assume that the Assembly wishes to continue with that practice at 
this time. 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

510 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, rising to the Point of Order I think that that has 
been the practice when we had two parties in the Legislature. I would respectfully suggest to you, sir, 
that with three definite parties we ought to vary the practice so that the Minister would make a 
statement, there would be an opportunity for a brief comment from the official opposition and a brief 
comment from the other party. I think that’s only equity. I think then that would end the matter and we 
could follow the practice as we have with that variation. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I think that I would endorse the comments of the Premier. I think 
it is important that the people of Saskatchewan know the viewpoint of all Members of the Legislature 
and there re now three distinct groups within the Legislature and I would certainly welcome any 
comments that our Conservative friends have to say. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would draw from the comments that have been made that the House is generally 
in accord with the statement that the Premier has made, endorsed by the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, that distinct parties be allowed to make a comment of a similar nature on the matter 
raised by the Minister. I would ask the Member for Nipawin to so proceed. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The comments by the Minister did not mention, or at least I didn’t hear him mention at all, any 
curtailment of government spending. As we all know that any program of controls to function 
satisfactorily and work satisfactorily must have, coincidental with the program of controls a curtailment 
and a serious curtailment of government spending. I heard no such indication of any curtailment or the 
extent to which the Minister was prepared to curtail the spending of his government. I might just add 
one comments, the first one to the suggestion that the Minister made to the federal government 
pertaining to professional incomes. We agree that professional incomes, if all other segments of society 
are to be controlled, professional incomes must also have some semblance of control as well in order to 
achieve equity. However, the issuance of their billings, are able to juggle their incomes, their net 
incomes for a particular short period of time. In the long period this is not possible, but in the short turn 
it is possible. Since the Minister suggested that the program should be of a short term nature and we 
concur totally with his comment in terms of the short term nature of the program, how then will any 
percentage of net professional incomes curtailment be effective at all since this practice of the issuance 
of billings can be juggled over year ends? 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

POTASH HEAD OFFICE IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Pointe of Privilege. I think we can 
clear it away relatively quickly. Yesterday I asked the Attorney General if there was any provision in the 
Bill he 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

511 
 

introduced that required the head office of the Potash Corporation to be situated in Saskatchewan. If you 
recall, Mr. Speaker, he assured me that the Bill did require that the head office be located here. I think 
the Attorney General inadvertently gave me bad advice. I see no section in the Bill, I now have it, that 
does require the head office to be located in Saskatchewan and I wonder if the government might clear 
up the answer he gave us yesterday? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member is correct. The 
section of the Act, I think it is Section 7 that he drew to my attention, says that the head office may be at 
such places designed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council and that is the black and white of the Act. 
The stated policy of the government has been on many occasions and I repeat again that the head office 
indeed will be in Saskatchewan. 
 

LIBERALS SET ALL-TIME RECORD FOR COLLAPSE OF SMALL BUSINESS 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might, before the Orders 
of the Day, direct a question to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Whelan)? He said in last night’s 
speech that the Liberals had set the all-time record for the collapse of small businesses, and I assume 
that the Minister has statistics at his fingertips, since the speech was last night. I wonder if the Minister 
is aware that in the October 10 Gazette over 500 earning functioning companies were struck from the 
Saskatchewan registry, businesses which have now been told by the government that they may no longer 
practise or continue in business in this province? 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to look at the 
transcript of the question and figure out how many questions he wants answered and how much of it is 
comment, and I’ll take it as notice and provide him with the answers. 
 

FLOOD PROTECTION WORK 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina-Lakeview): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Byers) and it’s a question again, Mr. Speaker, in 
connection with flooding which we seem to continue our dialogue on. But in this case the question 
relates to the work that is presently being planned in the Wascana Creek area of Regina which is in the 
Regina Lakeview seat. 
 
The Minister is aware of course - I do not want to be too long on this, Mr. Speaker, but I have to set the 
background - the Minister is aware of course that there is a joint project between the federal, provincial 
and city governments to complete this flood protection work. I think the Minister is also aware, Mr. 
Speaker, that the residents of that area have taken very great exception to some of the proposals and, in 
particular, in connection with a bylaw that has been proposed by the city of Regina. I think the Minister 
is further aware that the citizens in the area really did not receive much notice of the work that was 
going to be done, and were not consulted in any real manner. 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

512 
 

In view of this, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister is: would he be prepared to sue the influence 
of the provincial government to have the work stayed until such time as the citizens of that area have 
been consulted and furthermore would he use his influence to have the city of Regina delay the passing 
of their bylaw until the citizens of that area have a chance to state their position? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I think the works referred to 
indicate at least two things on behalf of the present government. First of all, when we obtain a report 
with a series of recommendations for water or land management, that we do try to act as quickly as 
possible and not let those reports sit around and gather dust, mud, or, whatever. This government wants 
to get on with the works recommended by the report. This is precisely what is happening. The works 
planned have been public knowledge now for well over a year and a half. At the time the report was 
released, the citizens of the particular area, a portion of the Hon. Member’s constituency, were advised 
of the work and asked to submit their comments to the provincial government and to the city. Therefore, 
there has been provision made for public input, and an agreement has been reached among the three 
governments to proceed with this work. It is true that the work will be carried out by the city forces and 
it is true that some citizens along the flood plain did register some objections to the proposed diking 
work. However, I did encourage them - the city council of Regina - to undertake further consultation 
with the citizens and there was at least one meeting - perhaps more - held as a result of my urging. I 
think that as result of those meetings that the city has agreed to some minor modifications. I think that 
we have proceeded as we have indicated that we would, released the plan, provide for public discussion, 
and then proceeded with the works. The risks of holding off on this work can and could be very, very 
grave indeed if we were faced with floods of the magnitude particularly of the 1974-1975 levels. 
 
MR. MALONE: — By way of supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Just so the Minister does not 
misunderstand me, I’m not being critical of the government, but I think the Minister is prepared to admit 
that the study, when it was sent out to these residents, was either not read by them or not understood by 
them, and it was only at the first meeting that was called, I believe at the instigation of this government, 
to have public reaction, that the people in this area did realize the full implications of the report. I think 
the Minister will agree with me that once these implications were realized the reactions were very 
adverse to the report 
 
Now all I’m asking the Minister to do is - I understand the work can’t be started anyway until the spring, 
this is my advice and it may be correct or incorrect - but all I’m asking the Minister to do is to hold 
things off for the time being so that the people in this area can make their views known to the Minister 
and to the Member sitting to his right (Mr. Baker), and that those views and the suggestions that come 
from those people be considered and dealt with by the city, the federal government and the provincial 
government. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that we can hold things 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

513 
 

off at this time. May I say that aside from our small incident related to this, this is the first 
communication I’ve had, from the Member in the constituency affected by the works, and so I take it 
that he is, for the most part, in agreement with the works planned. 
 
I will take the Member’s suggestion under advisement. I’m not prepared at this time to make any 
commitment as to whether we will declare a moratorium on any further works at this time. I’m not sure 
of all the implications involved. 
 

EXPROPRIATION OF FARMS 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the government, 
in particular the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Messer). 
 
After listening to the Attorney General go on at length telling us that the main thing stressed in the 
potash bill was fairness, fairness to the huge national multi-corporations as he called them. He said they 
certainly wanted to be fair and did not want to resort to takeover by expropriation. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is: can I assume that the government and the Minister in charge of SPC will stop further 
expropriation of Saskatchewan citizens’ farms in the Coronach-Poplar River area and start using some 
fairness in negotiations in that area? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think my friend, the Member for 
Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer) the Minister of Industry and Commerce is not here to respond to that 
question, but I offer some brief comments. 
 
Firstly, there is, of course, no undertaking that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation will not use 
expropriation measures. There have been expropriation powers vested in the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and its predecessor the Saskatchewan Power Commission for many, many decades. They 
have been used relatively sparingly and I think will continue to be used relatively sparingly. 
 
With respect to the particular landowners in the area of the Coronach project, it certainly was conveyed 
to the government that the land owners there - at least some of them wished that an expropriation be 
proceeded with, since at least some of the had expressed the view that their position with respect to 
taxation and other matters would be enhanced if a formal expropriation was proceeded with. If that is 
not the case then I think the Member opposite should advise the solicitors acting for the landowners - the 
firm will be known to the Hon. Member - because they have certainly left that impression, perhaps 
inadvertently. 
 
There are, of course, discussions going on regularly about settling the matter, but it had been certainly an 
impression left with the government that even though negotiations continued there would be an effort to 
have a ‘friendly’ expropriation in order to obtain certain of the benefits I have alluded to. It may be that 
we are in error. If we are, it will undoubtedly be corrected in the course of the continuing negotiations 
which are actively being pursued. 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

514 
 

MR. NELSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying that the association expressed wishes 
for expropriation, or are you saying individuals expressed the wish to have land expropriated? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am saying that I received the impression from officials of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation that it was their understanding from discussion with the solicitors for the association, 
that this was the case. I am not sure that the solicitors would be speaking necessarily for all the members 
of the association, because in a sense, or course, they will be representing not only the association by the 
individual members. Or I suspect they will be. But that is where the impression came from. If the 
impression is an error, it will, as I say, be corrected during the course of continuing negotiations. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There seems to be a lot of lack of information and the Premier doesn’t seem to be too sure of much of 
this information and I wonder if possibly his Minister in charge of SPC wasn’t able to give him a lot of 
this information because of the meetings he missed on 32 different days while he was a director and 
vice-chairman of this corporation? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Hon. Member is not addressing himself to the issue. 
I would be absolutely amazed if the Hon. Member you refer to (Mr. Messer) missed that many days’ 
meetings since the issue of the Coronach land holdings has been on the table. Obviously periods back, a 
year ago, are not relevant because the discussions with respect to compensations for landowners in the 
Coronach area have been of relatively recent duration as the Hon. Member may know if he checks the 
record. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Within the last year? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — In any case, I do not intend to report to this House daily on the negotiations 
between the landowners because obviously this is a negotiating process. If the Hon. Member feels that 
the procedures which are being gone through in order to negotiate with his constituents are 
inappropriate, then I know that he will bring his beliefs to the attention of the Minister or of myself. But 
it is my belief, judging from the material which comes across my desk, that there are continuing and 
active negotiations; that a good number of items for negotiation have been identified, including the value 
of the land, the cost of replacement of buildings, the matter of roads, and some other items. These items 
for negotiation have been identified and are in fact being pursued. I would think that this makes good 
sense if we are trying to achieve an agreement. 
 

AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FROM CORPORATIONS 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders 
of the Day I should like to direct a question to the Premier. 
 
Does the Government of Saskatchewan through SEDCO, or any 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

515 
 

other agency, receive audited financial statements annually from the corporations in which the 
government or those agencies hold a minority interest? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sure the answer is ‘yes’. I would not necessarily say that we do with respect 
to every company of which we hold a minority interest. I don’t know that. Certainly with respect to the 
Intercons and the Agras and the Westanks and companies like these, the answer is ‘yes’. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Are these statements available for the public perusal? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Some of them perhaps are available for public perusal because they are public 
companies, such as Agra Industries, or Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Company, IPSCO. Others have 
been made available for perusal to the Crown Corporation Committee when the affairs of SEDCO were 
under discussion. Some of the companies are private companies and I would imagine our share holdings 
are quite small and I don’t know whether it would be thought to be in the public interest to disclose their 
financial statements since it clearly discloses the business affairs of an individual in cases where the 
public holdings may be relatively small. But with respect to the large companies, I think it has been the 
custom to file statements. I think it has been done with respect to PAPCO and IPSCO and Agra and 
Intercon, as far as I can recall. These matters are pursued in the Crown Corporations Committee. I 
simply cannot remember all of the ones which were discussed last year. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. 
 
It is my understanding that these financial statements for these companies are not available and would 
the Premier not agree that in the light of the tremendous impact that the spending of government 
organizations has on the inflationary pressures in our society, in the light of this government’s stated 
position, that the people of Saskatchewan are the shareholders of these organizations; in the light of the 
responsibility that we have as elected representatives of the people of Saskatchewan who are 
shareholders, in your government’s words; in the light of legislation protecting the rights of minority 
shareholders to full financial disclosure, that these statements should be tabled in the Legislature 
immediately? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No. I would not agree with that. 
 
It has been long practised in this House and in this Legislature when loans are made to private 
companies through the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, and its predecessor the 
Industrial Development Fund, that the affairs of the companies were not disclosed - for good or ill. The 
same rules apply to the Industrial Development Bank and with respect to other agencies of industrial 
promotion. I think the same rule is applied by the federal government with respect to organizations to 
which they make DREE grants. It can be argued that there is some difference in principle when we have 
an equity 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

516 
 

position, and, where the equity position is significant and the corporation is substantial, then I think that 
the Hon. Member makes a valid point, at least with respect to the disclosure to the Crown Corporations 
Committee. Where the equity position may be minimal and the equity position is essentially to give us a 
position on the Board to protect the loan - and this is sometimes a practice - then I think that less cogent 
argument can be made for disclosing the affairs of the private businessman. It is a balance between 
whether or not the private businessman renders all of his financial affairs open to the public by taking an 
industrial development fund or a SEDCO loan or a grant, a small equity position - and we don’t want to 
disclose businessmen’s affairs if we don’t have to - or whether there is need for public disclosure only 
when there are significant investments of public funds, and particularly equity funds. I think we have to 
make a judgment in each case. We try to do that in the Crown Corporations Committee with respect to 
the people who get SEDCO money. I think the practice has been working fairly well and we propose to 
follow it, at least until more cogent arguments can be advanced than the ones I’ve heard today. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

OPTION FOR CONSTRUCTION OF POTASH MINE 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Potash Corporation): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 
Day I have a brief statement to make. 
 
Approximately one year ago the government was considering a number of options as to how it would 
become involved in the potash industry in Saskatchewan. One of the options under consideration was 
the construction of a mine by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. In the furtherance of that option 
the Corporation retained the services of three individuals from the potash industry. The three were Mr. 
W.J. Schultz, Mr. D.G. Matheson, and Mr. B.C. Kaukinen. These men had extensive experience in the 
Saskatchewan potash industry and are well qualified experts in their field. The Corporation is well 
satisfied with the work they and their support staff have done over the past year. When the government 
decided to consider another approach, that is, the acquisition or expropriation of the potash companies as 
set out in the throne Speech, Schultz, Matheson and Kaukinen were briefed about the new project 
because of course this project was different than the one for which they were hired. The along with the 
other senior government officials were asked to participate in the study of this option and they agreed to 
do so. Some weeks later when the government decided to implement this option and proceeded with the 
legislation that would permit acquisition or expropriation of the potash companies, Mr. Schultz indicated 
that he did not wish to have the role of chief operating officer of the corporation in view of the new 
direction it was moving. The other officials, including Matheson and Kaukinen however, remained 
committed to the project and continue to work for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government respects Mr. Schultz’s feelings on this matter and can only commend him for being 
forthright in his dealings with the corporation. His withdrawal from the corporation has been on 
amicable grounds and we are pleased to say that he has agreed to continue to do work for the 
corporation on a consulting basis on matters solely of a technical nature. 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

517 
 

We are pleased that Mr. Schultz and the Corporation have been able to revise his involvement with the 
Corporation on a basis satisfactory to both. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I believe I am entitled to make a remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should like to make the remarks in the way of a question, if I may and if the Minister will answer me. I 
am glad that you finally cleared up this matter, it has been hanging in the air now for some time. I 
wonder though if the Minister would advise me when this first came to his knowledge as to Mr. 
Schultz’s - it appears to be kiss-off to him, I suspect he won’t be with us much longer - it appears from 
the Minister’s statement that he is taking some other position. When did this first come to your 
knowledge, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to give us that information? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated the other times when the Member opposite was asking - I 
believe it was the Member for Regina Lakeview who asked one or two questions - that at that time there 
was no severance in terms of the then existing position of Mr. Schultz and the government. I did not 
indicate that there were no discussions underway. At that time, Mr. Schultz and the government were 
considering their respective positions. He was at that time the president of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and had not resigned. The final documents with respect to the severance from this 
particular position between the government and Mr. Schultz were signed yesterday and at the earliest 
possible opportunity, yesterday afternoon by the way. I have taken the liberty of explaining this position 
in the House. 
 
I think the Member will appreciate it is difficult to answer questions based on conjecture which may or 
may not be accurate or partially accurate while individuals employed by the government and the 
government are discussing their respective positions. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SCHOOL BUS LOADING AND UNLOADING SIGNS 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could, I know that the traditional 
number of questions have been asked but I think there is some urgency to this question. I beg leave of 
this House if you would permit me to ask this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I asked the Minister of Highways and the attempted answer was by the acting 
Minister of Highways but because of recent news reports, last night and again in the news today at noon, 
say that the RCMP have stepped up their enforcement of driving offence involving the passing of school 
buses loading or unloading passengers. The fact is that the police have stated upon a number of 
occasions that they are having trouble with people not obeying this law. Mr. Speaker, I asked the acting 
Minister at that time, why is it that Saskatchewan does not have posted warnings at regular intervals on 
our highways. A portion of The Highways Act which states, “It is illegal to Pass a School Bus loading or 
unloading.” The 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

518 
 

acting Minister at that time told me he had seen these signs. I would question him as to where. All I am 
saying now that with another offence and another death having taken place on our highways I am 
wondering when the Department of Highways will assist motorists and indeed law enforcement officers 
in placing at regular intervals on our highways a sign which states very clearly that it is illegal to pass a 
school bus loading or unloading. When is this going to take place? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I think we could go to no end to 
make signs advising people as to what various laws of the province are. The Member may be making a 
good point that we ought to have more signs indicating loading and unloading zones and sports for 
school buses either on public roads or upon pubic highways. On the other hand, the big yellow bus, and 
it is usually that colour, is well known to most of our motorists, and most of our motorists know what 
the laws are with respect to passing school buses, loading or unloading. I think it is simply a question of 
how many of these signs you would need to put up around the province. It would certainly be a good 
many. Mr. Speaker, the law is there. Most citizens are aware of the law. There will be violations, it is 
true. I do not really agree with the position as stated by the Hon. Member that we need a proliferation of 
signs for that particular reason. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I don’t think the acting Minister truly 
understands my question. I am not talking about signs to indicate places of loading or unloading. Every 
province in Canada, every state in the United States has at regular intervals on their highways a sign 
which states, “It is Illegal to Pass a School Bus Loading or Unloading.” Due to the recent incidents in 
violations of this, due to the fact the police say they are having a hard time to enforce this, is it not in 
keeping then with assisting our police to place these signs at regular intervals, like all other provinces 
do, to warn people that this is an infraction of the law? Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this will in fact save some 
deaths on our highways. I wonder if the Minister is aware that one of the latest victims was not too far 
from Regina where an 11-year old was killed October 28, near his home of Disley. Mr. Speaker, I think 
this is urgent, that the Department of Highways and the government opposite take some action to further 
inform motorists of this dangerous practice before more deaths occur on our highways. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Well I know, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly do not like the occurrence of tragedies of 
the type the Member refers to. I will undertake to convey to the Minister of Highways the feelings of the 
Hon. Member in this regard. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

SASKATCHEWAN LAPEL PINS 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I should 
like to draw attention to you and through you to the Members of the House to an envelope containing a 
sample supply of Saskatchewan lapel pins. The Saskatchewan pin is used by the Department of 
Renewable Resources as a 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

519 
 

promotional item. Of particular interest to the new Members, I should like to inform the House that a 
further supply in the near future will be provided with the thought that all of us Members will do our 
share in promoting our great province of Saskatchewan. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 9 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 9 
showing: 
 

With respect to any personnel hired by the Government of Saskatchewan who were granted a 
leave of absence from January 1, 1973 to October 31, 1975: (a) the names of all such personnel 
and positions held; (b) the respective dates for which the leave of absence was granted; (c) the 
reason for granting the said leave of absence. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this Motion is on the Order Paper for good reason. As this House is aware I am 
sure, people who are employed in the direct civil service in this province are in effect employees of the 
people of Saskatchewan. In a standard work situation, employers, through a manager or in this case, the 
actual government of the day, acts as the manager of the employees of this province. The people of this 
province through their manager have a right to know, in effect, what their employees do, what their 
standard labour practices are. Now it is the impression of some people in this province that many of the 
people who are currently in their employ are being given and granted leaves of absences to do political 
work, not just in Saskatchewan but across Canada. The people in this province have aright to know what 
their employees are doing and for that reason on their behalf I have placed this Motion on the Order 
Paper. 
 
Now, as well, it is standard procedure when requested to do so to have the government report to the 
people they represent on what the practices of their employees are. It has been standard procedure over 
the years, this House is well aware of the fact. I can’t for the life of me understand why Members 
opposite may be interested in setting a precedent in refusing that information to the people of 
Saskatchewan and for that reason I have placed the Motion on the Order Paper an do move that an 
Order, seconded by the Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 9 
showing. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I only wanted, Mr. Speaker, to related to the House 
an incident that happened to me in the Ontario election. I had the good fortune or otherwise to attend a 
poll captains’ meeting in Sudbury, no Fort William. An NDP poll captain’s meeting in Fort William 
trying to discover the secret of 39 over there and 22 over here and somebody came down off the stage 
and said, Tony Merchant, I’m shocked to find you here. What are you doing? And I told him I was 
looking but wasn’t delighted to be recognized. He then related to me he was an employee of the 
government on leave of absence. An employee of this government of the provincial government and that 
there were others 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

520 
 

there working in the election. 
 
Now, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that is inappropriate, that it flies in the face of the independence 
of a public service, a public service that should be independent, that for instance in the province of 
Ontario is by statute not permitted to take any part in political processes. I don’t share the view of the 
federal government, that some middle way is the appropriate position that this government should be 
encouraging upon the public service in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s for that reason that I’m pleased to second this Motion and I hope that the government will promptly 
give us a return on this information as requested. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say on behalf of the 
government that we see no objection to having the Motion passed as submitted and the information 
provided as requested in due course. This will take a little bit of time. I don’t think all that much, but a 
little bit of time to dig up the information. I was not going to speak at all on this, but I’m provoked to do 
so because of the last Member who talked about the independence of the civil service. Really the issue 
here is the independence of every individual, civil servant or not civil servant, to take part in political 
activity. And there were civil servants who, for example, or Crown corporation who may not be strictly 
civil service, but working for government agencies who ran in the last election for your party, and 
rightly so. That’s with leave of absence, as any other individual member of the civil service who would 
want to get up with leave of absence and take part in political activity. After all what could be more 
fundamentally right than for everybody, civil servant or otherwise, to have an opportunity to take part in 
democratic activity. 
 
So as I say I don’t have any big argument about this. We’re going to pass this. As far as we’re concerned 
we can agree to this. I just don’t agree with the Member that we should be cutting back to the Ontario 
position which seeks to cut out the rights of civil servants to take part in political activity. 
 
Well, you indicated that our position was wrong and that Ontario’s was wrong and somewhere in the 
middle was right, is what you indicated. I’m saying that if you move off our position that in my 
judgment is a regressive step toward the Ontario position, you’re finding a middle ground. Okay, I just 
ant to make the point that to me the issue is the right of any person, even a civil servant to take part in 
political activity. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that the 
government made this question debatable. It’s a debatable point I can tell you, the whole question is a 
questionable one even speaking in my own constituency, and talking about a so-called independent civil 
service. Of course, when it comes out of the mouths of an NDP it’s just hogwash. It is the most 
hypocritical statement in the world. Go check Mr. Hogg, whatever he did with the Sask Forest products, 
the Timber Board. Whatever he did, I’m sure he wasn’t on leave of absence. I can tell you that he 
worked night and day and day and night, during working hours and everything else for the NDP 
candidates. I can also tell, and I’m sorry Mr. Kramer isn’t in his seat, that we 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

521 
 

proved that highway crews were sent out to tear my signs down. We’ve got pictures. The young fellow 
when the cameras took pictures of him, in working hours, with government trucks, tearing down signs of 
the Liberal candidate and the Conservative candidate in Prince Albert-Duck Lake. He said, “I got orders 
from my superior, I got orders from my superior,” and that’s a matter of record. The pictures were there, 
the truth is there. 
 
Now, I don’t say that your NDP hacks that you’ve got buried in the Department of Highways and in the 
Timber Board and so on were the ones that smashed the windows in our committee rooms regularly. If 
they did, I’ll admit they didn’t do it in office hours. They did it late at night and I don’t know if they did 
it at all, but they did it or someone did it. But don’t stand up in this House, Mr. Attorney General, and 
take that pious attitude about civil service and Crown corporation employees being allowed to enter into 
politics. Of course, they can go into politics, no reason why they shouldn’t. There is a vast difference 
between going into politics, running for office, taking leave of absence properly and going out to work 
for the candidate of their choice. Strange coincidence no one took any leave of absence from the 
government or Crown corporations any where in Saskatchewan and worked for the Liberal Party and 
I’m sure for the Conservative Party. Strange coincidence they all worked for the NDP. I see the Member 
over there is getting ready, buttoning his coat and unbuttoning it again. He can hardly wait to get up and 
tell about what happened up in his by-election. Tell about his by-election and Mr. Harrington and a few 
more. Well, of course, we recognize we were wrong. Mr. Harrington and his Biershanks are not working 
for us any more. We took disciplinary action. 
 
Let me say this, I am not standing up here and saying that when we were the government we were 
without blame, never did say that, never, but what I find nauseating is the attitude of the Members 
opposite, getting up and saying we’re pure, we’re lily white, we’re pure. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, we’re not pure. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Of course, you’re not pure. You are less pure than we are because you’ve been in 
longer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We’ll just go to purgatory for our sins, but you know where you’re going, right 
down below, direct, no half house for the NDP. So please, save your speech, give it to the 
Conservatives. Harrington’s working for them now, and did a great job I might say too. So, Mr. Speaker, 
please don’t let the Attorney General talk about the purity of the Crown corporation employees or the 
civil service. Ninety-nine percent of them, the real civil servants, of course, are independent and they do 
a great job and they would have nothing to worry about, in fact, a great deal to gain when they throw 
that government out of office and put us back in office, because we are the ones that gave them the 
appointment, raised the civil service and didn’t import these hot shot, big class planners which has been 
the attitude and the policy of the old CCF, after all that’s how you got our Premier, good or bad, 
bringing in these expert form the outside and putting them on top. If you had an honest look at the civil 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

522 
 

service in this province, you would find out there is a great deal of discontent, because you’ve shoved in 
some of these political hacks at the top, over top of them and there’s a great deal of discontent in the 
Crown corporations because so much is being run by that little circle that the Premier and the Attorney 
General have gathered around them in the back offices somewhere here. 
 
So the NDP have done more to drag the civil service and the Crown corporation employees into the field 
of politics in this province from 1944 to ’64 and from ’71 to the present time, then any government in 
the history of this province or any government in Canada, and that’s a fact. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 13 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina-Lakeview) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 
No. 13 showing: 
 

(1) The amount of money that has been accumulated in the Saskatchewan Energy Development 
Fund. (2) (a) The amounts, if any, that have been paid out of the fund; (b) the purposes for which 
it was paid. 

 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — In the absence of the Minister of Finance I’d like to 
make a few brief remarks with respect to this particular Motion and then propose an amendment at the 
conclusion of my remarks with respect to it. 
 
I think frankly the Motion is not as precise as it might be. It asks for the amount of money that has been 
accumulated in the Saskatchewan Energy Development Fund and given no date which makes it almost 
impossible to answer with any precision. I then goes on to state the other two items of course. With no 
date stated I think it is necessary that we give some particular date that will be precise in relation to that 
particular motion. 
 
I must say that the amendment I am proposing will relate to the last audited statement which I think is 
the one that the House would wish to have with respect to this particular Motion. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I propose an amendment moved by myself and seconded by my seatmate the 
Hon. Mr. MacMurchy, Minister of Municipal Affairs: 
 
That all the words after the word “energy” be deleted and be substituted with the following: 
 

(1) And Resource Development Fund to March 31, 1975. 
(2)(a) The amounts, if any, that have been paid out of the Fund; (b) The purposes for which it 
was paid. 

 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

523 
 

MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — There is only one question I have. It appears to 
me that it is more precise than the question. The question is raised, why do we need an auditor’s 
statement. Surely you have got records up to date of what’s been accumulated in the fund. After all 
March 31, 1975 - that’ almost a year old. Surely, I realize we may have been more precise and asked for 
it a month ago. But surely you have got the figures up to date or they are easily obtainable up to date. 
The same with the amount paid out. The information you are prepared to give as a result of this 
amendment will be almost a year old by the time we get it - nine or ten months . . . well okay, just a 
minute — I will get my shoes off and I will figure it out. 
 
I will move a subamendment or an amendment to the amendment to read as follows: 
 

That all the words after the word “to” in the second line be deleted and the following substituted 
therefore: 

 
October 31, 1975. (2)(a) the amounts, if any, that have been paid out of the 
fund; (b) the purposes for which it was paid. 

 
The debate continues on the subamendment. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if there is any objection to 
accepting the subamendment or not. I can simply tell you that the amendment to fixing the date of 
March 31, 1975 was the date of the last fully audited report on the fund which we felt was the best and 
the most authoritative information which was available to the House. I don’t know what difficulties if 
any are posed by the extension of that period from March 31 to October 31. I am not saying that we can 
accept it r reject it at this time. I would like to consider this with, in particular the Minister of Finance 
and therefore I beg lave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 1 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for 
Return No. 1 showing: 
 

(1) A list of the dates and locations of the meetings of the Board of Directors of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation during the calendar years: (a) 1973; (b) 1974; (c) from January 
1, 1975 to July 18, 1975. (2) The names of the members of the Board at each of those meetings. 
(3) The names of the members of the Board as of July 1, 1975. 

 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, on this one I know that the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce who is the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation would want to say a 
word or two. He is not here today. He is away on business. I should just like to offer a comment to the 
motion. My understanding is that basically the information which is sought here was asked earlier by 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

524 
 

letter by one of the MLAs on the opposition side. It was, in fact, answered by the Minister or an official 
acting on behalf of the government in writing, so that to a large extent there is no prejudice, immediate 
prejudice for this information or this order not being made. 
 
The point that I really want to speak to really goes to a more basic principle which at this stage of the 
game relates to the question of Orders for Return as it relates to Crown corporations. The practice has 
been generally I think with some rare exceptions that question of this nature are asked of Ministers in 
Crown corporations in detail. To get into the habit of asking Crown Corporation Committee questions 
on Orders of the Day, in oral question period or in this form by way of Return really tends to negate the 
value of the Crown Corporations Committee. After all if the questions can be asked here in a sense in 
Committee of the Whole of the legislature, you, I think, tend to diminish the value of a Crown 
Corporations Committee. For my part I would be reluctant to see this passed, not for any fear of denying 
information to the Member, because I think I have already said the Member has the answer to this 
question in writing. I think he an table that to the House, or to the Press, whatever he wants to do with it. 
But more on the principle of the proper relationships if I may put it on that basis of Crown corporations 
thinking of myself. The Minister in charge may have another opinion or an additional opinion. Since he 
is not here I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I just want to 
say a word if I might because the Attorney General has left the impression with the House that this may 
well be an improper question. I wish to comment on the principle. As you know you can only ask Crown 
corporation questions for the year under review. That means anything that has occurred in the previous 
year will not be available to Members of this House for nearly two years. The most dangerous 
occurrences or the most vital and urgent information that should be brought forward to the public of 
Saskatchewan is denied them. That is the reason that Crown corporation question of an urgent nature 
and that relate not to the year under review but up to a current date of this particular year is not 
necessarily under review in the Crown corporation are asked at this time. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Attorney General will not attempt to convey to this House that it is improper to ask questions of 
immediacy and urgency relating to Crown corporations by Order for Return, because that certainly is not 
the practice of this Legislature. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the Point of Order if I might. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t believe the Member had a point of order quite frankly. The Attorney 
General begs leave to adjourn this debate, is leave granted? 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

525 
 

RETURN NO. 3 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 3 
showing: 
 

The total amount of money, and the purpose in each case, paid by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to Norman Springate and Associates Limited during the fiscal year 1974-75. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to point out hat I have the responsibility as an Opposition Member to 
be critic of the Saskatchewan Forest corporation and in my investigations of this corporation I feel that it 
is in the best interest of the public that I have access to the Information requested by the motion. 
 
There seems to be some indication that there was some bias involved in the contracting of Springate 
Associates to do feasibility studies and consultant work for the government in the construction of 
plywood mills, etc. up North. In my estimation this work was contracted by the people of Saskatchewan 
and it is apparently now finished and they have the right to know what work they actually contracted for 
and in fact, what prices were paid. I simply stated that it is in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I am acting in their best interest in requesting this information. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I only wanted to repeat to the House 
by reason for these questions and our interest in the matter. 
 
First, Norman Springate and Associates were asked to do a feasibility study in the area. Second, Norman 
Springate and Associates were asked to come in and build the operations, and with all due respect, 
didn’t do a very good job of it. They came in over price and badly delayed. Then to make matters worse 
after the had earned the money from taking part in the construction of the operation which they said was 
feasible, they were then given the management contract and certain people crossed over from dealing 
from Norman Springate’s point of view and moved over into the employment of the government or 
handled the matter under the management contract. It seems to me that what the government has done, 
and I am convinced that in due course this will become apparent to the people of Saskatchewan, is that 
they have succeeded in being conned and they have paid to be conned. They hired Norman Springate to 
convince them they were doing a good thing and then Norman Springate profited and I hear not the 
people of Saskatchewan. Particularly, when one remembers that Simpson Timber were always prepared 
to expand in the area. Simpson Timber were prepared to avoid the expense of public money entering 
into this very expensive and I suggest dangerous area. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

RETURN NO. 5 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (REGINA-LAKEVIEW) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for 
Return No. 5 showing: 
 

A copy of the mineral participation agreement with the Conwest Exploration Company and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

526 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, there will be an amendment tendered to this which I hope to have 
in a few minutes. The amendment will delineate three specific agreements to three sorts of specific areas 
which will be generally the agreement with Conwest, and I believe it’s our intention to make that 
amendment so that the information is properly before the House, but I don’t have it. So I guess I’m 
asking leave of the House to stand this matter and come back to it when I get the amendments some time 
later today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having given that explanation, because I don’t have the amendments, because the Minister 
is not here, I beg to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 21 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
21 showing: 
 

(1) The number of principals appointed to the Community Colleges that were previously (a) 
former NDP MLAs or MPs; (b) defeated NDP candidates, federal or provincial; (c) candidates 
who contested a nomination for the NDP, provincial or federal; (d) known campaign workers for 
the NDP, provincial or federal, or both. (2) The annual salary for each. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, my concern about this particular Motion is this: There seems to be a good amount 
of rumours circulating about that the community colleges will in fact be incorporating into part of its 
program areas of study for which they will involve the secondary students of our schools. I ran across 
several of these in the last few days, Mr. Speaker, and I’m concerned about the overwhelming number of 
political appointments to these positions which could well interfere with a school system which has 
normally been one of a non-political nature. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I must rise on this particular Notice of 
Motion by the Hon. Member for Elrose, and to make a few remarks with respect to the Motion. 
 
I want to tell the House and you, Mr. Speaker, that in having listened to the Hon. Member, his words in 
moving the motion, and in particular reading the words of Motion, this is probably one of the most 
disturbing or shocking motions that I’ve seen come before this Legislature in a very, very long while. 
I’ll tell you in a moment why I mean that. When I say ‘shocking’ I think that the implications of a 
motion like this, especially as it has been explained by the Hon. Member for Elrose who got up and said 
there are rumours, and that on the basis of rumours, I’m going to ask this type of a question makes it all 
the more shocking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is also equally as shocking to me that this Motion is being made by the 
political party in the Saskatchewan Legislature, the Progressive Conservatives. This is a party which is 
going to argue principles, 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

527 
 

that’s going to keep at high level of debate, that is not going to get into the question of partisan politics, 
that comes into this type of a situation with the Motion that the Member for Elrose now makes. I’ll come 
to it in a moment about how and why I say it is shocking. 
 
It’s shocking Mr. Speaker, because first and foremost what this Motion seeks to do, coming through all 
of the verbiage, is to embark on a political witch-hunt. I invite the Hon. Leader of the Conservatives 
(Mr. Collver) who is looking surprised at my comments, just carefully to consider what your Member 
for Elrose is asking this government to do, once this is made as an Order for Return. 
 
We are asked to tell the people of Saskatchewan and the Legislature, the number of principals appointed 
by the community colleges that are former NDP MLAs or MPs, defeated NDP candidates, federal or 
provincial; candidates who contested a nomination for an NDP provincial or federal; and the perhaps 
most insidious part of this Motion, known campaign workers for the NDP provincial or federal, or both 
and the annual salary of each. 
 
Now I want to tell the Leader of the Conservative Party that not even the Liberals have asked that type 
of a question. The known NDP supporters — they laugh on this very serious matter, the Conservatives 
do. They say ‘known NDP supporters.” Whom do they want to do a political check on? Principals. For 
whom do those principals work? Not the government, but the community colleges. Where, and how is it 
to be affected? The community colleges of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this Motion, if passed, will ask this government to catalogue 
principals of community colleges, catalogue, on the basis of political beliefs, and that is a very wrong 
principle for this Legislature to be embarked upon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — It asks us to tell, it asks if we pass this Motion, if the Members opposite agree, it 
asks us to say to the people of this Legislature who the known NDP supporters are. Known to whom? 
Known to me? Known to the Community Colleges? Should we go to the community college boards and 
say tot hem that the Member for Elrose has asked us to ask you who you think are NDP or known NDP 
supporters, or should we say it’s known to you? What kind of activity is required to be known? Does he 
have to be a party member? Does he happen to have voted for the NDP? Does he have to be a 
campaigner or door-to-door? Known! Maybe it’s know by the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) who 
the supporters of the NDP are, as principals of community colleges. Maybe it’s known by the 
Progressive Conservative Party headquarters in Saskatchewan who is known and who is not known. I 
tell you if that’s the case, that is indeed a very dangerous precedent for democracy to take in this 
province of Saskatchewan, because they are asking us to find out who is known and who is not known. 
 
What are we supposed to do? What am I supposed to do if this Motion is passed — go to the principals 
of the community colleges and say to them, the Conservatives want us to know who is known as a 
supporter. I want to ask you — are you a known 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

528 
 

Liberal? Because I’ve got to know. Are you a known Conservative? That’s what I’m supposed to ask. 
You are nodding your head in agreement. That’s what this government is supposed to do? If it goes to 
principals of community colleges, how would you like it if one of our Members put a motion which 
said: I want you to find out, you the government, who the known Progressive Conservative supporters 
are among the principals of community colleges. Would you vote for this? Would you vote for this 
government going around on an order of the House and saying: I want to ask whether or not you’re a 
known Conservative, because this is exactly what the Order for Return asks us to do. Known to whom, 
Mr. Speaker? Known to the candidate in Elrose? Known to Roy Romanow? The candidate n Riversdale? 
Known to whom? Since when did we get to the state of affairs in political life in the province of 
Saskatchewan where political blood tests on people who are working in community colleges, of blood 
tests on people who are working in hospitals, or extending the principle of blood tests to teaches, 
whether teaching for school boards or otherwise. Oh no, the Member shakes his head. What’s the 
difference I would ask the Member? What’s the difference. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about superintendents? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the Members here are saying what about superintendents? He says 
there is a creeping political flavour coming into the education system. That is the effect of the words he 
said in moving this. There’s a superintendent on the opposite who is a Conservative and nobody stopped 
him from running. There’s a superintendent sitting behind my friend the Member for Indian Head (Mr. 
MacDonald) and nobody stopped him from running. As far as I know there is another superintendent, 
Member for Maple Creek and nobody stopped him from running. I’m supposed to go around and find 
out who is known as a supporter, because somehow there’s a creeping political influence that is coming 
from the education system. That, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, is a political witch-hunt that 
the Conservative Party wants us to get involved in. A political witch-hunt because you want us to 
catalogue who the NDP are. We are to catalogue who the Liberals and the Conservatives are to find out 
who are NDP. 
 
It is not only that makes it very difficult, this type of a motion, Mr. Speaker. I’m concerned that this 
Motion, if it were adopted, would set a very bad precedent fro this House because where would it stop? 
This Motion today is dealing with principals of community colleges. Tomorrow, my friend may have a 
motion dealing with NDP people, known or otherwise, candidates or otherwise, in some other area. As if 
there is something wrong with people who are supporters of NDP being principals of community 
colleges, or being involved in the normal activities of this community. Where does it stop? Local 
hospitals, teachers or even farmers, Mr. Speaker. Will that be next? Will the Hon. Member ask who the 
known supporters who are farmers? What do we do? Do we go around the province of Saskatchewan 
putting out a survey saying that the Member for Elrose wants us to ask whether you are a known NDP, 
known Liberal, or a known Conservative? Is that the way we want this democratic system to run by the 
brand new Conservative Party of the province of Saskatchewan? I don’t think so. Again, I may sound as 
if I’m slightly agitated or angry. I don’t intend it in that way, but I am concerned about the very thrust of 
this question because I tell you, even the Liberals, to my knowledge, have not put out this type of a 
question. 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

529 
 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a precedent which I think is very, very dangerous, and which we must not allow 
the Conservatives to embark on We can’t allow that type of political witch-hunting or political 
cataloguing. 
 
You know, in the United States several years ago, there was a famous Senator by the name of Joe 
McCarthy, oh, the Members laugh; the Members laugh because if that’s their modus operandi, I hope 
not because nobody wins on that game. I want to tell the Member for Nipawin, nobody wins that game. I 
tell you, in the United States, Senator Joe McCarthy singled out people who he thought were known 
sympathizers or supporters of an ideology that he did not agree with. An do you know something, he 
destroyed hundreds of innocent people in the process of doing it. Here we are in Saskatchewan, that 
same type of a Motion, asking us to go around find out who the known supporters are, who the NDP 
principals are, or otherwise. No, Mr. Speaker, I for one can’t accept that in my approach in politics. I 
can’t be a party to that type of resolution. 
 
I want to make one other point which I think is as equally important to this Motion, and that is, Mr. 
Speaker, that this Notice is also, what I think, an unprecedented attack on the principle of local 
autonomy. An unprecedented attack on the principle of local autonomy. Oh, the Member for Elrose is 
making a note — well you make this note, Member for Elrose — there is a statute called The 
Community Colleges Act, 1973, Chapter 15. I want to read to you Section 5(2). This has to do with the 
appointment of principals. 
 

The college board (not the NDP government) shall appoint a person as principal of the college, 
prescribe his duties and tenure of office and subject to approval with the Department determine 
the remuneration to be paid to him by the board. 

 
That’s who appoints the college principals. I’ll table that. I’ll give a copy to the Leader of the Opposition 
and to the Member for Elrose, because I think it would be very well for them to be instructed before they 
come into this legislature with this kind of a motion, they read the law upon which they try to base their 
experience of facts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — They come in and they ask (by the way this is from the same Member and I’m 
not going to get into a personal attack on the Member), I think he is sincere and I think he is young in 
terms of the politics in the Legislature, but I think he comes well equipped as a politician to look at the 
statutes and to take a look at what the situation is. This is the same Member, Mr. Speaker, who said that 
he is worried about the attack on local autonomy by this government. I read that in the newspaper as the 
substance of your remarks on the Speech from the Throne, and yet the very same Member asks us to 
pass a motion which would attack the very autonomy and integrity of the school boards. Because this is 
what he wants us to do if we pass this Motion. H wants us to say well to heck with the local autonomy, 
to heck with the local college board, we’ll just ignore them and we’ll go straight to the principal and find 
out. We won’t assume that the local board did the best that they could, no, we won’t say that. We are 
going to say instead that these are political 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

530 
 

appointments made by political people at the local level. And I simply say, Mr. Speaker, that this may be 
the style of politics that the Conservative Party is going to follow. They may be following the lead of the 
Liberal Party from 1970 to 1975 because that was their style of politics. I think in the new breed, the 
new look Liberals we’re not going to see that now. I hope not, although I note that the Leader of the 
Opposition is still feeding some information to the Conservative to try and help them . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker. That was handed to me as you handed it to 
the Clerk and asked if I would hand it over to the Member who raised the point. That’s all. But I would 
like to feed him the truth, because you’re talking a lot of garbage right now. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I withdraw. Okay, you have your chance to enter into this debate, Mr. 
Opposition Leader. You’ll have a chance. You can get in there and if you accept this question, and we’ll 
get on to the other questions as well as about known Liberals, if you want to do that, to get into the 
politics at the local level, if that’s what you want to do, this is from the Conservatives and if you want to 
support them, okay, you go ahead and support it. You see if your Member for Regina South will back 
you on that, or your Member for Wascana will back you on that, if you want to go on to a local level 
business, and you tell us about ward system and we are injecting politics at the local level, if you people 
want to get in on that level, you go ahead and do that. That’s the ground rule of the operation and you 
can do it, but I tell you., you won’t take your caucus with you, or the majority of your caucus, and they 
shouldn’t have done it. You’re hitting the nerve, because I didn’t think you were in that area. I didn’t 
think the Liberals would go into this area. I expected the Conservatives, but not you. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I do not think the Attorney General is speaking to the Motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think then we must conclude only that obviously my 
remarks will be wasted on the Conservative Party because if I have been doing anything but speaking to 
the substance of the Motion, I don’t know what else I have been speaking to. If the Leader has said he 
doesn’t know what I am talking about, then I guess I am wasting my breath on this attack on political 
freedom and a democracy and this attack on local government and the collateral question which is next 
on the Order Paper is of the same category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that is insidious. It is not right. It attacks the people and the way they should operate 
at a local level. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we were given a lecture by the Leader from Nipawin 
(Mr. Collver) as to decorum and how MLAs should act in this House. All of us were given that lecture, 
how the high standard of debate should be. What happens on the very first question that the 
Conservatives put out? How does that apply to the decorum and standards that MLAs should be 
following? It doesn’t matter at all, dos it? They want to get into this area of the political operation. We 
were 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

531 
 

treated to an editorial in the Leader-Post which by the way, apart from being childish on this issue, 
telling that the MLAs were right in being lectured by the Leader of the Opposition. I want to see how the 
Leader-Post reports on the nature of this question and what kind of an editorial they put out about the 
standard of the question that is put out by the Conservative Party on the decorum of the MLAs that is to 
be used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the Member really intended to ask that. I think that the Member perhaps 
because of the fact that he is a rookie in the Legislative Assembly got carried away. I think that the 
Member really wants to re-consider the situation because it would be a drastic and unprecedented 
position to adopt. I am going to give you time to think about it and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I might say to the Attorney General I didn’t hear what he said because it 
was drowned out by the decorum. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — He sat down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley . . . Order!. I am sorry for injecting 
some levity into the proceedings of this House, but I remind the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, 
when the Member sat down he was saying something which I couldn’t hear and I said I couldn’t hear 
because of the decorum of the House. I asked the Attorney General what he said. He said “Adjourned 
Debate.” I am now going to put that question. 
 
Debate adjourned on division. 
 

RETURN NO. 22 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 22 
showing: 
 

The number of NDP candidates from June 11, 1975, Saskatchewan Provincial Election that now 
work for the Saskatchewan government or a Saskatchewan Crown corporation: (a) their names 
and positions held; (b) the positions advertised; (c) the salary that accompanies each position. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, here is the reason I asked this question. I have much concern from many of my 
constituents and I have had many civil servants approach me during the past six months that 
ex-politicians have been hired by the government in excessive numbers. I believe that there is no one 
who argues about the fact that every party I think has to take some key people in the government. These 
people certainly do believe that there is an excessive amount of the NDP candidates being hired by the 
government for key positions. This certainly does undermine the civil service as far as seniority goes in 
this province. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on this particular motion I think this one is perhaps in a slightly 
different category from the previous 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

532 
 

one. While this is of a different category, I still find it offensive. I don’t care. I know you will say 
because we have NDP people working with the government and you can make all the political speeches 
you want on that. I think this is slightly different. I really say to you that if you guys were the 
government, the Tories, we had these types of question on the Order Paper, I still tell you that is just not 
the way we should be acting as MLAs. We want to increase the level and the decorum of the debate . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Now that you are the government? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . as a government we answered similar types of question by boys in 1971-75. 
We want to elevate the standard of debate. We want to make a good contribution to Saskatchewan 
people. What we do is we debate the issues. What we are debating here are personalities, debating 
politics. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’re not . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, we are and getting right down to the local levels by asking us to identify 
the people. I simply say to you boys, that’s the spirit and if this is the kind of debate that we want to get 
ourselves involved in nobody wins on that. Nobody. They have lots to lose too. Nobody wins. I really 
say this in sincerity. I would hope that the Members opposite not get themselves into the same routine 
that the Liberals up to now have operated, the old look Liberals, but maintain what I think has been a 
pretty good standard set by the Conservatives in this House up to now, and to consider whether or not 
this Motion should be proceeded with, for all the arguments I have talked about. I think you need some 
time to think about it. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — On a Point of Privilege. I find the word “boys” offensive. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw. I did not mean that in a derogatory sense, or 
demeaning sense. It is a matter of terminology. I used the words ‘guys’, that’s wrong. I withdraw 
unequivocally. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 20 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a 
Return No. 20 showing: 
 

(a) A copy of any feasibility study relating to the cost of construction of any new potash mine by 
the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. 
(b) The name of the organization that carried out those studies. 
(c) The cost of carrying out those studies. 

 
He said: I want to say a few words on this one. It is my sincere 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

533 
 

hope that the Attorney General won’t get up and make another fire and brimstone speech and then 
adjourn the debate. It is my hope also that there will be no debate or argument about putting the facts on 
the table. 
 
This government has introduced a Bill which is entirely different than most Crown corporation bills. It 
has put no maximum on the borrowing power of this government in that Crown corporation. It is about 
to go into a venture which no one knows the cost. The Premier has indicated it will be $500 million to 
$1 billion, making this House and the people of Saskatchewan to give them carte blanche to be able to 
proceed in this fashion. Now the government has for the past year and a half or whatever it is, gone 
forward and investigated the possibility of establishing their own mine. They are now in the process of 
negotiating or will be, for the mines of private industry. I think it is vital that the people of 
Saskatchewan know first of all how much money we are talking abut, the risk involved, where they are 
going to get the money, the interest they are going to pay, the long term retirement program and 
everything else that is involved in this deal. One of the very important aspects will be the analogy as to 
whether or not what the Attorney General calls fair play, and fair price, will be the comparison of what a 
mine will cost per production ton to build in 1975 and then compare it to what the government offers 
these mines that are presently in existence. Therefore it is vital that this information be presented to this 
House before Bill No. 1 and Bill No., 2 are proceeded with. 
 
I ask all the Members of the House, all of you go back to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill and the reams of 
documents that were laid on this table in order that they at that time, the Members of the Opposition 
would have an opportunity to scrutinize and to observe, to assess and evaluate to carry out their 
responsibilities as MLAs and do a critical appraisal and a critical analysis of the financial deals. On this 
potash issue up until this time we have had absolutely no information. Here is an opportunity for a real 
evaluation. I urge the Attorney General, the Members of the government to proceed with this Motion, to 
pass it, to accept, put the information on the table tomorrow or Monday, so that we can proceed with the 
debate on Bill No. 1 and Bill No. 2 and so that the people of Saskatchewan will find out whether there is 
a fair deal for the potash companies, whether there is a risk, that they are being asked to enter into, 
whether that risk is one that perhaps they, the public of Saskatchewan may not want to proceed with. I 
just don’t know any other analogy. I know there is a feasibility study. I also know that reports have been 
turned into the government. In fact I was in Bredenbury the other night, and noticed the stakes in the 
ground and the surveying where that mine was to be built. People took me out and showed me the actual 
lots or the acreage. All I know is that the information is available, it is there and it is clearly the 
responsibility of this government to make it known and available to the Opposition, both Liberal and 
Conservative and to the people of Saskatchewan and at the earliest opportunity before we proceed with 
Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
will want to have some words to say 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

534 
 

with respect to this particular motion. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 28 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 28 showing: 
 

In the 292 Rural Municipalities and 9 Local Improvement Districts in the province of 
Saskatchewan as of November 1, 1975: (1) the total acreage of Crown land not held by the Land 
Bank Commission (a) the number of acres under cultivation, (b) the number of acres of natural 
grass, (c) the number of acres seeded in grass, (d) the number of individuals holding leases, (e) 
the number of community pastures holding leases; (2)(a) whether any of the above land will be 
turned over to the Land Bank Commission, (b) if so, the total number of acres of land involved 
and the dates. 

 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of problems 
related to the question that is being asked. The first problem we run into is the question of the number of 
acres of natural grass and the number of acres under seeded grass. It is well known that many of these 
cultivation leases are many years old, many of the acreages were seeded to grass at one time, many have 
gone back to their natural condition. It is practically impossible for the department to be able to isolate 
either natural or seeded grass at the present time. 
 
The other problem that we have is that the question asked is: whether any of this land will be turned over 
to the Land Bank Commission and the total number of acres and the dates. As will be known, the policy 
of the Department is that Lands Branch land cultivation leases are turned over to the Land Bank as 
leases expire. As many of these leases are in terms of 33 years so there would be no possible way that 
we would be able to tell you with any precision how many acres and when they would be turned over. I 
should like, therefore to move an amendment, seconded by the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson) that 
Return No. 28 be amended: 
 

That all the words after “1975" in the second line be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 

 
(1) The total acreage of Crown land administered by the Department of Agriculture and not held 
by the Land Bank Commission; (2) of the acreage shown in (1): (a) the number of acres under 
cultivation leases, (b) the number of acres under grazing leases, (c) the number of individuals 
holding leases, (d) the number of community pastures holding leases; (3) whether any of the 
above land will be turned over to the Land Bank Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

535 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional in the Legislature to 
recognize the contribution made to the public life or the province by former Members of this Assembly 
who have died. 
 
We have recently been advised of the death of Charles Morton Dunn who died on November 16 after 
this House commenced its current sitting. Accordingly I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Steuart: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former Member of this 
Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his community, 
his constituency and to this province. 

 
CHARLES MORTON DUNN, who died on November 16, 175, was a Member of this 
Legislature from 1929 to 1934 for the constituency of Pheasant Hills and from 1934 to 1938 
from the constituency of Francis. He was born in 1892 at Granville Ferry, Nova Scotia, and 
received his education at Annapolis Royal Academy. He was a life insurance agent with Mutual 
Life of Canada and was past president of the Life Underwriters Association of Canada. From 
1934 to 1938 he held the post of Minister of Highway and was also Minister in Charge of the 
King’s Printer, the Bureau of Publications, the Child Welfare Act and Old Age Pensions. He was 
a member of the Regina Rotary Club, the Elks Lodge, the Knights of Pythias and the United 
Church of Canada. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its most 
sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved family. 

 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege for me to join the 
Premier in seconding the motion of condolence on the passing of another man who played an important 
rule in the earlier days of our province and played a role in this Legislative Assembly. I knew Charles 
Dunn in the 1940s and the 1950s. I know that he first served in this Legislature in the Opposition from 
1929-1934 and served as a Minister of the Crown from 1934-38. We al know these ere difficult years for 
everyone in public life and I know by reputation that he left an excellent mark and was considered a 
sound and capable Minister and a very concerned individual. 
 
He carried on after 1938 as an active Member of our political party, playing a leading role for many 
years. He was also extremely active as can be indicated in this very brief summary of some of the 
outstanding events and outstanding contributions in his life as a member of the Elks Club, the Rotary 
Club and the Knights of Pythias and of the United Church of Canada. He was a friendly man. I suppose 
if anybody could b described as an old fashioned politician, Charlie Dunn fitted that picture. There was 
nothing mean or controversial about his character, about his approach to politics or life in general. I 
would join with the Premier and other Members in this Assembly in paying my respects to the memory 
of this man who served as we are all 



 
November 28, 1975. 
 

536 
 

now serving the people of this province in this Legislative Assembly, paying a tribute to his memory and 
recording our sorrow at his passing and passing on to the members of his family our deepest sympathy. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, may I add my 
condolences to the family of Mr. Dunn, on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Members of the 
Legislature. Although I did not know Mr. Dunn personally his record indicates that the served the 
province and the Legislature well. My God grant him eternal peace and his loved ones comfort in the joy 
of his life. 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a few words of tribute to the 
memory of Mr. Dunn. As has been indicated Mr. Dunn was the Member for Pheasant Hills constituency 
from the years 1929 to 1934. Pheasant Hills as many of you may know is now part of the constituency 
of Saltcoats. Although I did not know Mr. Dunn personally, I have talked to a large number of people 
who knew and respected him. They remember him as a competent and a very conscientious MLA who 
served his constituency well. 
 
I should like on my own behalf and on behalf of those people in my constituency who remember Mr. 
Dunn to express our sincere sympathies to the family. 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — I too would like to express my personal condolences to Mr. Dunn’s 
family. Although I too did not know Mr. Dunn personally I have heard very often in the Yorkton area of 
his friendliness, his hard work and his sincerity on behalf of his constituents. Many people in the 
Yorkton area and many constituents knew and respected Mr. Dunn for the fine work that he did as an 
MLA. On behalf of those constituents and on behalf of myself, I should like to expresses those 
condolences to the family of Mr. Dunn. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time through you to express on 
behalf of the Weyburn constituency and myself out condolences in the passing of Mr. Charles Dunn. 
Though I never knew Mr. Dunn personally, I well remember his name and the respect in which he was 
held not only in the political circles but by all who knew him as a public servant and as a citizen. The 
constituency of Francis which he had the privilege to represent borders and I believe is now part of the 
Weyburn constituency, consequently many of the people who reside there now in the Weyburn 
constituency knew him very well. Having been a Minister of Highways proved the capability of the 
man, and as you review other position in which he was selected to participate in, certainly proves and 
further demonstrates his humanitarian interests. Mr. Dunn was highly respected in that community, a 
very prominent figure in his church and other fraternal organizations. I should like to express again our 
sincere sympathy on behalf of the Weyburn constituency and myself to his family and his close friends. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. 
Steuart): 
 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the 



 
November 28, 1975. 

 

537 
 

transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of Mr. Dunn, be communicated to the bereaved family 
on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


