
























































Hansard: December 18, 1975


1280 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

25th Day 
 

Tuesday, December 18, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to the other Members of the House, approximately 18 Grade Twelve students from Sheldon 
Williams high school seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are led here today by their teacher, Mr. 
Cochrane. I hope they will find the proceedings this afternoon both enjoyable and informative. 
 
I hope to meet with them later in the day to try and answer any questions they may have. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

REQUEST FOR WITHDRAWAL OF REMARKS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I have a statement which I should like to make. 
 
A point of Order was raised by the Hon. Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) to the effect that he had 
been misquoted during the debate. I have checked the unofficial verbatim record and do not feel that 
either the Rules or the Privileges of the Assembly were broken. I might add that the Member could have 
risen on a point of correction at the end of the remarks of the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. 
Merchant). 
 
The Hon. Member for Nipawin rose on a further Point of Order to the effect that the Member for Regina 
Wascana made a personal attack during his remarks. I have checked the record and feel that a personal 
attack was made when the Member for Regina Wascana mentioned: 
 
"He shouts and he screams, he comes into this House and every time he tries to go through a four 
paragraph remark he seems to lose his temper as though having successfully dealt with the 
chambermaids in the Bessborough that way, this is a good way to deal with this House." 
 
I refer all Hon. Members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, cit. 149 (f), 
page 127, which states that a Member should not refer to the personal conduct of Members. I therefore 
request the Member for Regina Wascana to withdraw his remarks and avoid any personal attacks in the 
future. 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I’d be very pleased to abide by your 
ruling. Only for purposes of clarification, am I to withdraw 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1281 
 

the remark that he was connected with the Bessborough or am I to withdraw the allusion that he treats 
the House in the manner that one might treat a chambermaid. I think quite clearly the allusion to the 
Bessborough may be improper and I don’t know from your Honour’s ruling whether I am to withdraw 
both or simply the reference to the Bessborough Hotel. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the House would probably be quite prepared to accept an unconditional 
withdrawal. If the Member wishes to make a connection with the Bessborough at a later date, he may 
make it, if he thinks it is in order. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I withdraw the remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

HAS GOVERNMENT PURCHASED INTEREST IN NOVAPHARM 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders 
of the Day, I should like to direct a question to the Premier. Is it true that the Government of 
Saskatchewan or one of its agencies, or Crown corporations has purchased a 25 per cent interest in an 
Ontario corporation known as NovaPharm, a generic drug house? And is it further true that other generic 
drug houses which have been submitting confidential tenders for the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug 
Plan are now concerned that they will no longer be able to submit tenders on a confidential basis since 
they will be in competition with the tender opener, thereby, alienating or eliminating the tender practice 
of gaining drugs for the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan which will in turn substantially increase 
the costs for the citizens of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member has asked me two questions. 
One, has a government agency acquired an interest in NovaPharm, and the second question was, is it 
true that other drug companies are concerned and alarmed, however he phrases it. 
 
May I say with respect to the second question that that is not within the purview of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know whether other drug companies are concerned or alarmed and what they may 
be concerned or alarmed about. 
 
With respect to question number one, I have no knowledge whatever of the purchase of any interest in 
NovaPharm or so far as I am aware in another prescription drug company by an agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Then is the Government of Saskatchewan 
or any of its agencies or Crown corporations presently negotiating with the owners of NovaPharm or in 
any way discussing the possibility of obtaining an interest in NovaPharm? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any negotiations but if 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1282 
 

I were I would not advise the Hon. Member. 
 
I think it is reasonably clear that if there are negotiations which are still in the negotiation stage for the 
purchase of an enterprise, and I don’t know anything about NovaPharm, but I want to make the point 
with respect to other enterprises, it will rarely be in the public interest to report the day to day status of 
the negotiations. I make that point. With respect to NovaPharm I am aware of none. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a second supplementary then. It is our information that these 
negotiations are underway or that they have been concluded. My second supplementary is; what possible 
justification could the Government of Saskatchewan have in using money belonging to the people of 
Saskatchewan to invest in Ontario corporations or in fact in any corporation whose place of business, 
job creation possibility and so on, are outside the boundaries of the Province of Saskatchewan? And 
further is it possible that the Members opposite in keeping with the Premier’s interest in high stake 
poker have introduced the potash nationalization scheme as an elaborate smoke screen to cloud the 
Government’s activities in these other areas? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will not comment on whether that is an appropriate 
supplementary. 
 
I am not aware of any current negotiations with respect to NovaPharm. I am not in a position to say 
whether or not at some time in the past there have been negotiations on NovaPharm. I am not thoroughly 
acquainted with every negotiation that might have been carried on in the past. With respect to whether or 
not it would be appropriate for the Government of Saskatchewan to invest in an organization which has 
substantial holdings outside the province, I don’t know whether there would be reasons for that. It may 
be that the Hon. Member would like to direct his question to Premier Davis who will probably tell him 
why Ontario Hydro is investing in a substantial way in Saskatchewan. Or to Premier Lougheed who will 
tell him why the Government of Alberta is investing substantially in Pacific Western Airlines with major 
holdings in British Columbia. 
 

REGINA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CONCERNED RE POTASH TAKEOVER 
 
MRS. E. G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, would the Premier confirm that he 
has received a letter from Regina Chamber of Commerce which reads in part: 
 

The Board of Directors of the Regina Chamber of Commerce would like to register with you and 
through you to your Cabinet and the Government our deep concern with respect to the current potash 
controversy. 

 
It is obvious that the Chamber cannot agree with this public enterprise philosophy in the development 
of any particular resource or undertaking. It is this aspect of the controversy that is most distressing for 
it may be potentially damaging to our economy. 

 
That is the first paragraph. Also enclosed is a photostat of a 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1283 
 

newspaper clipping, Thursday, November 13, which also registers the Regina Chamber of Commerce 
opposition to the potash nationalization. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sorry that I cannot confirm that. I certainly don’t deny it, but I cannot 
confirm it since I don’t recall that particular piece of correspondence. I would be happy to check up to 
see whether we received a piece of correspondence along that line. 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce has spoken out against the proposed nationalization of the potash industry, will the 
Government and the Attorney General now be threatening to move the head office of the potash 
corporation out of Regina because the climate of the business community is as unfavorable to 
government action as is Saskatoon’s? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know how the Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland measures climate, 
but at least in our judgment a simple letter which had not been made public before the Member for 
Saskatoon made it public, that I was aware of, does not quite fall into the same category, and would not 
probably influence the employees of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the same extent as the 
activities of the Saskatoon Board of Trade. 
 
I don’t know whether anyone feels any great hostility with respect to the potash decisions in Regina. I 
don’t feel any and the Mayor of Regina has been kind enough to say that he doesn’t feel any. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It may well be therefore that the general climate of opinion in Regina is much 
more favorable to this than in Saskatoon. 
 

COMMERCIAL TOURIST FISHING CAMP ON DEWDNEY ISLAND 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 
should like to ask a question of the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. What is the name of the 
commercial tourist fishing camp operated on Dewdney Island in Reindeer Lake in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. T. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Arctic Lodges Limited. 
 
MR. NELSON: — A supplementary question. Are they licensed to operate a camp with the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I am not sure that I understood the question, but I think it was asking whether 
or not the Government or that Arctic Lodges were operating a joint camp on Dewdney Island. The 
answer to that question is No. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1284 
 

MR. NELSON: — The question Hon. Member is; have they a licence or lease to operate a camp from 
the Government of Saskatchewan or with the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Arctic Lodges have a lease on Dewdney Island and are licensed as an outfitter. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Second supplementary. Has the licence been renewed for 1976? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I am not able to answer that question. I will certainly take it under advisement 
and let the Hon. Member know. 
 

SEVEN CENT TAX REBATE ON FARM FUEL 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the 
Minister of Finance who is not in his chair so I will therefore address it to the Minister of Agriculture. 
Formerly there has been a rebate of seven cents per gallon to farmers and ranchers and agricultural 
people on the agricultural fuel consumed in their operations. I note that for this year, 1975, a maximum 
amount of $200 has been placed as the top of the rebate. Could the Minister comment as to exactly what 
the thinking of the Government is in this measure? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is true that the rebate has a 
limit of $200 per farmer on it. We don’t apologize for that for we feel that what we want to do in 
Saskatchewan is maintain the largest possible number of viable farmers. We are not interested in 
subsidizing large enterprises. As a result we have put a ceiling on the amount of dollars each farmer can 
get. We extended the number of dollars that goes to the smaller farm sector. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Since the seven cent rebate is still 
available at the pumps for commercial or pleasure vehicles etc., would the Minister care to comment as 
to why, in view of the fact that I would venture to say that probably 60 per cent of the farm fuel would 
exceed this $200 level, why this discrimination against agriculture when it is available to the general 
public at the pumps? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t view this as discrimination. I think it is a decision on the part 
of the Government to spread the available funds that we have for that program to the best advantage of 
the small farm community. I don’t apologize for that. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, aside from the fact that the Minister by his lack of answer has 
almost admitted discrimination, may I then ask the Minister that in view of this very obvious 
discrimination against agriculture when it is available to the general public, will the Minister of the 
Government consider 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1285 
 

restoring the same privilege to agricultural people? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I am sure that that is a better question directed to the Minister of Finance but all I 
can say to you is that we are not enamored with the idea of paying extended benefits to large farm 
operations. We don’t think that is particularly of benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. STEUART: — What’s a large farm? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, I think when you look at $200 per unit that covers just about every average 
size farmer in the Province of Saskatchewan and those are the people whom we are attempting to 
protect. I think that our decision is a good one. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

CHIEF ELECTOR REPORT OF EIGHTEENTH GENERAL ELECTION 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 
advise Hon. Members that I have received the report of the Chief Electoral Officer covering the 18th 
general election in 1975. I ask that reports be distributed on the desks of the Members. For the records of 
the House, I will table this copy. 
 

QUESTION 
 

REGINA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CONCERNED RE POTASH TAKEOVER 
 
MRS. E. G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder in view of the fact that I 
didn’t get the opportunity to get a second supplementary question put, may I do that before we begin the 
Orders of the Day? 
 
I address this to the Attorney General and the Premier that from the answers received to my question and 
the first supplementary that obviously the Government has a double standard in dealing with the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon. I wonder if I could have the assurance that Saskatoon would receive equal 
consideration with Regina with respect to the location of the head office? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think the answer to that is, Yes. No one should for a moment think that equal 
consideration would not be given, and equal consideration means the consideration of all factors. 
Certainly one of the factors will be the general business climate and the likely acceptance of the 
organization in that city, but again as I said on earlier occasions, this is unlikely to be a major factor 
since it is likely that in the short time any community in Saskatchewan would welcome the head office 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1286 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that 
Bill No. 16 - An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 1973 by now read a second time. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the opportunity to 
rise in debate of Bill 16, an opportunity that I thought I was going to have yesterday. However, we had a 
great day in the House yesterday and the opportunity to get at Bill 16 wasn’t there. 
 
The first thing I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that this Government has taken a glaringly weak and a 
totally indefensible position which borders on irresponsibility in that it has not yet introduced in this 
House a comprehensive program to supplement the federal anti-inflation program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Despite the fact that inflation is the disease which most threatens the citizens of 
Saskatchewan and citizens of Canada, despite the fact that it is now two months since Prime Minister 
Trudeau announced the Government of Canada’s intention to introduce an anti-inflation program, 
despite the fact that this Legislature has now been sitting for one month, there has been absolutely no 
indication that this Government has any overall anti-inflation program for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — It is my considered view, Mr. Speaker, that the lack of evidence of any planning in 
this regard is paralleled only by the obvious lack of studies, feasibility studies in marketing or the 
economies of purchasing for the nationalization of the potash industry. The Government has waffled, 
and I indicate that term to indicate who, in my view, is calling the tune on this tissue. It has used every 
excuse it can find to do nothing. It has said that the federal program is now law. Why should we act 
when there is no law and yet other provinces have acted. It is said that there were no regulations, yet 
other provinces act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — It is argued that the duration of the program was too long, yet in the beginning a 
piecemeal approach to the inflation problem in Saskatchewan it introduces in its first piece of legislation 
a Bill which has no time limit and which can exist in perpetuity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I referred in an earlier debate to a lack of logic in the thinking of this Government. You 
will recall that in that instance I was suggesting that on the one hand Members opposite told this House 
how significant the potash takeover was and how it deserved long, long debate. We were told that the 
Government should not be expected to take the word of the 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1287 
 

potash companies for the tax rate they are forced to accept and yet on the other hand the Government 
expects us to pass legislation quickly with no monetary restraints. Now I point that out as an indication 
of a lack of logic; the same kind of logic, Mr. Speaker, is being shown in this instance in Bill 16. The 
Provincial Government criticizes the Federal Government because the federal program is too long, and 
yet it introduces in this Bill proposed legislation with no time limit. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, attacks the problem of inflation in about the same manner that a toy water pistol 
would attack a forest fire. It’s totally ineffective. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — We can only hope, along with thousands of Saskatchewan citizens that a 
comprehensive plan will eventually appear, and the best thing that can be said about the Government 
anti-inflation program is - better late than never. 
 
I think one further point needs to be raised, Mr. Speaker, regarding the Government’s inability to state a 
comprehensive anti-inflation program. In debate the other day with regard to a resolution introduced to 
suggest a study on the teachers’ supply matter, questions were raised regarding our position on teachers’ 
salaries. Our position is clear. Since the teacher collective bargaining legislation introduced by this 
Government forced the teachers into a compulsory two-year agreement and since during that time 
Saskatchewan teachers’ salaries fell sharply behind neighboring provinces we contend that some 
catchup provision must be incorporated into the present round of bargaining. And we have accepted the 
principle of prairie averaging as stated by the former Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy). A 
realistic analysis of that situation is such that common sense suggests the need for teachers’ salaries to 
be competitive and one need not be a genius to see that. 
 
One further point is clear, Mr. Speaker, it’s the responsibility of the Government to introduce a 
comprehensive program, and in this responsibility the Government has failed and failed miserably. I 
suggest with respect, Mr. Speaker, Members opposite could for a change spend their time productively 
by dealing with the inflation problem in an all-encompassing way and for a change be of some service to 
the people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Turning specifically to the Bill, an Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 
1973, I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I support the general intent of this piece of legislation. I 
think most Members of the House recognize that it is largely a motherhood issue and a few Members, if 
any, will object to the intent and most of the Members will agree with the Minister who introduced the 
Bill (Mr. Shillington) that at least it is a short-term solution to the problem. Not the best solution, 
however, as it could have been more fairly accomplished through a rent review board, with power to 
move against specific circumstances and specific people which could get at the gougers without 
attacking as well those who have been fair. Most of the Members will accept the principle of the Bill 
because they can likely state cases like this one. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1288 
 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, from a Saskatoon renter who quotes the following rent increases on 
behalf of fellow renters in a particular apartment. These rent changes were proposed in early October 
and were to become effective January 1st. Rents that went from $82.50 to $165; from $77.50 to $165; 
from $72.50 to $150; from $77.50 to $190. These rent increases represent percentage rates of between 
100 and 145 per cent. There is one thermostat to control the heat in all the apartments. Coin operated 
washing facilities, no dryer and no inside entrance from the suites to the basement. Clearly a case which 
demonstrates the need for some controls with regard to rent. 
 
At the same time that we can cite examples of that sort, Mr. Speaker, we must also say, and I think say 
fairly, that there are many landlords who have treated their tenants fairly, who have not gouged their 
rents and who see to it that adequate services are provided. It is likely very fair to say that the latter 
represents the actions and the attitudes of most landlords in this province. 
 
Section 55 (h) disturbs me, Mr. Speaker. This Section provides that all provisions of the Act, with the 
exceptions of Section 34 (a); 34 (b); 34 (c); 34 (d); 34 (e); 34 (f); Section 43; Section 49 (a); Section 53; 
and Section 55 (g) bind the Crown in right of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we examine Section 34, it is obvious that the rent increases do not apply to the province. I am 
disturbed by this, Mr. Speaker, because of a situation, again from Saskatoon, where Government 
restraint is absolutely necessary. In one nursing home in my constituency where Level III care is 
provided, residents have been faced with the following types of rent increases. Rent in May, 1972 was 
$300 a month and in October of 1975, $795 per month. The increase over the past six months was $85 
per month last spring and $120 per month this past October - an increase of $205 a month in rent over 
the past six months. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit that what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. If the Government 
expects the private sector to accept rent increases for landlords of ten per cent in 1975 and eight per cent 
in 1976, then the Government should accept them as well. I submit that not to do so detracts from the 
credibility of the Government in this specific piece of legislation and in this Government’s overall 
attempt (if there is one) to fight inflation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — When he introduced the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister indicated the long-term 
solution to the problem of rents was further construction. The Premier later indicated that this 
Government has no desire to get into the construction industry and I want it known, Mr. Speaker, that 
I’m pleased with the statements of both the Hon. Members. The Minister in charge recognizes the need 
for construction and the Premier recognizes the best way for this to happen is to have the Government 
keep its nose out of the construction industry. 
 
On the point of construction, Mr. Speaker, I hope the Government realizes that there are signs that we 
are already on the road to recovery. In Saskatoon, for example, the 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1289 
 

number of multi-dwelling starts in 1975 will be close to 1,000 which is just about double what it was in 
1974. I dare say that the Member for Regina Victoria (Mr. Baker) if he were here would be able to 
confirm the same for the city of Regina. 
 
I point this out, Mr. Speaker, because clearly the long-term solution to the problem is increasing the 
number of building starts so that the supply of apartment units will exceed the demand. We must, 
therefore, make certain that this Bill will not act as a deterrent to this trend. And I submit that the best 
way to do that is to amend Section 27 so that termination of the legislation is an integral part of its 
passage. In my view the termination should be 18 months from the day of assent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives too much power to the Cabinet, and that causes me some considerable 
concern. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Sweeping powers like those detailed in Section 3, Section 2 (d) and Section 55 (g) 
are cause for concern because these powers rightfully belong to the Legislature; they are too easily 
abused if they are kept the way they are; they invest considerable power in the rentalsman and the 
commission; they don’t allow recourse to the courts, a provision which in my view and contrary to the 
view of the Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway), should definitely be present. Section 2(d) 
and Section 3, Section 55 (g) give total operative power in this Act to the Cabinet. This matter was 
raised earlier by the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) and the Premier indicated they would 
take a look at these powers. I raise the matter again, Mr. Speaker, to emphasize our concern and to 
indicate that we are anxious to receive a response from the Premier in this regard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I expect, Mr. Speaker, that the Government, and particularly the Minister in charge 
will take note of these concerns and these questions, in addition to the questions and concerns raised by 
my colleagues. While we can be expected to support the Bill in principle, there are a number of matters 
that require clarification and amendment in committee. 
 
For example, we want some detail about the size of the staff the Minister expects will be required to 
administer the Act, and further we expect to know the job specification of the staff that will be 
employed. We will also be placing amendments pending the reaction of the Premier limiting the power 
of the Cabinet. We expect a specific time limit to be placed on this legislation, and if the Government 
takes no initiative in this regard we will place an amendment to place the proposed legislation into a 
realistic time frame so that future construction will go forward and so that this Act does not become one 
which exists forever. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Bill in second reading. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1290 
 

HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a very few 
remarks I should like to make in closing the debate. 
 
There has been a good deal said about the fact that this is sort of the only anti-inflation legislation so far 
which has come before this House. I am not sure how strictly relevant that is, but suffice to say that we 
still await the definitive word from the Federal Government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons was quite correct when he said that the Act did 
not contain what the White Paper contained. The White Paper set out a fairly specific set of 
recommendations and a fairly specific proposal. The Act as introduced into the House of Commons left 
most of it to regulation. I’m not being particularly critical of the Federal Government for doing it by 
regulation. They are moving in a new area, an area in which they are somewhat unsure of themselves 
and they want flexibility to meet the day-to-day situations as they come up. But until the announcements 
are made this evening we are not going to know precisely what the federal program is and we have to 
have that before we can bring in a comprehensive anti-inflation program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have met with a very large number of landlords, and some tenants, and when I said 
initially that I expected that the Act would meet with more enthusiasm from tenants than landlords, 
certainly my meetings bore that out. The landlords have made a number of suggestions and I want to 
deal somewhat briefly with the suggestions which they have made and how I think we ought to respond 
to them. 
 
It has been suggested that there should be some form of minimum return guaranteed to the landlord. I 
want to deal with that because I think it’s not as broad a problem as it might appear. I want to deal with 
it in just a bit of detail. 
 
The Act, as you know, and the regulations which are passed there under will give a landlord the higher 
of his costs or ten per cent. The problem that might arise is if the landlord was suffering and was 
experiencing an actual operating loss in December, 1974, then presumably the higher of this cost or ten 
per cent would still leave him in the situation that would knock him into an operating loss and 
presumably might drive him into bankruptcy. And I think all we can say at this time is that I am 
attracted to that notion. The section that gives the Government power to pass regulations under the Act, 
those are grounds upon which the ten per cent ceiling can be waived and be broad enough to include 
that. And, as I say, we will give its fairness consideration, the last thing we want to do is drive any 
landlord into bankruptcy and it seems to be a fairly important argument. However, I discussed it with 
other people who say that it might be an administrative nightmare to try and do it. 
 
Quite a number of people including many Members opposite have mentioned the exclusion of the right 
to appeal and that has been given some consideration too, and I have some sympathy for that as a 
lawyer. I suspect some of my colleagues and perhaps some Members opposite who aren’t lawyers find 
that criticism less potent. But I do and the Premier mentioned the other night that we were prepared to 
give earnest consideration 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1291 
 

to a right of appeal. 
 
Now there are two avenues we might go. We simply repeal the section which prohibits the right of 
appeal. That would allow an appeal by what is known as a prerogative writ by errors on the fact of the 
record. I see certain problems in that and the thinking at the moment is that we might provide a right of 
appeal on a question of law to the Court of Appeal. It is a somewhat broader sort of appeal. 
 
One rather difficult problem was the question of the limitations on the Act. Quite a number of landlords 
mentioned that to me and it has been mentioned by a fair number of speakers opposite. Suffice it to say 
that I believe that to place a limitation in the Act is to try and deal with a very complex problem with a 
simple solution and I just don’t think it will work. There are a number of problems in it, the Premier 
mentioned one the other night. 
 
Another one that concerns me is simply the mechanics of it. We are not sure at this point in time how 
long the Federal Government’s anti-inflation program is going to last. The provinces are being allowed 
to sign up for 18 months and then you review it. If there is an 18 month limitation and the province 
decides to renew it all they have to do is sign the agreement. But if we place a limitation on the Act we 
have to deal with it by legislation and 18 months down the road puts us somewhere in the middle of 
June. The Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) suggested 22 months and that puts us in October and 
doesn’t seem to me to solve very much. To place a limitation in the Act is awkward in a mechanical sort 
of a way. 
 
I have said when I gave my speech moving this that it is a short term solution. It is not a long term 
solution. A long term solution would be a sufficient number of apartments. The Member for Nipawin 
said it was a temporary solution to a temporary problem. I hope he is right about it being a temporary 
problem. But a number of others have said the same thing and we recognize that, that the legislation 
locks in inequities, it preserves and in fact aggravates distortions that are already on the market and we 
believe that as soon as there is a sufficient number of apartments we will probably want to look at the 
Act with a view to repealing it or converting it into a rent review situation or something. To place a 
limitation on the Act I suggest to Members opposite simply won’t work. 
 
It was suggested by one Member, I believe it was the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) that the 
Government might be getting into the construction industry. That was dealt with by the Premier. I only 
echo that because we have no desire to get into the construction industry. Indeed, we may have our 
hands full with the potash industry without getting into the construction industry as well. 
 
The question of future investment has been raised by a number of Members and I think at this point in 
time we are reviewing the question of how long the exemptions should last, whether it should be five 
years or whether or not that is a House amendment that might be brought in. I’ll tell the Hon. Members 
and I can tell them no more that the five-year limitation is being reconsidered at this time. The matter 
will be dealt with further in Committee of the Whole on third reading. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1292 
 

I just want to deal with one or two other matters. The Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) 
suggested that a more appropriate approach might have been a rent review board. And I suggest to all 
Members of the House that in an age of wage and price controls that simply won’t do. What the Member 
opposite who I think has supported wage and price controls is saying is that when you are looking at 
wages you control them, but rent you only review it. I said in my speech in reply to the Throne Speech 
that if the wage and price control is going to work it has got to be fair to all concerned and everyone has 
to be treated equally. I suggest that control the wages, review the rents is not treating people equally. 
That is one reason why we don’t feel in the present situation a rent review board would be adequate. 
 
I don’t want to cover in great detail the question of why the Crown isn’t bound, it was dealt with the 
other day on a question from another Member for Saskatoon. Suffice it to say that we feel that within the 
literal definition of a Residential Tenancies there are things that the Act was never designed to deal with. 
It was not designed to deal with YMCAs and hotels as I said. I say to the Member for Saskatoon 
Eastview, it wasn’t designed to deal with nursing homes. And it wasn’t designed to deal with the kind of 
tenancies that the Crown is involved in which might come within the definition. 
 
One other question was raised and that question is the question of the size of the staff. I said outside the 
House and I have no objection to repeating it inside the House that our preliminary estimates are a staff 
of around 30 people. That, I think, is generally in line with the experience of the only other province 
which has had rent control, B.C. They apparently have about three times the number of apartments we 
do and they have about 90 people on staff. We are sort of in that ball park. I think a more appropriate 
time to get into that in detail might be in Estimates but I give you that information now if it is of interest 
to you. 
 
In conclusion let me say, Mr. Speaker, as I said when I moved the Bill that we have tried to be fair to all 
concerned. I have met with a lot of people. I suggested to the Hon. Members some of the amendments 
we think we are going to be making to try to make the Bill as fair as possible and some of the things we 
might be doing later in regulations. I think this Bill when the dust settles will be regarded by other 
provinces as a model of fair legislation in the area of rent control. I urge all Members to vote for it in 
second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Before the Member takes his seat I wonder if I could direct a couple of questions to 
him or at least one question to him. There may be others who would want to do the same. 
 
I don’t understand the statement that you made in your remarks just now that you have to treat everyone 
fairly and therefore there has to be this rent control legislation instead of a rent review board? That 
assumes it seems to me that all of the landlords of the province are operating from the same base which I 
think clearly is not the case. I say, therefore, that under this type of legislation you, in fact, cannot treat 
everyone fairly. Would you comment? 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1293 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, I will comment. We have said that the Federal Government should be 
requiring the prices of big companies to be approved in advance and not afterwards and consistent with 
that statement that is what we are doing in this Act. We believe the federal legislation would work a lot 
better if companies had to get approval for price increases in advance. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to remind Members especially newer Members to the Chamber that 
they will have plenty of opportunity for questioning in Committee of the Whole and rather than put an 
argumentative point at this time if they could confine their questions to strictly questions if the Minister 
wants to permit more. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Just another question if I’m permitted, to get clarity in order to know our position 
in terms of how we would vote on second reading. Am I correct in my assumption that the Minister has 
suggested that he is prepared to amend this legislation to allow an appeal to the courts. Second, he is 
prepared to amend this legislation to ensure that landlords won’t go bankrupt over the legislation but he 
is not prepared to amend the legislation as to the length of time. Am I correct in those three statements? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — A Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I don’t mean to be difficult to get along 
with in rising on this but surely the rules of the House are clear. These kinds of questions are asked 
during the time of Committee of the Whole and I know that from time to time we bend those rules a bit 
and if a Member gets up and asks for a clarification from the Minister after he has made a speech, or 
from any Member after the Member has made a speech, at times those rules are relaxed. But we are 
getting in a situation here where one Member has asked a question and the Minister has been good 
enough to provide a clarification. Now another Member has asked a question and a third Member has 
been getting up to ask a question also. I am thinking that in order to be able to maintain the procedures 
of the House in a normal and uniform pattern that maybe those questions should wait until we get into 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the point is well taken, I think the Members should confine their comments 
at this time to the briefest of clarifications on single points. If the Minister wants to take it and the 
Minister has the right at any point to have the rest of the material shifted to Committee of the Whole. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — If I could speak to that Point of Order. The Minister did agree to take my question 
and I have posed a question and would appreciate an answer if it was possible. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The first and the third statements were correct. The second statement was not 
entirely correct. I did not say we were prepared to amend the legislation to guarantee a landlord a 
minimum rate of return. I said I was attracted to the notion and we could do it by regulation. If we would 
do it at all it would be by regulation. I think I went on to explain 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1294 
 

that there are apparently administrative problems with it, we want flexibility in dealing with it. We 
would therefore prefer to do it, if at all, by regulation. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, before we get to Committee of the Whole, I wonder if the Minister 
would consider particularly - I want to do this in a very helpful way because I am concerned particularly 
about these sections . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the Member asking a question or a clarification? 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I am asking him if he will take under consideration particularly Sections 2(d), 
3(4) and 55 (g) before we get to Committee of the Whole. The question being whether we will have to 
move amendments or whether he will consider them in advance. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will take it under consideration but that’s a short answer to the question. 
 
Motion agreed and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS - 53 
Blakeney Dyck Wiebe 
Pepper McNeill Malone 
Thibault Feschuk MacDonald 
Bowerman Shillington Penner 
Romanow Rolfes Cameron 
Snyder Cowley Edwards 
Byers Tchorzewski Clifford 
Kramer Matsalla Anderson 
Baker Skoberg Merchant 
Lange Vickar McMillan 
Faris Allen Collver 
Kowalchuk Koskie Larter 
Robbins Johnson Bailey 
MacMurchy Thompson Berntson 
Mostoway Banda Ham 
Larson Steuart Katzman 
Whelan Stodalka Birkbeck 
Kaeding Lane  
 

NAYS - Nil 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTION - SITTING OF THE HOUSE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Romanow (Attorney 
General): 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, commencing Thursday, December 18, 1975, meet at 
10:00 o’clock a.m. each sitting day and there shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock until 2:30 o’clock 
p.m., and 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1295 
 

that this order shall expire on December 31, 1975. 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before I start my remarks on this particular 
motion I should like to raise a Point of Order about the motion itself. My suggestion, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the motion is now out of order and as such should not be further considered by this House. The 
reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that it is quite clear from the motion that it cannot be given effect to by 
this House if it is indeed passed by the House in a vote later on. That is, it is impossible now for this 
House to commence, "commencing Thursday, December 18, 1975 meet at 10:00 o’clock a.m.", and that 
is a part of the motion, a significant part of the motion and it is impossible now for effect to be given to 
this part. I would submit, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of this happening because of the 
effluxion of time that part of the motion is irregular, the part I have referred to, and is out of order and is 
null and void, that is that if part of a motion is irregular or out of order that, therefore, the whole motion 
is out of order. I refer you, Sir, to Beauchesne, I am not sure what volume you have there, but page 167 
under paragraph number 199, which says: 
 

Any irregularity of any portion of a motion shall render the whole motion irregular and in turn cites 
Smith’s Digest, 7th edition, page 223. 

 
So what I am putting to you, Mr. Speaker, is because of the way the motion was worded, that is the 
business about commencing on Thursday at 10:00 o’clock, that cannot be done. The motion therefore 
cannot be given effect to by this Assembly if it passes it, if it should pass the motion, therefore it is out 
of order and the whole motion is out of order. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — May I just speak to the Point of Order very briefly. 
The submission that I would make to your honor is that your honor look at the substance of the motion. 
The substance of the motion in a nutshell can be summarized to extend or to try to extend the sitting 
hours of the Legislature. That’s the substance. The question is whether or not the substance of the 
motion is out of order or not out of order. My learned friend opposite is trying to argue that a part of the 
motion if it is out of order invalidates the substance of the motion. With all due respect I just can’t buy 
that. In courts of law, in criminal proceedings, in civil proceedings, parts of motions, parts of statements 
of claim, parts of documents are very often out of order but the substance is permitted to continue and 
the substance is the issue here. The substance really is additional sitting hours and in all due respect we 
may not be able to fulfil the Thursday morning operation that is true, but the substance of it we still are 
able to fulfil and I would argue, with respect, that it is in order. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I would 
remind the Attorney General that this is not a court of law, this is the Legislative Assembly of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Therefore the rules of the Legislative Assembly do not follow a court of 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1296 
 

law. The second thing, Mr. Speaker, is how can we accept a motion and vote on a motion that is 
impossible to carry out its intent. It is impossible, Mr. Speaker, because, 10:00 a.m. in the morning, is 
now gone. It is impossible if we pass this to carry out the intent of the motion and, therefore, the only 
alternative that is open to the House as I see it, Mr. Speaker, is that the Attorney General or the 
Government withdraw the motion and resubmit another motion, making it possible then for it to have 
meaning and making it possible for the Legislative Assembly to carry out the intent of the motion itself. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, speaking on the Point of Order. I 
think this is the proper course for the Government to follow, they should withdraw and submit the 
proper motion. I’m sure we would be prepared to consider giving them leave, we would certainly 
consider that. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might briefly address myself to the Point of Order. 
There are two matters, I know that Mr. Speaker was advised by my friend the Member for Lakeview, I 
hope that if Mr. Speaker has not as yet had an opportunity to look at that particular page, you might look 
at page 376 of Erskine May, which deals with proceedings that are null and void. I, secondly, hope that 
you might look at the definitions contained in the shorter Oxford English Dictionary and in Black’s Law 
Dictionary and if I may read them to you, I don’t think there is any doubt about the fact that you may go 
back to and look at the words, nullity or null and void and decide whether those words fit the 
circumstance that you have now. Nullity, in the shorter Oxford Dictionary is, amongst other things, 
defined as a situation, an instance where a fact or circumstance causes invalidity. And I think that clearly 
that situation exists here. And nullity in Black’s Law Dictionary is defined as an act or proceeding in a 
cause where the opposite party may treat as though it had not taken place or which has absolutely no 
legal force or effect. 
 
Now, my friend, the Hon. Attorney General has suggested to you that you can distinguish between the 
intent and the opening words, seeming to imply that the opening words constitute something in the 
nature of preamble, when clearly the opening words go far beyond that and in that regard suggest to 
your honor that Beauchesne on an amendment is an important area by analogy to consider, because as 
no doubt your honor has seen in dealing and in discussing amendments yesterday, one of the precepts 
laid down by Beauchesne, page 171 and 172 and elsewhere, is that an amendment is only allowable if it 
allows for proper reading with the main motion. Now I suggest to you by analogy here, removal of a 
severance would not be appropriate and that the rules with an amendment apply. That you can’t in short 
breathe into this resolution life which by the effluxion of time has deserted the resolution. I don’t think 
that there is any doubt about the fact but that the Government is either faced with having the matter 
ruled null and void or withdrawing and bringing in the motion again. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Further on the Point of Order, my colleague has referred to Erskine 
May on page 376 where it specifically sets 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1297 
 

out the House’s procedure when the proceedings are null and void. It makes it clear than an order 
declaring proceedings to be null and void where there has been an inadvertence or some form of 
irregularity in procedure. If I can, Mr. Speaker, I should also like to refer to the same text on page 489 
where proceedings on a bill were declared null and void and it says again quite pointedly that if a bill 
has been read a second or third time by mistake or inadvertence the proceedings have been declared null 
and void and another day has been appointed for second reading. It makes it quite clear and there are 
several other references I am sure that have been called to Mr. Speaker’s attention that inadvertence is 
grounds for declaring a particular matter null and void. It means and in all cases through Erskine May 
the proposer of the motion or the bill was required to withdraw and simply start again the next day. I 
think obviously that the Attorney General’s arguments that all motions from now on be dealt with intent 
and not with the substance of the motion, I think is clearly not acceptable to the House and I am sure Mr. 
Speaker doesn’t take it seriously. It would lead to totally ridiculous situations in all future dealings in the 
House if everything was to take the intent of the Member speaking and not his words as put down in the 
motion and in the Blues. I am sure that that argument of the Attorney General’s is specious to say the 
least and I am sure it would establish an unworkable precedent for this House if it was taken. I hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that you would consider the precedence set out in Erskine May that a matter can be declared 
null and void by reason of inadvertence and inadvertence seemingly through the text is the ground for 
declaring motions and bills null and void. It is certainly inadvertence in this case, the proper procedure 
for the Attorney General is simply to withdraw the motion and present it again perhaps tomorrow. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I wish to thank all the Members for their comments on the Point of Order. I believe 
there is not too much in the rule book to rely on in this particular case and Members will have to make a 
judgment as to my ruling after I have made it. 
 
The Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone) when raising the point cited Beauchesne 199 on page 
167, subsection 4, wherein it states. 
 

It is the Speaker’s duty to call the attention of the mover and of the House to the irregularity of a 
motion whereupon the motion is usually withdrawn or so modified as to be no longer objectionable. If 
the motion is of such a nature that the objection cannot be removed the Speaker may refuse to receive 
or put the motion in the House. He treats it as a nullity. Any irregularity of any portion of a motion 
shall render the whole motion irregular. 

 
Now it is clear that the passage of time has had something to do with this and if I may just cite an 
example prior to this in this Session where the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) had 
Resolution No. 10 on the Order Paper dealing with the resumption of the postal services which he 
withdrew. Had he not withdrawn that at that time I think that might have been a Point of Order and 
Resolution No. 10 would have had to be withdrawn. 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1298 
 

The Government Motion to which we are addressing ourselves now was moved by the Attorney General 
with regard to the extension of the sitting hours of the Chamber, was in order when the debate began. 
Now due to the passage of time an anomaly has occurred and I would, consequently, rule that since the 
motion was in order when the debate began and the substance of the motion, in part, can still be carried 
out, I would consequently rule that the motion is in order. Further, I would suggest that the dates that are 
specified in the motion can be interpreted in different ways. But one interpretation which has to be put 
on the dates is that it cannot take effect before December 18th and it cannot exist after December 31st. I 
suggest that if it cannot be carried out in full that it can be carried out in part if the motion is in order. 
 
Therefore, I would rule that the motion is in order for those reasons. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, if you would hear me on your ruling. I think, with respect, I don’t 
think you can read into a motion what the substance is of it or what it isn’t. You have to take the motion 
as is presented to you. The motion quite clearly says that on today at 10:00 o’clock a certain thing was to 
occur. I don’t think you can ignore that and say that the substance of the motion is really what’s 
happening later on between now and December 31st. That it, the motion, has to be read in its entirety 
and as I say, with respect, you can’t go to the motion say, well, it really doesn’t matter whether it is the 
31st or the 18th, the substance is morning sittings. I suggest that is incorrect and that you have to regard 
the whole motion before you and not take parts of it and you indicated I think in your remarks that part 
of the motion was in order. Well, I go back, Mr. Speaker, to my other comments that if part of the 
motion is in order by inference part of it isn’t in order and if part of it isn’t in order Beauchesne is quite 
clear that the whole motion must fall. And I would ask you to reconsider your decision in view of those 
remarks. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I began my statement, or near the beginning of my statement I said that the 
motion was entirely in order at the time the debate began but due to the passage of time this situation has 
occurred. I suggest at this time that the ruling in Beauchesne states that it is the Speaker’s duty to call 
the attention of the mover and the House, which implies to me that the mover still has control of it, but 
in this case the mover does not have control of the motion, it is the property of the House at this time. I 
am not prepared on that basis to change my ruling. I think it is the property of the House and this is the 
only practical way to solve the problem. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, if I could comment, you pointedly ignore the rules in Erskine May and I 
would appreciate receiving your comments for my own interests - if I can make one more comment. 
Seemingly the mover of the motion has put Mr. Speaker in a very embarrassing position in this and, with 
all respect and with all deference, that the proper procedure and the practical solution is for the mover of 
the motion to withdraw it and make sure that proceedings in the House are done in a proper manner and 
that the motion is operative and is working and does what he intended. Certainly, all that the mover had 
to do was 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1299 
 

introduce a motion that morning sittings commence in the House the day after passage of the motion and 
that would have been the very simple thing and the obvious thing for the Attorney General to do. 
Inadvertence has pointedly, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, made it clear that grounds are present for Mr. 
Speaker to rule the matter null and void and simply it can be started all over again. I would think and I 
would hope that the Attorney General would show the required respect for the rules of the House and the 
precedents and show the courtesy to Mr. Speaker by withdrawing the motion and giving the only true 
and reasonable alternative, and that is to introduce a new motion with a new effective date. 
 
MR. M. J. KOSKIE (Quill Lakes): — Mr. Speaker, I think you and as the Attorney General indicated, 
must look at the substance of the motion. When we commenced it was as you indicated in order. Now 
what I say is that certainly the Opposition have in no way been prejudiced in this instance because by 
their own actions they have delayed it over to a subsequent date. But in no way have they been 
prejudiced whether it started yesterday or not because the Opposition were the ones who decided that 
they didn’t want it to start yesterday. And so I say, Mr. Speaker, you have to read the intent of the 
motion and I certainly would support your ruling. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am not prepared at this time to accept any more comments. I thank the Members 
for the comments that have been given to me. The Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) asked why I did 
not make reference to May’s citation that he listed when he was speaking. The reason I didn’t make 
reference to it at that time is because I didn’t think it had application to the item before us. The citation 
there deals with an order. No order has been issued at this time. The matter is under debate. Any further 
comments will have to be in the form of a challenge or a continuation of the debate. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Just a comment, I intend with deference to challenge your ruling, if you would 
allow me first . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Order! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, would you tell that Member to be quiet. As I indicated I am not 
making a comment, I intend to challenge your ruling. Before doing so, I wonder if the mover of the 
motion would withdraw it as you, Mr. Speaker, have certainly indicated should be done. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if I am in order, but speaking to the Point of Order, 
because I am not sure that the Member for Lakeview was in order when he got up. The position of 
myself as a Member of this House is that I abide by Mr. Speaker’s rulings, with all respect, sometimes I 
agree with, sometimes I don’t agree with him. Sometimes I win, sometimes I lose as a Member of the 
House. In this case you as Speaker have found that the motion is in order. Accordingly, it being in order, 
there is nothing for me to withdraw, or nothing to act on that basis. Thank you, your Honour, for your 
ruling. 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1300 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Attorney General is right. I didn’t ask the Attorney General to withdraw 
it, or imply it. I implied here that I ruled the matter is in order and consequently if the Member wishes he 
can challenge it or debate it. 
 
MR. MALONE: — With deference, Mr. Speaker, I challenge your ruling. I think we have to because of 
the situation. 
 
Ruling of the Chair sustained on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS - 37 
Pepper Larson Vickar 
Thibault Whelan Allen 
Bowerman Kaeding Koskie 
Romanow Dyck Johnson 
Snyder McNeill Thompson 
Byers Feschuk Banda 
Kramer Shillington Collver 
Lange Rolfes Bailey 
Faris Cowley Berntson 
Kowalchuk Tchorzewski Ham 
Robbins Matsalla Katzman 
MacMurchy Skoberg Birkbeck 
Mostoway   
 

NAYS - 15 
Steuart MacDonald Clifford 
Stodalka Penner Anderson 
Lane Cameron Merchant 
Wiebe Edwards McMillan 
Malone Nelson (Assinboia-Gravelbourg) Thatcher 
 
The debate continues on the Motion. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. Obviously the argument that the Hon. 
Attorney General presented and another lawyer, the Member for Quill Lakes presented, was of some 
consequence to you. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, in light of your decision whether you would also accept that 
the resolution is so changed in nature that it would now be possible for all Members whether they have 
spoken to the original resolution or not, to address this now changed resolution. In short, Mr. Speaker, 
having breathed new life in the resolution, it appears to me appropriate that Members who have spoken 
might be able to speak again. Indeed when the Attorney General and the Hon. Member for Quill Lakes 
suggests the comparison to the way a court operates, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is the sort 
of ruling that would come in a court that where a technicality is overcome to the benefit of the party that 
had made the error, then the courts bend over backwards to allow in fairness that the other side receive 
every benefit that is available to them. 
 
I wonder on a Point of Order whether you would consider that and whether I for instance having spoken 
in the original 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1301 
 

debate might be able to speak again. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Unfortunately, my only experience in court was with regard to a traffic violation. I 
would say that the Member’s Point of Order is not well taken because the words I see before me are the 
words I saw before me yesterday. The debate continues on the motion as it stands before us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, about your ruling, we did challenge it because we felt it was a very 
serious situation and that it was something that should be regarded as such. We abide by your ruling 
now that it has been upheld. 
 
As I was saying yesterday before we ground to a halt, I was attempting to make an amendment to the 
motion and was unable to do so because of certain activities of the Attorney General and his colleagues 
opposite, that we were prepared to vote for the motion as proposed by the Attorney General if certain 
things had been guaranteed us as to who was going to participate in the debate in these extra hours. It is 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite are not prepared to give us such an undertaking, as I 
understand their lack of interest in this debate, it would appear that they are not prepared to indicate that 
they will speak on the potash Bill during these extra hours of sittings. 
 
In view of that, Mr. Speaker, I should like to propose an amendment to the motion that may ensure that 
while the Members opposite may not participate in the debate that it will allow them to be questioned by 
the Members on this side of the House and particularly the Members in the Liberal caucus. The 
amendment that I am going to propose, Mr. Speaker, does not cut down the hours of sitting, it, in fact, 
enhances the hours of sitting because it will at least ensure that during extra hours of sitting that the 
Treasury Benches will participate and that we will hopefully find out from the Members opposite their 
views of the implications of Bill 1 and Bill 2 and indeed any other Government business. I would move, 
Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Wiebe: 
 

That the words "and that between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Members shall be permitted 
to ask questions of the Government" be added after the words "each sitting day" in the second line. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — With regard to the order of this motion that is before me, I am going to rule, the 
same as I did yesterday when a motion that had some similar parts to it was offered as an amendment. 
At that time I ruled, on the ground of relevancy, I quoted from Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 
Forms, Fourth edition, page 171, citation 203 as follows: 
 

The law on the relevancy of amendments is that they are on the same subject matter with the original 
motion, they are admissible, but not when foreign thereto. 

 
And further, an amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a matter which is foreign to the 
proposition 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1302 
 

involved in the main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 
 
I might suggest to the Members that if the matter of a question period is of concern to the Members, I 
have no way of judging at this time whether a motion could be put on the Order Paper. I would cite 
Beauchesne, page 171, citation 203 (5) in this case, an amendment was ruled out because it raised a new 
question which could only be considered on a distinct motion after notice. I would suggest that a motion 
could be submitted with regard to a question period after the proper notice and would be quite in order. 
But in this particular case, I hark back to the ruling that I just made, which I repeat from yesterday. I 
declare the amendment out of order. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, again we abide by your ruling. I think it is apparent that we on this 
side are prepared to sit the hours the Government has suggested. But when we sit during those hours we 
want some assurance from the Government and from the Attorney General that their Members will 
participate. The Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) has indicated to me that perhaps a proper 
amendment that we will sit any time that the Government is prepared to put a Cabinet Minister to talk 
about Bill 1 and Bill 2. They have not been prepared to do that as yet. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the Member if you are rising on a Point of Order. The Member had to 
sit down in order to move the motion. Just permit me a moment, I want to check something. 
 
Let me just clarify for a moment, the Member had he moved for adjournment and lost the adjournment 
could continue to speak. But having moved an amendment, has lost the right to continue further in the 
debate. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Well, Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this particular Motion as 
presented by the Attorney General I should like briefly to state my objection and my opposition to this 
Motion as presented and why I feel that as an MLA representing over 8,100 constituents, that I cannot 
support this particular Motion. 
 
First of all I feel that my responsibility as an MLA is not only to debate the various proceedings in this 
Legislature, but my responsibility as well is to answer and look after the concerns of the people whom I 
represent whether it be while I am here in Regina participating in the Assembly, or whether it be when I 
am on my farm or in my constituency office. 
 
By asking us to sit from 10:00 o’clock in the morning until 9:30 at night does not allow an MLA to carry 
out that responsibility or that duty. Let me explain. We sit in the morning starting at 10:00 o’clock. I, as 
caucus chairman, must call our caucus together prior to the day’s proceedings, one hour before the 
Session starts each and every day. Which then means that each and every one of our caucus members 
from 9:00 o’clock on will not have the opportunity either to answer the calls of their constituents nor 
will they have an opportunity to phone various government departments on behalf of their constituents. 
That then means that the entire morning is taken 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1303 
 

away from the needs and concerns of our constituents. 
 
The majority of government departments do not return to work until 1:30 and again from 1:30 to 2:30 it 
does not give you that much time to accomplish any work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — With the result that in the evenings as well you, of course, cannot contact or get a hold 
of any of the government departments. 
 
Secondly, I think I have a responsibility to my constituents to oppose legislation which I feel is not in 
the best interest of this province and of my constituents. It’s on that basis that I oppose various pieces of 
legislation that are introduced. If I have made an error in that opposition to particular legislation then it 
is up to my constituents to voice their opinions the next time I go to the polls and ask for their support. 
 
I think one of the reasons, as stated in the Press, that this resolution was introduced was because the 
Attorney General wanted to muzzle or slow down or wear out the Opposition Members in their 
discussion on Bills 1 and 2. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I am unequivocally opposed to Bills 1 and 2 and it is for this reason too 
that I am opposed to this Motion. In effect this Government is not allowing the people of Saskatchewan 
an opportunity to fully understand and realize the vastness of the great effect that Bills 1 and 2 will have 
on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me, too for a moment, point out to the seven Members sitting to my left who in turn are not favoring 
this Motion and seem to be indicating that they, too, are in support of the quick passage of Bills 1 and 2. 
Each one of this side of the House can stand up and speak to the 38 Government Members opposite. 
Regardless of how long we speak, regardless of what arguments we present, when the final vote comes 
down there is no way that we are going to change anyone’s mind on that side of the House. They have 
made up their minds prior to the introduction of this Bill and there is no way that they are going to 
change. So the only way that I as an MLA have an opportunity hopefully to convince the Government 
that they are following the wrong approach is to make the people of Saskatchewan aware of what they 
are doing, and let the people of Saskatchewan judge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Now how do they do this? One only has to go back three years ago to the Foreign 
Ownership of Land Bill, in which the Liberal Opposition at that time did much the same as what they 
are doing now. We on this side of the House did not convince the Government to withdraw that piece of 
legislation. But the people of Saskatchewan convinced the Government to withdraw that piece of 
legislation. People throughout Saskatchewan, it took over a month and a half, but when they started to 
understand what was happening they voiced their concerns to their individual MLAs. 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1304 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — And they did that, Mr. Speaker, through the means of letters to their MLAs, through 
the means of a phone call to their MLAs. And MLAs regardless of what political party they belong to or 
what side of the House that they may sit on hopefully respond to what their constituents say. If the 
majority of their constituents say that they are against or opposed to such legislation MLAs will 
normally change their minds. Members on that side of the House when we were dealing with the 
Foreign Ownership of Land legislation realized from the views that were expressed to them by their 
constituents that it was bad legislation, they finally agreed to withdraw that particular piece of legislation 
and set up a legislative committee to study that legislation. 
 
What was the result of that opposition, which we as the official Opposition at that time voiced on the 
Foreign Ownership of Land legislation? A legislative committee was set up, that committee reported 
back to this Assembly, this Assembly accepted the recommendations of that committee and a new 
Foreign Ownership of Land Bill was introduced the following year that was acceptable to each and 
every person in this province. 
 
So this is why I say it is vitally important, Mr. Speaker, that we hold Bills 1 and 2 as long as we possibly 
can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — That we allow not only my constituents, but the constituents of each and every 
Member sitting on that side of the House an opportunity to understand what is happening. An 
opportunity to reply to their MLAs and hopefully the MLAs will see the errors of their ways and say, 
look this legislation is unpopular, if we go ahead with it I have a chance of not being re-elected in the 
next election and hopefully that legislation will be withdrawn the same way it was . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Because of my opposition, not only to Bills 1 and 2 but in my opposition to this 
Motion and my concern as well for my constituents, I feel it’s important that I move an amendment to 
this particular Motion. 
 
I move, seconded by the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan): 
 

That the Government Motion to extend sitting hours be amended by striking out the words ‘10:00 
o’clock a.m.’ where such words appear in line two and that the words ‘11:00 o’clock a.m.’ be 
substituted therefor. 

 
I so move. 
 
The debate continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in 
opposition to the amendment. I can understand the concerns particularly of the Member 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1305 
 

for the constituency of Morse (Mr. Wiebe) in looking after his constituency since it’s very, very tight 
down there. I’d be sweating myself if I were he. However, I lose his arguments with respect to the time 
necessary to carry on the work as an MLA. Part of the work as an ML during a Session is not merely 
confined, as he well knows, merely confined to the hours of 2:30 to 5:30 and 7:00 to 9:30. The pattern of 
the work of an MLA is committee meetings, Crown Corporation Committee, Public Accounts 
Committee, which have a normal starting time, if not 10:00, earlier than 10:00. The normal pattern 
includes that kind of work. In addition it is not an unusual procedure for MLAs during the latter part of a 
session, in order to clean up the business to get out on the land, to start at 10:00 o’clock, particularly if 
committee work is complete. 
 
So I find it difficult to see the argument of the Hon. Member for Morse, with respect to the necessary 
time for MLA work in the constituency. Part of the work of the MLA is filling his responsibility in this 
Legislature and fulfilling the responsibility in this Legislature is under normal circumstances a 9:00 or 
9:30 start with respect to committee work and with respect to legislative work. I, therefore, don’t really 
follow his arguments and cannot support his arguments and I ask all Members to vote against the 
amendment. 
 
HON. N. E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, one of the arguments that has 
been . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What percentage . . . 
 
MR. BYERS: — I got 50 per cent of the vote, 51 per cent in my riding. How does that compare with 
you? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the arguments advanced by the Opposition that we should 
not extend hours because of the great load they are bearing is certainly not justified. We hear appeals 
that they would like Ministers to speak on the Bill. May I say that there are now 15 or 16 Bills on the 
Order Paper that have been there for many days. I think this Government has been most charitable to the 
Opposition Members and particularly considerate and charitable to the new Members because all of us 
know the difficulties and the frustrations that new Members sometimes go through in their early years 
and weeks in this Chamber. I have some pressing legislation that I should like to introduce in this House 
and I want to say that I have the speeches here ready to give and I’ve had them in my desk for several 
days. 
 
One of the bills is to assist the rural telephone companies in the province who are in the process of 
preparing their capital budgets for next year. There is proposed legislation on the Order Paper that will 
help them do that. By refusing to sit longer hours the official Opposition is really running interference 
and preventing this Government from introducing additional legislation. 
 
I want to say to some of the new Members, particularly those who are learning about new government 
programs, that you 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1306 
 

are now serviced with a grant to your caucus research office to provide staff. I sat as a young Member in 
this Chamber for three sessions when we had no such allocation from the public purse. I want to say that 
when I came into this Chamber in 1969 eleven MLAs had one stenographer to do all of their clerical 
work and we had no additional help. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I think he strayed. The Point of Order is he is not 
speaking to the Motion at all and I just can’t sit here and hear anybody wander from the Motion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the point is well taken by the Leader of the Opposition, that Members will 
stick to the subject under discussion and I will count on the Leader of the Opposition’s support when I 
rise at a later point if necessary to mention people straying from the point. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Well, one of the arguments advanced by the Opposition to oppose the Motion was that 
it would cut into the time that Members need to serve their constituents. I think that that point bears 
answering because of the claim that has been made. 
 
The point I was attempting to make before the Leader of the Opposition rose was that Members now 
have services that were not known to Members in previous sessions. A good deal more support help is 
available than was available at previous sessions. 
 
With respect to dealing with constituents’ problems, I have certainly had enquiries from Members on 
both sides of the House and those are being handled. The Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) and 
I, I think, correspond regularly. I’m sure that the Member for Qu’Appelle will tell you that enquiries to 
my office get answered fairly expeditiously. I think most Ministers are prepared to offer that service to 
Members if proper communications are made to their offices. 
 
Therefore, I think in view of the fact that we have been very gracious with Members of this House in not 
flooding them with bills in the second reading stage, that they can deal with one or two or three bills at a 
time. I think we have been very charitable with them and, therefore, I will not support the amendment. 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second this amendment, let me just 
point out to the Minister from Kelvington-Wadena (Mr. Byers) that not only do the Members of this 
Opposition not live by the charity of this Government nor do the 60 per cent of the people in this 
province that voted against them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now the Minister who has just completed speaking says that he has much 
legislation he wants passed in this Session and I should like to remind, not only the Minister who has 
just completed speaking, but as well all Members of the Government opposite that this fall Session was 
called to introduce 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1307 
 

legislation not to ram it down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now if you are interested in establishing a fall session to pass legislation at least 
have the honest decency to stand up and say that is what you want to use it for. You also said in your 
brief remarks or at least inferred that Opposition Members on this side of the House didn’t want to 
extend the hours. We have stated time and time again the last few days that we are perfectly willing to 
extend the hours and we have, as well, on many occasions pointed out to you that that extension of hours 
is going to prove to have some difficulties for Members on both sides of the House in expediting their 
duties on behalf of their constituents. You said you thought we were blocking legislation. We say, 
firstly, that this fall Session is for the introduction of legislation. You point out that you have some 
legislation that is very important for people who are involved in rural telephones. We invite you to put 
that legislation in tomorrow and we will see that it has speedy passage. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now the Minister of Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy) pointed out 
that he didn’t see why we would have any problems in handling the problems of our constituents in the 
hours that we were allotted despite the fact that he is interested in extending or at least implementing 
morning sessions. Now he may not have any problem serving his constituents because of the number of 
executive assistants and other assistants he has and also because of the fact that he lives in Regina on a 
full time basis. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — And I would point out that I may have been in the same position had I had the 
kind of assistance available to me that for example, the former Minister of Social Services, the former 
Member for Kindersley, had. There is no question that his executive assistant certainly did a good deal 
of his constituency work for him. We on this side of the House obviously don’t have those benefits . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A big airplane . . . 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I don’t have an airplane nor do I have the use of the Government airplane. 
However, I should like to point out as well that not only do I not have the use of executive assistants but 
I have also been burdened by an enormous number of problems in my own personal constituency as a 
result of the work of the last Minister of Social Services. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — And I have spent considerable time in the early hours of the day trying to 
straighten out a highway problem between 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1308 
 

Smiley and Coleville that was put in for political reasons. And I have also spent considerable time in the 
past few months trying to straighten out a grazing lease that was promised in the heat of an election by 
the former Minister of Social Services. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What was his name? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Alex Taylor, I believe he works for the Government now, I am not really sure, 
here in Regina, I should refer my problems to him. 
 
Now we pointed out that we are willing to sit in the mornings provided that the Government is prepared 
to give us enough time to work effectively on behalf of our constituents, to serve them to the best of our 
abilities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now I don’t know how hard the Government works on behalf of their 
constituents but I can assure you that those Members on this side of the House whom I am acquainted 
with work very hard indeed. And I pride myself on the fact that I spend a great deal of my time working 
on behalf of my constituents. So much in fact that I have gone to the trouble of establishing a 
constituency office at personal expense in my constituency because at this moment I don’t find enough 
time to deal with my constituents’ problems. And now you ask us to sit extended sittings in the 
mornings and you suggest that we have no problem solving or helping our constituents with their local 
problems. 
 
Well we say we are willing to sit, we are willing to work the extended hours provided number one, that 
you make our work more effective, that you will enter into an exchange of debate in this House on the 
bills that we feel so greatly affect our constituents. I have found it interesting to find that our associates 
at least in this Legislature on my left are in support of the Motion and I am not surprised to find that they 
have time to sit every morning. I don’t expect that they do anything differently also in treating their 
constituents than they do in this House. And if that’s the case then perhaps they do have time to sit in the 
mornings. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — As well as finding the time to work on behalf of our constituents we need time to 
prepare for this Session, and I think it is obvious by the calibre of addresses given by the Members on 
this side of the House that we spend a good deal of time preparing our addresses on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Not only do you ask us to forego a considerable amount of time but you ask us to 
spend that time we are foregoing in debate in this House which puts a further burden on the amount of 
time in preparing for debate. I am not convinced personally that Members opposite are interested in 
seeing that this House works to the best of its legislative ability. I have also been shocked by the 
methods of the Attorney General on behalf of the Government. I suspect, he’s prepared to use this time 
in order to ram legislation through this Session, a sitting that as I pointed out was proposed only to 
introduce 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1309 
 

legislation. And I am shocked as a new Member. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MCMILLAN: — I have on some occasions heard some very decent things said about the Attorney 
General and one of them was that he was, in most cases, exceedingly fair and I must say that I am 
surprised that you have taken the approach that you have and particularly with new Members on this 
side of the House. 
 
As well I am surprised with the ruling that was brought down by the Speaker. I assure this House that I 
am not a lawyer, nor do I currently have any burning intention to become a lawyer, but even the logic 
involved didn’t make much sense to me. As a Member of this House I will abide by your ruling but I 
must say, Mr. Speaker, I was shocked. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now, I must point out that our concerns over here are legitimate concerns. We 
have pointed out about 15 good reasons why we feel that the effectiveness of Opposition in this province 
is being abused by the Members opposite. We have said that we felt without exception that where we 
were able to co-operate in the best interests of the people of this province we were perfectly willing to 
do so. We said we are willing to sit extended hours provided it is in the best interest of the workings of 
this Legislature and in the best interests of the people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — We have pointed out I suggest conclusively that these extended hours in the way 
they have been proposed are not necessarily in the best interests of anyone and, in fact, may be to the 
detriment of democratic government in this province. 
 
I have no problem supporting the amendment to this Motion, just as I would have no problem supporting 
the Motion if it had been introduced with a little sincerity on behalf of the Government opposite. I 
expect some of my colleagues on this side of the House have something further to say about the 
amendment and I will take my seat. I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I want to direct myself briefly, fairly briefly at least to the 
amendment proposed by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). In doing so I want to indicate to Mr. 
Speaker, that there shouldn’t be any misunderstanding about the process that we are here going through 
and what has brought this amendment from the Member for Morse. 
 
What we are engaged in in debating this Motion is an effort by the Government to suspend the usual 
rules of the House (the usual rules of the House don’t have a sitting in the mornings) in an effort to add 
at least two additional hours 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1310 
 

without in turn taking away two of the hours in the evening. We had early proposed that we would be 
prepared to sit in the mornings if you relieved us of sitting in the evenings. We would add five mornings 
and subtract two evenings. We were actually, in terms of your wish to have additional sitting time, more 
generous in our position than what you are in yours, in making that decision in that amendment. 
 
Now I want to make this point, too, that when we come to suspend the usual rules or extend them or add 
to them in circumstances in which we are dealing, what we are really doing, what the Attorney General 
is really doing, is attempting an effort really to exhaust the position of the Opposition. I think what 
happened in the process is he miscalculated the extent of the Opposition that was going to arise on these 
two bills from us, thinking suppose as he did that we were ten new Members of 15 and that we might be 
as easy to deal with as what the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) has been in his quiet approach to the 
Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — It is very real this need for additional time in the morning and I want, Mr. 
Speaker, to illustrate my point about the importance of the mornings because we have heard from the 
Member for Nipawin about the kind of drivel that we have heard in respect to the potash debates. That is 
I guess how one satisfies one’s own lack of performance, by calling those who do perform, drivel. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The other point made by the Attorney General, which he makes repeatedly is that 
we are trying to obstruct, that we are filibustering and we are unreasonably delaying passage of these 
bills and that he wants to cut off any further close examination of these bills by us outside of the House, 
which is sometimes the most important time. 
 
I want to tell Members what I did this morning to illustrate the very real importance of the morning 
period for us. I was taking a look section by section at Bill No. 2. When I come to speak on Bill No. 2 I 
intend to look at each one of these sections in detail, examine them and point out a number of 
weaknesses. This morning I spent my morning on Section 20 which deals with the powers of audit in 
connection with the potash corporation. The reason I point this out is to illustrate the importance of 
having these hours to do research before we come into the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Section 20 of Bill No. 2 gives the usual power to the Provincial Auditor to audit 
the books of the potash corporation. That’s usual, standard. But it goes a step further, it says that the 
books . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member is speaking to the Bill. The Member has already spoken in the debate. 
His debate at this time is 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1311 
 

limited to the change in the amendment from 10:00 to 11:00 o’clock. I think that gives the Member a 
very narrow position from which to debate. I wish he would stay within that limit because you were 
talking about the Bill in some detail. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I have a very good, legitimate point that I am putting to the House, Mr. Speaker. 
My point is this, I preceded it very carefully by saying to you, Mr. Speaker, that the morning period is an 
extremely important period for us. The Motion that is before us would have us sit from 10:00 to 12:00, 
the amendment would have us sit from only 11:00 to 12:00 to give us an additional hour. The point I am 
beginning now to make is how important even one additional hour can be in the morning for research in 
preparation of the debates that follow in the House later in the day. That’s the point I am making. To 
underline and illustrate the validity of the point I was telling Members about what I was doing this 
morning in terms of research on Section 20 and why I was doing what I had to do, including getting in 
touch with the Provincial Auditor to find out what the position was. And it is a very, very important 
significant point that this Bill carries something which one does not find in other comparable pieces of 
legislation. 
 
The Government in drafting this Bill slipped in some words, very few, but nonetheless very meaningful. 
I phoned the Provincial Auditor’s office this morning to see what was the practice in connection with 
Sask Tel and in connection with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation about who audits their books as a 
matter of legislation. This morning while I was doing that the Provincial Auditor told me that it was his 
office that did that. This morning I looked at the statutes governing who must audit the books of Sask 
Tel and Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Saskoil, it was the research I was doing this morning in 
connection with Bill 2 preparation for this afternoon; indeed, I was on the phone during those very 
periods. 
 
Now, and as a result of that research, what I am going to put to the Government is that they are taking a 
power in Bill 2 with respect to the auditor of the potash corporation books that does not exist in respect 
of any other Crown corporation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I listened very carefully to the Member’s remarks when he made them the first 
time and I listened very carefully when he made them now and I agree his remarks are in order up to a 
point but once you get to the point where you are talking about different audit procedures in different 
corporations, I don’t think that is a legitimate point since you are discussing the details of the Bill. There 
is another place and time to do that. The Member I think will confine his remarks to why the change 
from 10:00 o’clock to 11:00 o’clock is important to him. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I think I have made the point of the importance of the 
morning period to do research and I will be speaking to the point I was making at greater length and 
again demonstrate how we are digging into these bills in a very real way in that period. 
 
The thing that emerges in this debate on this amendment, 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1312 
 

and we have now heard from two Ministers opposite and I am pleased at that because at least they are 
beginning to get involved in the debate in connection with this matter if not in connection with more 
substantive matters that are before us, but what is emergent here, very clearly, (a) is that this is an effort 
of a kind of closure which the Government is doing and that cannot be mistaken. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, Rule 31 of the Rules of the House provides that: 
 

Immediately before the Orders of the Day for resuming an adjourned debate is called, any Minister of 
the Crown (with the approval of the House leader) standing in his place, shall have given notice to the 
previous sitting of his intentions so to do, may move that the debate shall not be further adjourned and 
shall not be further postponed; and in either case such question shall be decided without debate or 
amendment; and if the same shall be resolved in the affirmative, no Member shall thereafter speak 
more than once, or longer than 20 minutes in any such adjourned debate. 

 
That’s a rule we could be working with, that’s the power that the Government has in connection with the 
House. It doesn’t have the courage though to use the rule. What it does instead is it tries to do indirectly 
what it can’t do directly or doesn’t have the courage to do directly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The other thing that this debate on this amendment is doing, is again underlining 
very clearly if the point isn’t already made, that we are passionately and dedicatedly opposed to these 
two potash bills. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We want the opportunity to debate them and debate them at length. We want the 
opportunity and we are prepared to debate them from 11:00 o’clock to 12:00 o’clock in the morning, but 
not from 10:00 o‘clock to 11:00 o’clock in the morning. As I say, that’s the second thing that is clearly 
emerging in all of this; it is that the extent of the Opposition here is profound, deep-seated and dedicated 
and I think that was misconceived by the Government when they brought these pieces of legislation, 
such massive pieces of legislation in a fall session, a point made by my friend behind me. 
 
The other point, too, that is emerging, and we have yet to hear from the Conservative Leader (Mr. 
Collver) on the amendment proposed by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe), and he may speak on that, 
I don’t know, but the other point that is emerging there is that they are not prepared, for whatever 
reasons they have, to enter into these debates. The Attorney General made an interesting point in that 
connection last evening when he said what’s happening in the process is that the Liberals are being seen 
as the official Opposition, which they really are, and the 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1313 
 

Conservatives are being seen to fade in the process. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I hope we are going to hear from the Member for Nipawin on this amendment. 
 
I think in view of the comments of the Minister in charge of Sask Tel (Mr. Byers), I would be entitled, 
Mr. Speaker, on speaking to the amendment, to rebut some of his remarks that were not ruled out of 
order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I might take this opportunity to remind the Member that the Minister of 
Telephones (Mr. Byers) was speaking for the first time in debate, and therefore, he has full right to 
speak on the amendment and the Motion, whereas, you have only the right to speak on the Motion. 
Therefore, you do not have the right to necessarily rebut all of the remarks that the Minister of 
Telephones made. So I just want to caution you on that. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — If you will let me, Mr. Speaker, conclude my remarks in connection with the 
amendment, and to do that briefly, I simply again remind the Attorney General that if he thought the 
‘new look’ Liberals were going to be as timid as the ‘new look’ Leader of the Conservative Party, that 
was a gross miscalculation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Now he’s in a bind and he wants to sit in the morning from 10:00 o’clock to 
12:00 o’clock, and we say we will sit from 11:00 o’clock to 12:00 o’clock, but we won’t sit if we can 
avoid it from 10:00 o’clock to 12:00 o’clock because we need the time to work on the massive pieces of 
legislation so ill-conceived by bringing them forward at this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — And that really in essence is what the debate is all about in connection with this 
amendment, and the various other amendments that have been made and the Motion itself. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I say I will support the amendment, I will not support the Motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise briefly in 
speaking to the amendment. My remarks may be somewhat different from my remarks yesterday 
because I am restricted now to addressing myself to the amendment. 
 
I think in beginning my remarks about the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I should like to stress a point that 
was suggested by my colleague from Regina South (Mr. Cameron) and that is the reaction of the press. I 
suggest to you that the reaction of 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1314 
 

the Press to this debate made yesterday, and the anticipated reaction of the Press to this amendment and 
the amendment yesterday, is very important to the House. Indeed, the perception of the Press, I suggest, 
is a true perception. That the Press has rightly realized that this debate is really a part of the continuing 
potash debate and as the Attorney General said to us repeatedly in the course of both this debate and the 
debate on the amendment and the debate on the potash Bill, that it’s the dirty Liberals more or less 
continuing a filibuster. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that to characterize our opposition to morning sittings as solely a continuation of 
the filibuster is not fair and I suggest to you to characterize our resolve in this amendment to maintain 
some time is not completely fair, but I think that it is true that it is all part of the sort of continuing saga 
that goes on with our very fervent and determined opposition to the passage of the potash Bill in the 
timetable that the Government has suggested. 
 
Now the amendment, Mr. Speaker, is designed to permit Hon. Members additional time to prepare for 
the House, additional time to prepare for their dealings with constituents. And in a way that’s related 
back again to the potash debate because the only bills that the Government calls are bills that have 
anything to do with potash, by and large, although with the co-operation of this side of the House we 
have seen some progress on Bill 16 - The Residential Tenancies Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my friend the Member for Regina South has referred your Honour to references made in 
the electronic media. I should like, Mr. Speaker, to refer you to the references made in the print media, 
in the Leader-Post yesterday, the headline of which said, "Liberals Delay Motion to Extend Sitting 
Hours." It is germane to our continued opposition and it is germane to this amendment; this amendment 
which says, though we are prepared to be available for certain extra hours, we are not prepared to be 
available for the massively increased number of hours that Members opposite suggest would be 
appropriate. 
 
It is important in deciding for Members whether they will vote in favor of this amendment, or not, to 
remember that the Hon. Attorney General is quoted in the paper as having said on Monday that the 
original motion was being introduced to get the Liberals off their filibuster. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that the reason that the Government Members indicated that they will oppose the amendment now 
before you is a part of the piece in trying to, as Mr. Romanow would characterize it, get the Liberals off 
their filibuster. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s not what he says. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Of course, that’s not what he says here, he says very different things here - well 
he catcalls different things from what he says when he speaks at least. And he says different things in the 
corridor from what he tends to say in the House, perhaps we’ll all learn from that. But that’s the way he 
is reported in the Press and I bring that to the attention of the House. 
 
Now, this is as the Press reported, the debate on the Motion, a part of the Government’s attempt to use 
closure in a 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1315 
 

different way. I don’t want to oversell that argument but I think that it’s fair to say that press reaction 
has been, and the right reaction, that this is all part of the piece. This is a manoeuvre by the Government, 
the reluctance to pass this amendment will be nothing more than a manoeuvre by the Government at any 
cost to ram through the passage of this potash Bill. Ram through a bill and ram through this Motion and 
deny the amendment, because they have in their arrogant way decided that they would set the imaginary 
standards that they propose to meet. 
 
Do extended hours of any sort assist the province in an examination of the bill, and would the removal 
of one hour a day of those extended hours so deprive the House of the inability to quickly deal with 
business? We have heard for instance from the Hon. Member for Wadena-Kelvington (Mr. Byers) that 
they have other bills. Well we certainly haven’t seen those other bills. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if we 
knew that those other bills were coming we might be dealing different with this amendment. We might 
then have taken the view that on those other bills which came before us a long time ago, and that we in 
large part prepared for, that on those other bills we could now deal more expeditiously. There’s no 
reason to believe, Mr. Speaker, that when the Government defeats this amendment, if that’s their choice, 
if the Government uses their power to ram through this Motion, there’s no reason I suggest to believe 
that we will hear more of those other bills. 
 
Now that Minister is saying that he opposes this amendment in restricting himself to the amendment and 
the Hon. Member the Minister for Moose Jaw, both stressed that they could sit in the morning and they 
didn’t need the extra hour that we suggest we do need it in order either to prepare for our dealings with 
the House, in order to prepare for our dealings with constituents. Now it’s an easy thing to say when you 
are a Minister with a staff, secretaries, with executive assistants with a speech writer or two, or at least a 
John Burton that you can borrow from time to time . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — . . . and who is this John Burton indeed. He sits beside me in the pew. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of rather specious arguments that you have heard from Ministers may 
apply to Ministers, but they certainly don’t apply to a working Opposition. They don’t apply to an 
Opposition who, in large part, have far greater demands made upon them, on their time outside of the 
House than back bench Members on the Government side. There’s a great tendency when you are on the 
Government side, if you are a Government supporter, to approach one of the many Ministers that the 
Province of Saskatchewan has rather than to approach one of their own Members. We say that we need 
time to deal with our problems, that our problems are different from a Minister’s problems and that our 
problems and the requirements on our time are different from the requirement on the time of a back 
bench Member such as the Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie) who spoke earlier, or perhaps some of 
the other backbenchers on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the position that mornings is the time 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1316 
 

Members used to prepare for the day sitting, was presented yesterday in the Leader-Post article to which 
I referred, and though this amendment is different from the amendment that was presented yesterday, 
you may recall that the amendment yesterday said if you take away our mornings, give us back the 
evenings, an amendment which would incidentally considerably have increased the time in the House, 
this amendment is certainly different. It’s different because it says that we will be available at the same 
time that Government offices are available. I, for instance, find that I have difficulty getting mail out 
because the Government Mail Office is closed. Closed at 5:00 o’clock, a problem that I am sure the 
Ministers don’t face. I’m sure the Hon. Ministers who have spoken in this debate don’t face it at all. 
 
How much additional help would five hours a week be? That’s the amount of time that this amendment 
would whittle away. The proposal is to increase the sitting time quite dramatically. How much 
difference would five sitting hours a week make? I suggest not very much. I suggest indeed that when 
the Hon. Attorney General who hasn’t spoken to this amendment but has spoken in the last couple of 
days, when he suggests that what we need is more time in the House, he is failing to appreciate that what 
the Opposition believes would be proper in the potash debate and that’s inexplicably integrated into 
debate on this Motion and the debate on the amendment. What we need is more time so that the people 
of the province can appreciate the problems with which they are faced. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Some of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, are wondering whether I propose to read 
through this address when it comes back to me, and I give the assurance to the House that I’ll initial it 
unchanged so that Members will have an opportunity to fulfil their brains . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have nothing else particularly to say, except that . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Except to say that I am surprised at the attitude of the Government about this 
amendment and about the Motion. An attitude which really says that their will be done, regardless of 
what the 60 per cent of the province want, regardless of what the people of the province may want, they 
will jam this thing through for their own purposes. It has been described as a subtle form of closure and I 
adopt that. Not even a subtle form of closure - it’s a chicken-hearted form of closure, a better way to 
describe it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A form of closure that I believe won’t go well with the Press and won’t go well 
with the people of this province. Now I don’t know how soon the vote on this amendment will come. 
Probably early this evening, and I expect that if the vote on this amendment does come this evening that 
we will again see a demonstration of those Members who have managed to find their 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1317 
 

way to the House, standing up and being counted, basically rubber stamping whatever has been 
suggested to them by the Cabinet and by the Hon. Attorney General. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are my only comments and I invite Members of the House to pass this amendment. I 
think that you have heard good reasons from various Members of the Opposition on why this 
amendment should be passed. Clearly there is an understanding by Government Members that a great 
deal happens outside of this House. Clearly that’s understood by the Cabinet or else Members of the 
whole House wouldn’t be paid, for instance, just at the time when the House is in Session. We are paid 
not only for sitting here, paid not well for the time here, but paid for our entire year, a year which in my 
experience occupies about 30 or 35 hours of my time on a weekly basis. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Now when I come into this House I have the continued duty to my constituents 
of that 30 or 35 hours a week and I fulfil it. And Members from the rural constituencies have even 
greater demands on their time than the city Members have. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Indeed part of the reason that an Opposition has a greater demand on its time 
and part of the reason that I think this amendment should be passed is that as an Opposition, I suppose 
when you are number two you try a little harder and we do try a little harder. We perhaps have on this 
side a better quality of Member because only the best get through when the Government isn’t with you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — That perhaps makes us somewhat more conscientious than the bad that got 
through and didn’t get into their Cabinet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Now you take our 15 . . . 
 
MR. DYCK: — How come you are only 15? 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well, now if I’d been passed over a couple of times I wouldn’t be so jumpy in 
the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DYCK: — . . . take you on. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Could you speak more quickly I can’t follow what you are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that you don’t hear the asides but some others of us do who unfortunately aren’t 
blessed with your selective hearing and I can only suggest to the Hon. Member 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1318 
 

that every one of us would take you on anywhere in our constituencies and we’d move a lot closer to 
yours than you think and I suggest in the next election that . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — My selective hearing says that you are out of order. You should confine yourself to 
whether you prefer 10:00 o’clock or 11:00 o’clock for the extension of hours. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad you asked me that question, because I prefer 11:00 
o’clock. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it has been suggested to me that perhaps the reason I require that extra time is that I 
am a night person. That’s not the case indeed. Indeed I use those early hours to work as hard as I can and 
I had hoped to avoid coming into the House at those hours when I’m working for constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the great horror of the official Opposition, I take my seat. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of statements that I 
should like to make with regard to the amendment. But first of all there is a reaction I have to a 
statement made by Mr. Dyck. He suggests that I should take him on in a man to man battle in the next 
. . . 
 
MR. DYCK: — On a Point of Order. The Members opposite persist in identifying opposite Members 
here by their name. I think the rules and traditions of this House are clearly stated. Now I am the 
Member for Saskatoon Mayfair. I’d like the Member to respect that and recognize me, if he’s going to 
talk about me, as the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Quite frankly, I think the Member is doubly out of order, by referring to Members 
by their names rather than by their constituency and secondly because he’s talking about something that 
is foreign to what he is to be talking to now. The Member has already spoken in this debate, therefore he 
must confine himself to remarks as to why he refers 11:00 o’clock rather than 10:00 o’clock. Strictly to 
that. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, might I just make a suggestion which would be acceptable, I think, 
to all people. It is 5:25. May I call it 5:30? 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o’clock p.m. until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I think as it was called 5:30 I had been interrupted on a Point of Order 
and I think it’s only fair that because of that interruption I apologize to the Member for Saskatoon 
Mayfair for having ticked him off and I recognize that that’s the second time that I have done that since 
the House began. I want to tell him, that by my count I just owe 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1319 
 

him ten more for the number of times he ticked me off while I have been a member of city council in 
Saskatoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, in addressing some remarks to the amendment I want to go back to a 
statement that I read in the Press the day before yesterday, attributed to the Attorney General in which 
he suggested that what in fact the Government had in mind was an attempt to, and I’m only paraphrasing 
now, I’m not directly quoting him, but effectively shut off the attempt of this caucus to allow for a 
reasonable time for debate on the question of the potash bills. 
 
I think it’s important for us to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about the time needed for 
debate and the point has been made before, we’re not talking about a compressed amount of time that is 
needed, we are talking about the need to stretch out the debate, to give people in the province an 
opportunity to react to the legislation which has been put before us and which this Government is 
attempting to ram down our throats and down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I think too, having said that, that the amendment that has been put is a little bit more 
reasonable than the motion that had been put previously by the Attorney General. I’m surprised, as a 
matter of fact, well really maybe not quite so surprised, I guess it was going to take something like this, 
but I was amazed that the Attorney General had so clearly underestimated the intent of my colleagues 
and myself to see to it that proper time is allowed, so that the people of Saskatchewan can in fact 
become aware of what this whole business is all about. 
 
Now the kinds of constituency concerns that I get, Mr. Speaker, are a little bit different from some of my 
colleagues. As you are well aware, I am a Member from an urban riding, but I think it’s important that 
Members opposite have some idea of the kinds of concerns that as an urban Member I am called upon to 
deal with in the morning, and if this amendment passes, in the morning prior to 11:00 o’clock. 
 
One of the things I am concerned about, Mr. Speaker, while I’m here, is that I listen to the kinds of 
suggestions and concerns that my constituents and the people from other constituencies have and that 
they bring to my attention. I think it’s important and I’d like to give you some indication of the kinds of 
concerns that I spend my time dealing with in the mornings. I have a letter here, a copy of a letter from a 
Mr. Paulson in Saskatoon, addressed to the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, Premier of Saskatchewan, and I’m not 
interested in the kinds of suggestions that come in a letter like this, but I think it’s important that I have 
time to be able to respond to them. 
 
The letter has suggestions like this: 
 

On several occasions both you and Members of the Government have made references which lead to 
believe you feel you are talking and acting on behalf of the majority of 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1320 
 

the people of this province. This seems to me very much like an overstatement or maybe a matter of 
somebody having forgotten the last election results. The fact of the matter is that the NDP suffered a 
setback of elected representatives in the House as well as only polling less than 40 per cent of the 
votes cast. Under these circumstances I feel it is very questionable to talk in these terms and thus leave 
this kind of impression both in and outside the province. 

 
This letter goes on. When I talk about the kinds of suggestions that come before us that we need to deal 
with and that we need to have time to think about, I urge all Members to listen to this kind of a 
suggestion. 
 

In conclusion I would like to make a suggestion, (this writer says). If you believe, you are fully 
convinced that you are acting in the best interests of the people of our province, please take it to them. 
Call for a plebiscite, ask the people if they are interested in investing in and operating potash mines. 
I’m not so sure that this was part of the mandate you were given in the last election. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I like to have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to have time to listen to those kinds of 
suggestions. To listen to those kinds of concerns. They are not only concerns that come in written form, 
they also come by telephone. I had a call yesterday from a person in Saskatoon who had some questions 
about the proposed takeover and I think it’s important that I should have some time to be able to deal 
with those kinds of questions. The kinds of questions he asked were questions along this line. First of all 
he wanted to know why, what kind of reason had been brought before the House. 
 
MR. ALLEN: — On a Point of Order. I believe that the Member has already spoken once in the debate 
and now he is speaking again on the amendment and he isn’t very close to the topic at hand. I’m sure all 
Hon. Members are interested in listening to him relate letters that he has received, phone calls that he 
has received on the potash question, but that, Mr. Speaker, I think should perhaps come when we are 
considering Bill 1 and Bill 2 and not when we are discussing whether or not we’ll sit at 10:00 or 11:00 
o’clock in the morning. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Member has very clearly stated that he is rising to 
speak in favor of the amendment. He is trying to illustrate why he requires this extra hour in the morning 
to deal with the problems of his constituents, to deal with the problems that he was elected by his 
constituency to solve on their behalf. He has made it very, very clear and precise, I believe, in his 
statements that this is why he needs this other hour. He’s made it very clear that he’s giving examples as 
to what he does in that other hour, whether it deals with potash or whether it deals with problems of the 
city of Saskatoon or education problems or whatever. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that he is quite in order to 
give these examples to the Legislature to try and get across to the Members on the 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1321 
 

other side, that we do need this extra time to be able to perform our functions as duly elected MLAs. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I’ve heard sufficient from each side of the House to guide me in a ruling on 
this. I think that the Member should make every attempt to stay as close to the item that is before us 
now, which is the amendment, changing it from 10:00 o’clock as it appears in the Motion, to 11:00 
o’clock. I think, quite frankly that the Members are straining the rules a bit by getting into discussions 
about details of letters or as I raised earlier, details of bills. They should just stick to the point of why it 
would be better to have the House opening at 11:00 in the morning rather than 10:00 in the morning. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you, Sir, that I am attempting to convey why I 
feel it is important that we use, have that time to use to answer questions and I’m merely attempting to 
point out to Members opposite that there are many kinds of questions that are brought to our attention. 
As I was suggesting people are asking why. We need time to be able to answer why. They are asking us 
where the money is coming from and we need time to try to deal with that question, despite the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that we really haven’t had very many answers to that question in the House. We are asked, 
what’s the rationale? We need time, Mr. Speaker, to be able to deal with that. And as was so ably 
pointed out by my seatmate earlier today, we need time to be able to get into the nuts and bolts of the 
bill so that we can come to grips with it, understand it and be able to answer the questions that are asked. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I think when we speak about the question of time, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 
note a point that was made by the Hon. Member for Kelvington (Mr. Byers) when he rose and spoke a 
little while ago. He made a pretty good point, Mr. Speaker, about time. He indicated that there were 
some bills on the Order Paper that could be brought before this House and I say he’s absolutely right, 
because they are noncontroversial and they could be dealt with quickly. If that had been done there 
would be no need to be debating this amendment and there would be no need to have had the original 
motion put. 
 
With regard to the question of the whole function of the fall Session, it seems to me that it has been 
clearly there to present legislation and where there is controversial legislation to allow time for reaction. 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that had the Members opposite taken that approach in this instance, had they 
placed legislation before the House that was controversial with the idea that time would be allowed for 
consideration, we wouldn’t need to be dealing with this matter in the way we are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in each instance with amendments that have been put by Members of our caucus, as is the 
case with this amendment, they have been put as a positive effort to sit for a longer period of time, 
because none of us are concerned particularly about next week, although frankly many of us would 
rather be somewhere else, but we are prepared to sit here. We 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1322 
 

know how important the legislation is. Every time, as in this instance, an amendment had been put by 
Members of this caucus it has acceded to the request that we sit for a longer period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the amendment which is before us now is a very reasonable amendment and I think 
that it is important that Members opposite should have an opportunity to consider the reasonableness of 
that amendment and, therefore, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Adjournment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 
YEAS - 12 

Steuart MacDonald Clifford 
Stodalka Penner Anderson 
Wiebe Edwards Merchant 
Malone Nelson (Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg) 
Thatcher 

 
NAYS - 37 

Pepper Mostoway Vickar 
Thibault Whelan Allen 
Bowerman Kaeding Koskie 
Romanow Dyck Johnson 
Snyder McNeill Thompson 
Byers Feschuk Banda 
Kramer Shillington Collver 
Baker Rolfes Larter 
Lange Cowley Bailey 
Faris Tchorzewski Ham 
Kowalchuk Matsalla Katzman 
Robbins Skoberg Birkbeck 
MacMurchy   
 
The debate continues on the Motion and the amendment. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have very much more to say and I must say I am glad that 
pleases the Members opposite. 
 
I must say I am a little surprised. There has been a great deal of talk from some of those who have 
spoken, who sit in the Conservative caucus about wanting to get on with government business. It seems 
to me that we have spent a good deal of time talking about how long this House should sit, and that we 
might at least, in a rather reasonable way, adjourn debate on the Motion that is before us and get on to 
the business of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — As I say, I am quite frankly very surprised. 
 
MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current): — I begin by saying I rise due to popular request. I should make it 
very clear that our caucus, probably more than any other group in this House, suffers because of this 
particular 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1323 
 

Motion on extended hours. It is significant to know that we are the only party in Canada that does not 
receive a third party grant. As a mater of fact, we are not even recognized by this particular Legislature 
as a third party. We agree with the other Members in the Opposition that there is a great deal of work to 
be done by rural Members and six of our seven are rural Members. We have many miles, probably as 
many miles in comparison to most Members in the House. 
 
We are willing to stay here and sit here and participate provided there is productive legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise in this debate, once 
again. I must say I was impressed with the maiden speech of the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I think probably it is about as productive an effort as we have seen from the 
Members to my left in this entire Legislature. 
 
After the House had adjourned at 5:30 this afternoon, I was heading down the hall towards those 
beautiful premises that have been awarded us by the friends opposite - it is known as room 275, that is if 
someone would care to call it a room - I ran into a very interesting gentleman there, he was on his way 
out. I suggested, he shouldn’t leave so soon, because we have another evening to go on. He replied, 
"Boy you guys on that side sure must like your $20 a day. If you guys are willing to go along with drivel 
like that for your $20 a day, I feel sorry for you." 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, he just may very well have brought up the whole reason as to why the 
Government would propose to extend the sitting hours of this Legislature. Maybe it is a very deep dark 
plot and you know after listening to the Member for Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) and all his plots, 
it is enough that you start thinking about deep dark plots yourself. I think everybody knows, it is 
associated with politics that nobody likes a dollar more than a socialist. Nobody is more adept at raising 
their own salaries than what has been the socialist Government. Take a look at the British Columbia 
Government which is now past tense, shortly to be followed by this one, from one shot, they were 
elected in 1972, the salary of an MLA out there was $6,000, they were in for six months, the salary of an 
MLA was suddenly $24,000. 
 
But anyway to get back to that deep dark plot, Mr. Speaker, is it possible, Mr. Speaker, that in order to 
justify the pay raises that these gentlemen across the floor want so badly, is it possible that they feel that 
they have to go to the length to justify their pay raises by extending the hours? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one reason that I am very strenuously opposed to increasing the length of sitting, I guess I 
could accept the amendment as put forward by the only Opposition, but one of the reasons for which I 
don’t want these hours extended, is because there is one experience that I would like to take part in in 
this 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1324 
 

House. Now I have been informed by an MLA who retired last election, and I mean retired not defeated, 
he said, the one thing that you have got to go through is when the NDP want to raise their salaries. You 
haven’t lived until you have had a meeting in the washroom with Henry Baker to talk the situation over. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, if we extend these hours, the odds become increasingly less that I 
may get to meet Mr. Baker in the washroom and discuss this proposition. Mr. Speaker, as a freshman 
who would like to partake in all of the benefits of the Legislature and the educational opportunities, I 
really think that the Government is perhaps being a little rough on us rookies. 
 
But getting back to the serious aspect. I wonder if this is what it is? Because if that is what you are 
looking for, if you are looking to justify the workload, and that you are going to pour it on us, then come 
to us and say, listen, if you fellows will agree, we’ll give you a pay increase, forget it! Forget it! Because 
every one of you is overpaid as is every one on this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that really awes a new Member coming into this Assembly is 
maybe the very glib politicians on the other side of the House. One of the most awesome people whom 
we saw the first day or two was the Attorney General. There is no question about it, he does awe you. 
All I could think of as he was speaking was, that is a ‘guy’ you have to stay clear of, he’ll chop your 
head off. You know, Mr. Speaker, have you ever noticed that as time goes on and he stands up a little 
more frequently, the similarity of his phrases, ‘you boys’, ‘you guys’ and take the rank basic politics out 
of his speech, there really isn’t all that much there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I am sure, Hon. Members are all interested in the 
debating skills of the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), we have seen him in 
debate many times in the House, and we all agree that he is very good, but how that relates to whether 
we sit at 10:00 o’clock in the morning or 11:00 o’clock in the morning, is beyond me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t think I require any more guidance on the Point of Order! I would hope the 
Member for Thunder Creek is in awe of the rules of this House as he is of the Attorney General, or even 
more so. He is not speaking to the Motion that is before us. He has already spoken in the debate, 
therefore he has to confine his remarks to whether he prefers 10:00 in the morning or 11:00 for the 
recommencement of the Session should this be passed. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, it is a coincidence that the backbencher from the other side should 
mention that because I was just coming to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the amazing things about this entire 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1325 
 

debate and why we are talking about this amendment, versus a motion, is the bad generalship that the 
Attorney General has shown as House leader. There comes a time when probably the hours must be 
extended. But let’s not kid anybody, we all know full well, there is only one reason they want to extend 
this debate and that is so this Opposition will blow itself out, you will wear us down, and that ultimately 
this insidious bill of yours must come to a debate. Let’s not kid anybody, it is part and parcel . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — We are not interested in running away, we’ll sit right here until December 24, if 
it ultimately must come that we must start at 10:00 or at 11:00, we will be here. The points have been 
made very validly by other Members that this additional time is required for work in our constituencies. 
That’s very fine for Cabinet Ministers, who have the executive assistants, the secretarial staff to answer 
the letters and do the routine work. It is fine for them to say, oh, no problems for us. Unfortunately, they 
can’t bring these executive assistants and these secretaries into the House during the question period. 
The fact that you refuse to answer questions, the fact that you refuse to accept an amendment pertaining 
to questions, I think is indicative of the skills that this Cabinet has. Take three or four out of there and it 
comes down like a house of cards. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, one thing that I think has been accomplished by the Government in 
this very shallow attempt to wear down the Opposition, to ram something through, one thing you have 
done that I never dreamt possible was how very tightly you could weld this caucus together. Because 
gentlemen, you have got a scrap on your hands. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — The Attorney General by his Motion has waved a flag at us and there is no way 
you are going to be out of here by Christmas. You can bring us back between Christmas and New Year’s 
and there is no way you are going to be out of here by New Year’s. We’ll sit New Year’s Day if you 
want. Mr. Speaker, I repeat once again, we’ll meet at 11:00 on New Year’s day if you so desire. We are 
fighting two of the most insidious bills, Bill 1 and Bill 2 that have ever been brought to this Legislature. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you can isolate the intent behind this Motion and isolate it away from Bill 1 
and Bill 2. 
 
As I started to say earlier, it is the generalship that has surprised me, the inflexibility of the House leader 
across the way. As I indicated earlier, he scared a lot of the rookies over here, he doesn’t scare us 
anymore. In fact, Mr. Attorney General, I don’t think anybody is afraid to take you head to head any 
time, any place, anywhere. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Of course, you are the best 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1326 
 

that they have across there too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by changing this time from 10:00 to 11:00, granted it is not much, but it does give us some 
time to work with our constituency problems. I really can’t emphasize just what a problem that is 
working with them. A certain number of questions of course are very general. So when you come to a 
question period here in the Legislature, you may try to ask a Cabinet Minister a question pertaining to 
some phone call, or some letter that you may have received in the course of the morning. What is a 
typical answer that you get from a Cabinet Minister in that question period? He’ll say write it out, put it 
on the Order Paper, so we can bury it for six months, so that he doesn’t have to answer it. We have 
several in that category. Or else he just doesn’t answer it. Or, what has been the most frequently used 
excuse, he doesn’t know anything about it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Consequently, Mr. Speaker, when a constituent contacts you and is desiring 
information, obviously you have to start into that bureaucratic mess known as the civil service. So first 
off it is a feat in itself to find in that massive telephone listing the pertinent individual, the pertinent 
department that you would like to find. That’s really quite a feat. I suppose you become more skilled at 
it, I doubt if I ever will. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, by changing this time from 10:00 to 11:00 at least you have one additional hour 
in which to accomplish this. I think, Mr. Speaker, a very reasonable alternative was offered which was 
ruled out of order. That was that additional time between 10:00 and 12:00 as was suggested by the 
Government, that the entire Cabinet would make themselves available for questions from MLAs. Mr. 
Speaker, I thank you for recognizing me this afternoon, but yesterday as a back bench MLA I found it 
very difficult to become recognized. I don’t know whether this is a problem common to all back bench 
MLAs but nonetheless when the question period comes, unquestionably, Mr. Speaker, the Front 
Benches are the first ones that you see. This is very natural and I don’t criticize you for it. Mr. Speaker, 
if we had had that two-hour question period, I really wonder would that make our constituency load that 
much easier. I really think that it would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think in the upcoming period of time it could get very monotonous in this Legislature 
because we are, under no circumstances going to lie down on this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Our friends across the way may and that is their choice of course, but under no 
circumstances are you going to get out of here for quite some time unless you want to. The Attorney 
General, the House leader has made one other very basic tactical error. He has underestimated his 
adversary. I think, Mr. Attorney General, that in the coming weeks you may tend to show a little more 
respect for what you call this tired, worn out Liberal Opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1327 
 

MR. THATCHER: — Because, Mr. Attorney General, we are the only Opposition here, we are the 
only ones that are fighting you. And the invalid excuse that we are all freshman people and that we are 
not capable of getting up in the House, we are sitting here to learn, that simply isn’t valid. Ten out of the 
15 are brand-new faces here, including myself. I don’t think we have been hesitant about standing up 
and ultimately every one of us knows that some of the professionals across the floor are going to knock 
our front teeth out some day. I am quite sure, Mr. Attorney General, you will have occasion to knock my 
front teeth out. I can assure you shortly afterwards you will be lying on your back when you do it. 
Nonetheless every one of us will get our heads knocked off, every single one of us. But we will bounce 
back. I can only show contempt for those who are afraid to stand up and take a shot in the head. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — As to why these hours were lengthened or why the Government would like these 
hours lengthened, it has got to be a bit of a mystery. Because there has really got to be some of the worst 
House generalship that maybe we have seen or has been seen in this House for a good many years. I 
would suggest to you that if the Attorney General had been commanding the British Forces in 1763, this 
country could have perhaps taken a very different turn. 
 
I see we are finally getting the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) reacting. He has been rather silent. I 
must say that I have had occasion to miss what has become so typical of the Minister of Labour, that 
sneering, snarling voice and I can only feel that if I am now getting it turned on me, then obviously I 
must be getting somewhere in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know I am not going to be allowed time but I should like to tell the Member for 
Saskatoon, the Whip on the other side, I should like to tell him a little bit about that silver spoon, but I 
imagine I would be called to order so I won’t attempt to do it. Unless you would care to give me leave to 
do it, on that side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are we going to accomplish by having morning sittings? I suppose we should look at 
the realistic aspects of it. This business of delaying these two potash bills which are unquestionably tied 
together with your motives for extending the sittings really isn’t going to change anything. It is going to 
make the speeches from this side a little less scintillating and considerably more boring. But if you think 
that by stretching us out another couple of hours, that you are going to get us out of here, forget it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — The archives that we go into will just perhaps become a little more boring. The 
books that will be read to you may become a little less interesting. Although, in the fact that so many of 
you don’t read perhaps having some books read to you will be of some benefit in your case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is their advantage? You might as well 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1328 
 

accept it right now, you are here for a while unless you want to withdraw that bill, Bill 1 and Bill 2, then 
we would be happy to leave with you. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, every one of us on this side can think of 
a thousand places that we would rather be than right here doing what we are dong. We don’t like it any 
more than you do. But you have brought a bill upon us, two bills upon us that I think, if I may repeat 
myself from last night, are repugnant. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And make no mistake about it you are going to have the fight of your life to get 
them through. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Big deal, big deal. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That snarly voice is coming through again now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, really what I was talking about here, we are consuming a lot of time and I will be the last 
one to say it is productive, frankly it is sickening. In fact maybe this whole business of what you are 
trying to do and what we are trying to do in many ways is an indictment upon the democratic process. 
You are trying to ram something through. Whether or not we should be attempting to do something so 
productive is open to debate. Nonetheless it is in the rules. If you don’t like what we are doing the rules 
should be streamlined. Maybe we shouldn’t be allowed to ramble on like this. On the other hand 
democratic debate must go on. Yet at the same time should you people be allowed just by the sheer 
weight of your numbers to ultimately pass two bills which are going to change the entire face of this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — One area that I do agree with the Member for Nipawin was that he said some 
weeks ago that this process is irreversible. And make no mistake it is irreversible because there is no 
getting out of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as long as these rules are available, we fully intend to use them. I think that what is going 
to happen and what is so fearsome to you people on that side of the House, is that you know full well 
that public opinion is slowly mounting against you. At this point most people are busy with the aura of 
Christmas hanging over them and probably have more pleasant things to do than the very repugnant, 
distasteful thing which Members opposite are doing. But after Christmas is gone and New Year’s is 
gone as this continues to go on, whether we are starting at 10:00 o’clock in the morning or 2:30 in the 
afternoon, but as it continues to go on, very slowly, very surely this popular opinion is going to rise 
against you. 
 
You people know that it is going to rise against you. It is very interesting going back a couple of weeks 
when the Bill was introduced you would maybe get a phone call at your desk protesting the 
Government’s intervention into the potash industry. As time has gone on, slowly that one phone 
message waiting for you has become a stack of them. Every day the number goes up, maybe five, six or 
ten. Very slowly but it is coming. 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1329 
 

We make no apology for holding you up and we will make no apology in the future for holding you up. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, I can see that you are really enjoying this and if I can I will try to keep the rapture 
in front of you for some time, but believe me when I run out somebody else is going to take my place. 
When he runs out someone else will take his place. Part of it, Mr. Attorney General, that I suppose our 
party will always be grateful to you for is that you are giving the ten rookies on this side of the House, 
you’re giving us some experience that normally would take us a couple of years to get. And that may 
very well prove to be your undoing. I must say that we all enjoyed the day in the House yesterday and 
we are enjoying it today and I am quite sure that when necessary we will enjoy it in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would love to go home for the Christmas recess just as much as anyone on the other 
side would. In fact you can’t adjourn this House too soon or leave it out too long for me. Because I can 
think of a thousand places I would rather be than here. Ultimately, it is going to get down to the point 
where we are going to be sitting here for virtually nothing. You may have some hope that some big 
retroactive pay increase is going to come in to you. It may. You can vote it in but don’t look for it 
unanimously. Very shortly you are going to be sitting here for your $20 a day. We could care less. We 
will work for nothing, it doesn’t bother us. Just as long as you want to do it we are happy to stay here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to the topic of why we should sit at 11:00 rather than 10:00, one more reason 
is that I have found in making calls to many Government offices that particularly are in this building 
here, that the later in the day it goes the quicker the phone is answered. Actually when a vote is being 
taken in some of these buildings, when the bells start ringing you find that somebody answers the phone 
a little quicker than what they do normally because it seems to take a vote to make many of your hacks, 
your executive assistants etc., to waken suddenly to the fact that we are doing business in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that unquestionably a very great miscalculation has been made on the part of this 
Government. I think a miscalculation was made yesterday and you got burnt on that. I am surprised that 
you bothered to try and bring this in today, because really, I think had we planned this I don’t think we 
could have planned it any better than what the Government has done. 
 
The Attorney General appears to think that he is really throwing an insult at us when he motions to the 
Press and says, filibuster. He seems to think that he is really cutting us to the bone marrow when he 
motions to the Press and says, obstruction. Mr. Attorney General, if I could only get you to make a 
mailout to my constituency, and tell them about our filibuster and tell them about my obstruction, I will 
be eternally grateful. 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I think the Hon. Member over there is not talking 
at all about whether the House is going to sit at 10:00 o’clock or 11:00 o’clock. He is talking about 
everything else. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1330 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Point of Order is well taken. I have heard discussion on pay increases, 
mailouts, physical abuse of the Attorney General and numerous other things. None of it that I can see is 
related to the subject that is to be discussed here, namely whether this amendment should be adopted and 
whether we sit at 10:00 o’clock in the morning or 11:00 o’clock in the morning. I wonder if the Member 
for Thunder Creek could try and regain control of himself to confine himself to the amendment. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A very valid point, Mr. Speaker, and very well taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing on this matter, I would merely wish to add one more thing that in all seriousness 
I am done for this particular amendment but somebody is going to take my place. Somebody will take 
his place and right on down the line. You can go as long as you want and we are right with you. You 
don’t have much help from this side in terms of Opposition. But we will fight you all the way. You have 
made a great miscalculation, you have underestimated your adversaries. 
 
MR. J. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I am more than pleased to see that the 
Liberal Party has a new House leader and a new Whip. I am also more than pleased to see that the 
number of people who are now trying to render their great decisions in this House are trying to suggest 
to their colleagues that they are the potential leader of their party. Because it is quite apparent that they 
are using every opportunity they can now gain in trying to prove that they each are capable of being the 
leader of that party. They are using it in a type of filibuster . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — . . . and I can assure you that I know what filibusters are all about, because I 
happened to be involved in filibusters. When we filibustered a bill at the federal level we did it for a 
purpose. We didn’t only filibuster a bill for the purpose of delaying and using the tactics of delays that 
they are using right now. But we delayed a bill to prove to the people of the country and to prove to the 
Opposition and the government, at that time the government, naturally, to prove to them that we had 
something to say about it. When the Liberals introduced bills in the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker, 
insofar as extending the hours of the individual debate that may pertain to that particular bill, it was done 
for a purpose. It was done to allow the Members of the Opposition the right to stand up and say what 
they were talking about. 
 
We haven’t heard for the last day and one-half one solid criticism of why we should extend the hours. I 
should like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that personally I am concerned that we have a number of Private 
Members’ bills on the Order Paper and I would suggest to the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek that he 
may be intimately involved in one of them and those Private Members’ bills cannot be passed unless we 
extend the hours of this Session. It is very apparent those people opposite are not concerned about 
Private Members’ bills. They are not concerned about the debate in this House. They are concerned only 
with 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1331 
 

their filibuster so they don’t have to get back on their rhetoric of why and when and how they should 
oppose Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting to you at this time that for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan that 
we have to extend the hours of sitting in this House in order that the Private Members’ bills can be 
considered, can be debated, the amendments can be debated and they can come back into this House and 
they can then be passed for the benefit of those seven or six Private Members’ bills. But it appears that 
the Members opposite aren’t concerned about that. They would rather filibuster, in fact, the cheapest, 
political gimmick I have seen in my life is what happened this afternoon when they had to filibuster a 
ruling from the Chair. I would be ashamed if I was on that side of the House to use that type of a 
filibuster. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, at least at the federal level you couldn’t challenge a ruling of the 
Chair. I would urgently suggest to those Hon. Members opposite in the Liberal Party that if they are 
using a filibuster to challenge rulings of the Chair, then they must look at themselves and find out 
exactly what they are looking at in the mirror. They can’t look at themselves intelligently because that 
should not be used in any House whether it’s in a provincial House or the federal House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to suggest that there has to be a time for debating insofar as the bill is 
concerned, and I did have an opportunity at the federal level to participate in a type of filibuster that 
those people now are using. But we filibustered for a specific purpose. We filibustered for a purpose of 
trying to bring about amendments to a bill - we filibustered to an extent that we knew that the 
Government knew what we were talking about. And when that went to the Committee of the Whole, 
invariably it was a subcommittee, and then back on third reading, we had as Opposition Members, an 
opportunity then to introduce amendments. I’m suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that as far as those people 
opposite, that’s in the Liberal Party only, as far as those people opposite are concerned they don’t want 
to know the truth in Committee of the Whole. They have been told that they will be told the actual facts, 
told the situation and details, though not the regulations, in Committee of the Whole. It utterly amazes 
me when I look at Hon. Members opposite, particularly the Leader of the Opposition, for him to allow 
his Members to stand up and say and tell us the regulations. He knows, and every Member in this House 
knows, or should know, that the regulations can only be brought about after the Bill has been passed. He 
knows that the Federal Government, as of tonight, is only going to bring about the regulations of the 
Anti-inflation Bill. It utterly amazes me when I look across and I see the Hon. Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) preparing notes, but that Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley 
well knows that regulations are brought about after the Bill has been introduced and passed. He knows 
that, that’s parliamentary procedure. It utterly amazes me while I listen to the rhetoric and all the rest of 
the stuff that goes with it, and people are suggesting opposite that they want to know the regulations of 
the bills that are introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting to you tonight, that I visited schools the last day or two, in fact, hearing 
the Hon. Member 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1332 
 

for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) maybe he hasn’t been to a school lately, maybe he doesn’t know what 
the school students are talking about, or thinking about, maybe he doesn’t know that they are interested 
in what all this parliamentary procedure is all about. I visited Riverview Collegiate yesterday morning 
and they said to me, why is this taking so long? Why are Bills 1 and 2 taking this long? Why in fact 
would the Opposition deny us, the Government, for extending the time of sittings in order that the 
Government can then bring in and pass that type of legislation that is necessary? 
 
It is also rather interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that we have to have extended time because those 
people aren’t aware of the fact that what the people in this country are all talking about. They are not 
aware of the fact that the people know what the Government can do and why they are elected to do it. 
We have a Premier here in this province and he is the head of the province, the head of the province 
that’s introduced a Throne Speech. We know what that Throne Speech is all about. We have talked on 
that Throne Speech, and I’m suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that because the Opposition, the Liberal 
Opposition, are not familiar with what the Throne Speech was all about, they are not familiar with what 
we are trying to tell the people of this province. They are not familiar with the fact that the people of this 
province appreciate what we are doing in legislation. They have to now try and lobby and boycott and 
say we don’t need more time because everybody else knows what it’s all about. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this appears to be a situation that the people in this particular House 
must have more opportunity to express their opinion. It appears that they haven’t had that opportunity. 
Look at the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek and the rhetoric he came up with. When I look at that 
individual and realize that he hasn’t been to the Chamber of Commerce in Moose Jaw, I have been there 
with a letter expressing my available time is at their disposal to explain to them what this is all about. I 
have been to the schools and said I will come to your school and tell you what this is all about. I will 
make my time available to you. But the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek doesn’t quite find the time 
hardly to spend time in this House, in fact, he doesn’t find time even to talk to the people in his 
constituency and he doesn’t find time to try and find out what the whole issue is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that we must have more time, not to educate the people of Saskatchewan, but we 
must have more time to allow particularly the Liberal Opposition to have some time to get off their 
chests that which isn’t concerning anybody else. They believe that they are building up a great 
crescendo of public resentment against the legislation being introduced in this House. All they are 
saying is that they do not want this House to discuss Private Members’ bills, they do not want this House 
to discuss the rentalsman bill that went through this afternoon (thankfully it went through), they do not 
want this House to discuss very important things that should be discussed insofar as this Government is 
concerned. 
 
I should like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that beyond a question of a doubt, anybody with brains in their 
heads opposite on the Liberal side, knows that bills have to be passed, they have to be discussed, they 
have to go into committee, they have to come back to the third reading, and then if those great 
magnificent defenders of the public of Saskatchewan want to 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1333 
 

stand in their place, then I suggest to them, pass those bills that we are talking about, don’t give us the 
rhetoric and reading out of books. I have been through that crap before myself. Don’t go through that 
stuff, but you be responsible to the people of this province because you are not being responsible right 
now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — You know, it not only amazes me, Mr. Speaker, when I hear these people talk 
about the number of phone calls that they receive. It utterly amazes me about the difficulty of meeting, 
as our House Leader has said we should meet, which I subscribe to 100 per cent. We have been through 
that. We know that the opposite Members in the Liberal Party are telling less than the truth, when they 
say about the number of phone calls they received. And the Hon. Member for Wilkie (Miss Clifford) 
utterly amazes me when she went through a whole rhetoric of phone calls she received and the reason 
that she couldn’t possibly meet earlier in this House. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if I were a little 
younger I could well visualize I wouldn’t mind making a phone call or two myself, but it not only 
amazes me that we on the side of the Government aren’t receiving these phone calls that you people are 
supposedly receiving. You know they are not receiving them. You know that you’ve got as much time 
as we in the back bench have got to prepare speeches, particularly when you read it out of a book. And 
particularly when the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek said, we can read books, we can stay here until 
after New Year’s and Christmas. I can assure the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek, who is now 
purportedly trying to be the new Leader of the Liberal Party (and you have got lots of competition my 
Hon. Member), but I can assure you that we also are prepared to stay here without any hesitation at all, 
because in the interests of democracy and in the interests of parliamentary procedure, these bills and all 
legislation including Private Members’ Bills have to be considered. I would suggest to you that you 
people have an obligation, the Liberal Party has an obligation to recognize the fact that there are various 
ways of the parliamentary procedure that you can use. But to filibuster, even the Speaker’s Ruling, a 
filibuster extension of time, is a complete indication that you are not interested in parliamentary 
procedure, you are only interested in filibuster and I can assure you that that’s what you people have in 
mind, and I can assure you, keep on with it because we’re here, we are prepared to stay, and I can assure 
you we’re prepared to stay exactly with the philosophy of what this Party stands for, exactly what the 
bills stand for, and exactly with the support of the Saskatchewan people in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS L. B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak on the amendment. 
 
Being as everyone on this side of the House according to Members opposite seem to be running for the 
leadership, I’ll let you know that I am also, about 1983, not this time, but about 1983. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1334 
 

MISS CLIFFORD: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to comment that my running record so far hasn’t been 
that good. I have been called out of order, I shall try very hard not to be called out of order. I will try not 
to shoot my theory to pieces, and I’m not proposing an amendment, so therefore I shall stick right to the 
point. 
 
The other day we sincerely proposed an amendment for the reasons that we feel we need an extra hour 
in the morning to do our constituency work, and I stated 23 reasons I do admit, why I needed my work 
done in the morning. And I do get a lot of phone calls, I also admit that. But I also, perhaps you have 
selective hearing too, because I also stated that not only did I get these telephone calls, and I’m sure that 
the Members opposite got them, that perhaps someone else is answering their telephones. So, therefore, 
I was not stating that they do not have the problems that we do. But I think they too could use the hour 
in the morning to do this constituency work. 
 
I should just like to say, Mr. Speaker, when we are discussing the hour between ten and 11, or whether 
we start at 10:00 o’clock or 11:00 o’clock in the morning, this morning I happened to be in a 
government office, the office of the Fire Commissioner from 10:00 o’clock until 11:00 o’clock and we 
were discussing a problem with a community centre, and I won’t go into the problem, I won’t read the 
letter but I just want to very sincerely make a point that I was there discussing a problem which I think 
needs to be solved and it has been in abeyance for a long time. I am sorry that the Minister of Labour 
(Mr. Snyder) is not here because I think I have a point that might help him, because in my discussion 
with the Fire Commissioner I found that he needs a little bit of help there as far as staff is concerned and 
I think that maybe if they had the hour to find this out this might be an additional help to them if they 
took that time . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — . . . and I’ll be glad to tell him where the staff can be used. 
 
Now there have been many reasons and when I first was thinking about standing up here this evening, 
Mr. Speaker, I thought I would just very briefly and plainly state again and ask for your consideration, 
your listening, if you listen to why I think we need the time. And I am appreciative that you are 
listening. But, there have been many reasons stated and one has been that this possibly is a method of 
closure that you are trying to force in more time so that we can get to these potash bills. Believe me, we 
want to be here and my amendment which was overruled stated explicitly that we wanted to be here. We 
want to be here to do some productive debating, and you may laugh but . . . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You read books. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — You don’t think my debating is productive. Would you listen? Fine! I haven’t 
read out of a book. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1335 
 

MISS CLIFFORD: — But the fact is we have got to look at why we are proposing these morning 
sessions. Why are we proposing them? Our purpose behind this speaking whether you think it is 
productive or not, is because we want more time for the public to get to know why, and what you are 
proposing and let them decide. I am not saying maybe we are not always right, although we feel very 
strongly that we are, but let them tell you. No one is always right but in this problem I think that we have 
got a good cause, that we want the people of Saskatchewan to give you their opinion which I am sure 
will say, stay out of the potash and this is our purpose and this is what we are standing for. 
 
I will make an aside here. You were speaking of school children and what they are saying about the 
reasons why we don’t want morning sittings and the reasons why we are staying here. There is one thing 
that I know about school students and people of all ages and that is that when you present to them the 
facts that you think you have something to fight for which is their right to speak out in Saskatchewan, 
they all know that we have a good reason and they will be behind us because they have been reading and 
they know that we sincerely believe that this is their right. So that the people of Saskatchewan know this 
and they are asking for you to give them time to talk to you about this Bill on the potash industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to give very many more comments, a comment has been made that we could 
use this extra time to propose Private Members’ Bills and believe me there is nothing I should like better 
than to get The Rural Telephone Act in, but this can be done in many ways. It can be done by putting it 
on the Order Paper and start debating rather than just pushing and pushing and pushing on two bills. 
Everyone here, young and old, no matter how long you have been here knows that that is the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is about all I have to say on this matter and I sincerely hope that the Members opposite 
will be listening because we sincerely believe that we do need this time as do you need this time to get 
more feedback, not only from the province but from your constituencies. I am not here to abuse anyone, 
the Attorney General in particular, physically or otherwise. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address myself to the amendment. 
I think the amendment is very important, in one way it does give us the extra hour we do need in the 
morning. I find if we are going to meet at 10:00 o’clock, we have to sit in caucus at 9:00 o’clock and 
most government offices are very hard to get into before 9:00 o’clock in the morning for some reason. 
At least this morning I had a bit of a problem getting in one before 9, after 9 I could get in there for a 
while. 
 
I have also stated before that if we must extend the hours why don’t we extend them in the evening, why 
take up the only time of the day when these offices are open? 
 
Pardon? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The doors open at six. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1336 
 

MR. ANDERSON: — I’ll be down to see you tomorrow then. I’ll be there at six, Mr. Byers, because 
I’d love to see you. I’m sorry I used your name, you’re Department of Highways or something, 
Environment. I’ll be there at six tomorrow if that’s an appointment you are quite willing to make. I do 
appreciate you making it. 
 
As I was saying, it’s very important, the one hour sounds probably nit picking, but it isn’t. It does give 
us at least an hour to get in these offices and to make phone calls to them. 
 
I quite often find that a lot of my constituency problems do require a trip to offices and certainly phone 
calls. It’s very difficult to explain by letter, or it takes a great deal of time to explain in a letter a lot of 
your problems, where if you can find the Minister, or Deputy Minister in charge it can be easily 
facilitated. It’s no use saying I have Saturday to do it in, the offices aren’t open, Sunday they aren’t open 
and they aren’t open in the evenings. They are only open from nine to five. If we are going to sit in this 
House from nine to 5:30 it’s a very difficult proposition for an MLA to represent his constituents. 
 
I also feel that there is not that great of a rush in this sitting. We do have all winter and the whole year, I 
would believe, ahead of us. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The potash will still be there. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Well certainly and I hope I will be too. I’m not as old as some of the Members 
across, so I can last I suppose as long as they can. I think they are all in pretty good shape, we don’t have 
to have these Bills through by Christmas or anything like that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I am glad you like my speech, Sir, I’d hate to bore you. It seems strange to me 
that this Government is so afraid to have us approach their Ministers that they lock us into the 
Legislative Assembly when their offices are open. They seem to be quite shrinking violets, in fact, they 
are quite insistent we must meet at ten to protect them I guess. It also seems rather strange that they not 
only don’t want to take calls from the people of this province who want to talk to them about problems, 
such as potash. Pardon? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . can I . . . 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Oh no, certainly, speak. I like to hear a jackass bray. 
 
Another thing in doing this closure at this 10:00 o’clock, they are not only depriving us from seeing the 
Ministers, they are depriving us of the opportunity of speaking with our constituents and this I believe is 
the end of democracy. We saw what happened when this tactic was used in the United States with Mr. 
Nixon when he divorced himself from the people and let 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1337 
 

his advisors run him. He ran into things such as Watergate. I feel if we are going to keep our Ministers 
in the House all day, protected from the population, we are going to keep MLAs in the House all day, 
closed away from the general citizen of this province, we are going to start to rule by "triumviral". We 
are not going to consider the democratic process and this is a dangerous and sad route for any 
government to fall into. It sets a dangerous precedent. This is why I say that the hour from ten to 11 
doesn’t seem important, but it is to me at least. It gives an hour where this work can be done. 
 
As I said before I would rather that you had brought your motion in to sit in the evening hours. At least 
the offices are closed, we can do this. 
 
As one Member, I am sure, brought up and I quite agree with him that there are many other bills, private 
bills to bring up that I would beg leave to adjourn debate on this. 
 
Request for adjourned debate denied. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — And so as we don’t seem to have any Private Members’ bills or any rent bills to 
bring on the paper, I will continue debate on why we should meet at 11:00 o’clock. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I would say by popular demand which is a nice way to come back. 
 
As I was saying that this action and not allowing us an extra hour in the morning does appear to me that 
the Government is more interested in divorcing us from our constituents, divorcing themselves from 
meeting the constituents, making themselves more unavailable than they are in debate. 
 
If this weren’t true, this extension would have been asked for evening sittings, so we’d be open in the 
House. But obviously this Government is afraid to talk to their people, they would rather cloister 
themselves as in a monastery. It’s a shameful method of showing the utter disregard this Government 
seems to have for the citizens of this province, and so therefore, I will support this amendment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
MRS. E. G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, speaking in support of the 
amendment to the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — The amendment would change the motion so that the proposed morning sittings 
of the Legislature would begin at 11:00 a.m. instead of ten. Speaking in support of that amendment, I 
should like to make it clear that I am prepared to sit here and debate the bills before this House as long 
as anybody wishes. Even though there are many other duties at this Christmas season that a wife and 
mother might wish to be doing on behalf of her family, as she prepares for Christmas, I am prepared to 
stay here and carry out my duties as an MLA. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1338 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — All we are requesting in this amendment is a request for one extra hour each 
morning to attend to the many duties and commitments that come as our responsibility as duly elected 
Members from our constituency and as Members of the official Opposition. 
 
Perhaps the Hon. Attorney General has forgotten about the early days when he was a new MLA. 
Perhaps he didn’t need to research material and prepare speeches as I find I have to do. As a new MLA 
it probably takes me longer to research and prepare my debates for the afternoon session. 
 
There are Members in this House who don’t have that same problem of having to do research and 
preparation. I would say that there are two kinds of MLAs who don’t have to work that hard. First of all 
I would suggest that the Cabinet Ministers with all their assistants don’t have to spend the hours that 
some of us do in preparation. Secondly there are other Members in the House who have not yet spoken 
in any of the debates and I suggest that they don’t have to spend time in the morning doing research and 
preparation either. 
 
I should say that such Members show little understanding or concern for us Members of the official 
Opposition who are taking our responsibilities seriously and doing our best, even though many of us are 
here for the first time. 
 
Some of the Members opposite may think one hour shouldn’t make that much difference, but I want to 
assure you, one hour means a great deal to me, as I try to keep up with the duties that I have taken on as 
the representative of Saskatoon-Sutherland. I won’t bore you or take up time, Mr. Speaker, with 
bringing attention in detail to some of the problems that have been brought to me by my constituents, 
but they are important issues and I feel I have a responsibility to do what I can on behalf of those 
constituents. 
 
I have letters here and you say people don’t get letters. I could read letters and these are only samples of 
letters. I don’t suppose many of you realize, if you don’t come from Saskatoon however, other Members 
from Saskatoon should realize how many calls I get and I don’t know whether they get the same calls or 
not. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins) he’s only 
been the Minister of Health for a short time and perhaps he doesn’t realize the number of senior citizens 
that can’t get a bed when they have a stroke and are paralyzed and all that. He will find that out when 
he’s Minister of Health for a longer time. In my work in Saskatoon in the health care field I get calls 
regularly about . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Well I tell you, if I dealt with one of those letters it would take more than an 
hour to find a bed for somebody that hasn’t got a bed. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1339 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — As a matter of fact, if the Minister of Health would find a bed I wouldn’t have 
to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — I’d be glad to send these letters over to him and tell him all about these 30 or 40 
people who are sitting around our hospitals that haven’t got a place to be sent out to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Regarding Bill 16, I’ve had letters, meetings and calls from people who are 
concerned on both sides of that issue, tenants and landlord alike. They are concerned about the 
legislation. They want fair legislation and I’ve been trying to explain to them what I can about Bill 16 
and what we are trying to do, and how we are supporting something that would help the situation. I think 
this is what we are dealing with in this House. These are the issues of the day. 
 
Perhaps you don’t have to deal with problems of your constituents. I don’t know. Maybe they don’t 
phone you, or write you. As a matter of fact some of my constituents say they can’t get through to you 
on the phone. So maybe that’s why I’m getting so many calls. They have to talk to somebody from 
Saskatoon. 
 
There are concerned teachers, concerned nurses and concerned women. There are women who are 
concerned about needed changes in the legislation that discriminates against them and they are 
depending on Miss Clifford and myself to speak for them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Now as a new Member, before I came down here I read the procedures that went 
on last year and in making my plans for the opening of the Legislature I read that last year the House 
adjourned on December 12. It wasn’t called back except for a special sitting on January 14th and 15th to 
do with a special issue and then it did not reconvene until March 10th. Now I ask why is the situation so 
different this year? Why does this Government think it is so necessary to pass two bills before 
Christmas? You’d honestly think that potash was going to go mouldy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — It’s just like the Christmas spirit, it will keep and not go mouldy. It will probably 
get better through the years if you just wait. 
 
I want you to know that we are serious about opposing Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — And we can sit here just as long as you can and we can 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1340 
 

debate just as long as you can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — I cannot accept that these Bills have to be rushed through before Christmas. If 
the Government were acting in a reasonable way, they would realize that the course they are following 
in attempting to force this issue through the House before Christmas is wrong and it’s irresponsible. 
 
The Members opposite would try to have us and the people of this province believe that they are the 
only ones concerned about people in this province. They want us to believe that they are the only ones 
who listen to people. You remember that saying and you read it in the papers, "Speak up, your 
Government wants to hear you." They won’t stop and listen. As a matter of fact I think there is a reason 
they want this rushed through before Christmas because they are afraid to go home and face their 
constituents during the adjournment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — I have always said when you are opposing something you should always be 
prepared to give constructive criticism and probably some good sound advice. What I would like to 
present to you from a woman’s point of view is some good commonsense advice. This is my first sitting 
of the Legislature and I offer this, with respect, to all the Members opposite. 
 
This is Christmas time when all of us here should be concerned about our families. Particularly you 
fellows about your wives, the mothers and children. As a woman I put forth a commonsense solution to 
this debate that we are in right now. 
 
This, as I’ve said before, is the Christmas season, a season when we talk of peace and good will towards 
men. I tell you if the Attorney General would show some good will it would be the greatest gesture of 
all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — I think the Attorney General would show a great gesture of good will towards 
the House, the Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan if he would think about what I am saying and if 
tomorrow morning he would come in here and adjourn this House until after Christmas. 
 
I am supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to be back, I’m glad to 
be able to take an opportunity . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . to participate in this debate and I want to make one thing clear when I start, 
that I don’t intend to ever let Bill 1 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1341 
 

and Bill 2 pass this House. I’m going to tell you, I haven’t had an opportunity except for a few moments 
extemporaneously to speak on Bill 1 and Bill 2. But I’m going to tell you, as far as I’m concerned, I 
don’t ever intend to let Bill 1 and Bill 2 pass this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That means I don’t care what the implications are. I don’t know what my 
capacity is. I don’t know the feelings of my own Members except to assess what they are doing, but I do 
know this, that we’ve got a purpose. I stand here now not to delay this particular Motion. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Why are you . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, you choo, choo engineer from Moose Jaw. You know he stands up when 
he yaks from the seat of his trousers at the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) but he doesn’t 
have enough guts to stand on his feet and talk. If you’ve got something to say about the Member for 
Thunder Creek stand on your feet like a man and don’t sit there and interrupt the way you do from 
morning until night. I think it is time you Members got this very clear, you just had better get something 
very, very clear, we’re not playing in this and perhaps some of the things we may have to say in the next 
month or two months may not make too much sense . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That’s right. Because if I have to talk 15 hours I’m not sure it will make sense 
for 15 hours. I’m going to tell the goal and the objective and the purpose of what we’re trying to do. It 
will sure make sense and will make sense to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If you think I’m going to sit here and let 40 per cent of the voters of this 
province, the minority, dictate a policy that will change the economic and social fabric of this province 
and have an impact on the Dominion of Canada, you’ve got another think coming and I have no 
intention of letting it happen. Absolutely no intention. You know, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North 
(Mr. Skoberg), I’m going to tell you why you are back in Saskatchewan and not at Ottawa. That had to 
be the shallowest speech, the biggest tripe that I have ever heard in this House for a long time. You 
know, he said, "When I was in Ottawa I participated in a filibuster." He said, "I was part of a filibuster." 
He wakes up now the Member for Moose Jaw North, would you stand on your feet, would you take this 
opportunity, we would love to listen to you. All of us will. We’d be glad to sit down. Instead of yipping, 
yipe, yipe, yipe. You know, you’re like a backbiting puppy. He said, "You know I took part in the 
filibuster but we had a purpose." Well, I’m going to tell you, I’ve got a purpose too and that is to 
strangle Bill 1 and strangle Bill 2. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1342 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have yet to hear the Member speak to the Motion that is before us. He is 
devoting his comments to Bill 1 and Bill 2 and other sundry matters. The matter that is before us is the 
extension of the hours of the House. I am sure the Member wants to be in order. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I certainly apologize if I didn’t. What I am really trying to say and I will try to 
relate my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that by trying to extend the hours and to thus shorten the debate will in 
reality defeat the very purpose that I stand before this very Legislature tonight. The very reason I feel 
that I was elected, that is to preserve the way of life that I believe in, in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Do you know, I understand that our good friend, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. 
Collver), gave a second lecture. He lectured the Members on this side, the Liberals, yesterday. 
Unfortunately I wasn’t here for a pretty good reason. I wish the Member for Nipawin was here because I 
want to tell him that if he thinks the purpose of this House is because the Government have a majority 
and because they can win the vote, that there is no value to stand on your feet and espouse the ideals and 
the principles that you believe in and the principles and the ideals that the people elected you for, then I 
say that is a tragedy. A tragedy! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a tragedy for the Conservative Party but a much 
bigger tragedy for the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s the tragedy of the Leader of the Conservative 
Party and that’s the tragedy of the Conservative Opposition. 
 
When I heard the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) congratulate the Member for Swift Current 
(Mr. Ham) who has been in this House for five, six, seven weeks and make a maiden speech of one 
minute in length about the biggest and most important issue that has ever come before the people of 
Saskatchewan. If we ever let those boys . . . 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If you want to make a Point of Order, fellows, the procedure in the House is to 
stand on your feet. That’s what you do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I’ll be glad to sit down if you’ve got a Point of Order. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1343 
 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member is going off the Motion which is before him 
for debate. You have indicated this to him once and he continues to side track again. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I could show . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No, I think I’ve had enough guidance on that. I think lecturing other Members in 
the House whether they be a recognized political group or not, is not in relation to the extension of the 
hours and it is really not on the subject. I want the Member to try and observe the rules. They are not my 
rules, they are your rules. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly endorse what you are saying, but what I am really 
saying is I hope that my colleagues to my left will participate on this Bill so that they won’t permit the 
NDP Government to shorten or lengthen the hours and ram this legislation through. They have got a 
responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to prevent that. That’s all I’m saying, Mr. Speaker. I think 
it is very germane to the Motion. What is the attitude, what is the purpose of the speaking pattern of 
Members of this House toward an issue on a basic and fundamental principle about whether or not we 
should let this Government get control over every aspect of our economic lives or not, whether or not we 
should let a precedent of socialism, an expropriation and, by the reading of the Bill, almost confiscation 
of the resource industry in this province, take over and set a pattern for the rest of Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
it is important that we don’t jam this Bill out because I hope, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty that I’ll be 
standing here in March speaking about potash on Bill 1 and Bill 2. I really mean that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to assess why this particular Government is 
doing this, this time. I think it is important because I think, Mr. Speaker, as I get the sense and the mood 
of the public in Saskatchewan that all of a sudden the NDP are becoming frightened. They know, Mr. 
Speaker, they know that there is a reaction and a bad reaction. They also, Mr. Speaker, know that when 
we turn around and every time we go out people are beginning to ask questions: How much is it going to 
cost? Where are they going to get the money? How much interest are you going to pay? What’s this 
going to do to investment in Saskatchewan? And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I think it is absolutely vital 
that we take our time and present this issue very clearly, very concisely and take as long as is humanly 
possible in order to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan will have an opportunity. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, that is why the Government is ramming this through in this special fall Session, because 
Members know that very, very rarely do the people of Saskatchewan react to the Legislative Assembly 
for a long period of time. People are busy, it’s Christmas, they have an opportunity to do so many other 
things and the first thing you know the Bill has gone through and no reaction has occurred. All we want 
is we’re going to make absolutely certain that by the time Bill 1 and Bill 2 ever do get passed in this 
House, that every man, woman and child in this province knows what you are doing and four years from 
now they’ll be able to give a judgment. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1344 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — And I’m going to tell you that judgment is very important. Because there was a 
judgment a few days ago. You know the judgment was brought about by exactly the same issue as is 
here now in the Province of Saskatchewan. What happened to the resource industry in the Province of 
British Columbia and that’s why Dave Barrett was thrown right out of the province and lost his own 
seat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you and to all Members of this House 
that in no way will this Bill ever pass as far as I am concerned and that is why I hope this Motion will 
never pass. I am not worried about what the days are, the length of time, what I am talking about is the 
importance of the fundamental principle that we are debating. What it means, will it change the pattern 
in the social fabric of Saskatchewan life? Will it change the pattern and thrust of resource development 
in Canada? Are we going to turn around and see the same thing happen to other resources as has 
happened to the oil industry. You know, the interesting thing, the Minister who was in charge of Saskoil 
is now presiding over the death of potash just as he presided over the death of the oil industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You would think, Mr. Speaker, that when a man led one industry to the 
execution block in this province and completely destroyed it at a time when energy resources and 
resources were so vital, that now he would not preside over the execution of the second resource 
industry. That really bothers me. One of the reasons I don’t want the debate to lengthen or the time 
lengthened is because I hope that Minister will take the opportunity of standing on his feet and 
expressing to the people of Saskatchewan how he can justify the execution of the second resource 
industry in this province when he presided over the execution of the first. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The funny part of it is, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Thunder Creek really hit 
the nail on the head when he said, I have never seen such poor management because it is poor 
management. This particular amendment of my colleague is a very reasonable one. I don’t know if any 
of you have ever sat down and tried to figure it out. It’s one more day to debate this Bill before 
Christmas, it is an extension of almost 20 per cent of the time. We are trying to be as co-operative as 
possible. All I’m saying is that I don’t want that amendment to pass and I’m glad the Attorney General 
got his back up and said, don’t let anybody suggest that the Opposition won a battle, that that Opposition 
won a point. Oh, no, he’s going to win them all and he’s going to do whatever he wants in this House or 
by gosh you fellows - how many times has he told you - you’ll have a new House leader. Well, I’m 
going to tell you Members on the back benches, I wonder, if any other parliament or any other 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1345 
 

House or Legislative Assembly in this country would ever not have the good sense and the good 
management to sit down and say, okay, you know what you have lost on Bill 1 and Bill 2, which I am 
delighted about, is two days and I am also going to tell you I’m going to be talking at 9:30 and if you 
want to bring it up on Monday, I’m going to be talking about it at 9:30 on Monday night. I had not better 
say what I can do because I’m not sure, but you have already lost two days and I’m delighted, I really 
am. If you want to call that obstruction, if you want to call that filibuster, I say, Yes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Because if I can stop by filibuster or obstruction the expropriation and the 
takeover of the potash industry in the Province of Saskatchewan, I will obstruct and I will filibuster. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I am going to tell the Member for Moose Jaw North that as far as I am 
concerned this is the greatest purpose. I have been in this House since 1964, I have never felt more 
strongly about any bill that has been introduced in this Assembly as I do about these two. Strangely 
enough, my colleagues, some of them who have been here for the first time, feel equally as strong. We 
feel we have a responsibility and a serious responsibility and a serious goal and we’ll do everything we 
can to carry out that responsibility and carry out that goal. As I say that is the purpose for which we are 
standing on our feet yesterday, today and Monday, Tuesday, whatever day it takes. We will not permit 
the passing of Bill 1 and 2 if we can prevent it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I also want to tell my friends the Conservatives, that I wish they would join this 
battle because one of the things they are going to learn, it is not always important who wins the vote, 
that’s not always important, because sometimes they will win the vote and lose the battle. That’s what’s 
important. I am convinced right now that the Government may win the vote if it ever comes to one but I 
am equally convinced that they are going to lose the battle. It is too bad that you fellows aren’t part of 
that battle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Not only would we welcome your participation, we will welcome your efforts, 
because you know something is happening and yet you gentlemen don’t realize it. All of a sudden the 
public is beginning to get a real sense of where this Government is going and what direction they are 
aimed at and just exactly what plan they have for the Province of Saskatchewan. What is that grandiose 
plan? They are beginning to realize, and you know I am going to tell my friend from Nipawin again, that 
if he thinks he is going to have another issue, don’t mistake these birds opposite, they are going to put 
everything possible through this time. You should see them a year or two before the election; sweety 
pies, smooth, sweetness and honey. This is the 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1346 
 

crunch, this will be the biggest debate and the biggest issue that this House will face in four years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER: — You’re running scared. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You’re yipping again. Would you stand up when I’m finished. When I’m 
finished I’m going to ask all the Members on this side of the House to let you stand on your feet and 
make another one of those great atrocities of yours again and instead of yipping, instead of sitting there 
barking like a puppy dog, you will have the courage to get on your feet and express your principles. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — And I’ll respect your opportunity to speak and listen to you with all I can. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You’ve got your book upside down. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I’ve made my position clear on this and the position of my fellow colleagues 
that we are not here to delay this Motion for a day or a week or an hour. We are here to prevent the 
passing of Bill 1 and Bill 2. Make no mistake about it. I hope I have made that clear. I hope I make also 
clear the reasons we feel so strongly that is because this is the one thing that really divides this side of 
the House from that side of the House. How often have I heard my friend the Attorney General stand up 
and say, socialism is no longer a bad word. Let me tell you, Mr. Attorney General, socialism has become 
a bad word very quickly in Saskatchewan. Very quickly. It became a bad word in British Columbia very 
quickly. 
 
I should like to tell my friend from Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) he likes to espouse that word. I 
happened to come in contact with a lot of his constituents yesterday. They are pretty disturbed about his 
socialist attitude. Pretty disturbed. I am going to tell some of the rest of you backbenchers, the reason we 
are trying to prevent this Bill from going through the House is to save your skin. To save your skin. 
Because if we don’t save your skin you are in trouble. If you let that Attorney General ram this bill 
through and pass it, because when some of you Members go home, go back to your constituency, go 
back and talk to your constituents, when the Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) walks down the main 
street of Weyburn and the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) goes down to his home town, they are 
going to find out that this isn’t the great and beautiful scenario that they thought it was. They are going 
to find this out very, very quickly. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Snyder) is gone. What did he say, big deal, big deal. One of his 
yips, that was his contribution to the debate. I am going to tell you it is a big deal. It is a very big deal for 
the Liberals, a very big deal. So big it is beyond your comprehension to understand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1347 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — You know what you have, for example, you sit in this House and you think that 
these people are standing on their feet and talking about something only to prevent two hours of 
morning sittings. Two extra hours. That is not what they are trying to do at all. They are standing here 
because they believe very firmly that what you people are doing is wrong. What you people are doing is 
bad for Saskatchewan. That is the reason they are standing up here. That is the reason they are going to 
do battle. That is the reason they are enjoying the battle. I am going to tell you, the Member for Thunder 
Creek said, you know we are getting an education, we are getting as much experience in a month as we 
would get in two years. It is an opportunity for something in relation to an ideal and a principle to unite a 
group of people. It is not the hum drum, in it not the ordinary or everyday problem, but what it is is a 
principle that everybody believes in, an ideal by which they stand for and you have given us that and 
you have given the Liberal caucus that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I have to make a comment in relation to my colleague for Thunder Creek. You 
know as I sat and listened to him and watched a Thatcher raise the ire on the back of the necks of every 
NDP, it reminded me of another Thatcher. 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Where is he now, Cy? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I’d like to tell you, Bill, but you better . . . 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I didn’t mean it that way. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — But you said it in that way. Please don’t ask me to interpret what you say. That 
other Thatcher, one thing that he did, he believed in freedom of the individual. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to know what the previous 
Thatcher has to do with us sitting at 10:00 o’clock or 11:00 o’clock as the Motion is before us. I don’t 
think he is on the Motion at all and I wish you would draw that to his attention. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t think I require any more guidance on this Point of Order, thank you. The 
Point of Order is well taken. I have always admired the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley in being able 
to take bits and pieces that are thrown at him from across the Chamber and make a debate out of it. But 
that still doesn’t make it in order, because it comes from the Chamber. To be in order it has to be on the 
amendments before us, whether we sit at 10:00 o’clock or at 11:00 o’clock and in your case the entire 
Motion about the elongation of the hours. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, once again I will respect your judgment. May I respectfully 
suggest to you, Sir, what the whole purpose of what I am trying to do and I think it is very much related 
to the issue or the Motion. What I am really trying to say, 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1348 
 

Mr. Speaker, is that this particular Motion hits at the very core, the very substance of my beliefs and my 
opposition. And what I am trying to point out to you and Members of the House, all those reasons why 
we shouldn’t put these two additional hours into the morning sitting so that it would tire out the 
Opposition, speed up the bill, make it possible to pass it quicker. But I will try as much as I can to stay 
to it. 
 
I want to say one other thing and I hope I am germane in this, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Moose Jaw 
North said, you know the Liberal Opposition suffers because of this debate. I am going to tell you, 
gentlemen, you are wrong. The people who are suffering will be the people of Saskatchewan if you pass 
this bill, that is the people who are going to suffer. That is why it is important that we don’t turn around 
and jam this through. I don’t think that you people in the back benches have ever seen a debate in the 
House. I am sure you are confused and wondering why Members of the Opposition would stand up and 
talk and talk and debate about something, sometimes you don’t find the meaning and the sense to it. I 
am sure that you have a reason for that. I respect that question. But I am going to suggest to you if you 
look a little deeper you will understand why and that is the real motivation behind it. 
 
Let me make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that this particular Motion doesn’t really offer anything to 
adjournment of the House, to the passage of the bill, it offers nothing except another opportunity for 
another debate in which we are glad to participate. I think we have offered the Attorney General a very 
reasonable proposition today, a very reasonable proposition. As I say in most cases he does a pretty 
good job but I think he lost his cool today. His logic went out the window. His common sense went out 
the window. There is no way, after him being in this House for eight or nine years that he must know, 
that there is no way the Government can put the whip to the Opposition, no way. Because we and the 
Members, the backbenchers are going to learn this that we have the last word, we have the opportunity 
to speak and to propose amendments and to hold up the bill until we feel that the debate has been as 
extensive, that the knowledge has been as widespread as humanly possible. This is our prerogative, 
because we happen to be the Opposition and we have the opportunity to speak, because free speech is 
really here. 
 
What is this Motion trying to do? It is really trying to impose closure. It really is. I think - the Attorney 
General nods his head - and I think that is right. I think that is legitimately right. I think you 
backbenchers have learned a long time ago that democracy has one purpose and that is freedom of 
speech. I think that you know also that democracy is the opportunity of the minority to speak out and 
speak very clearly in the Legislature. I think that all of you will know soon that this is the prerogative 
that we are now exercising. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It is abuse. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, it is not a question of abuse. This Motion is the abuse, my friend for 
Athabasca (Mr. Thompson). This Motion is the abuse. Really what it does is show contempt for this 
group of people over here. But what is more important it shows contempt for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s the real issue here. You know why it shows contempt? Because it has one goal 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1349 
 

and objective to get this bill passed as quickly as possible so that public reaction will be as little as 
possible. There is no question about that. You all know it. Everybody knows it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason we are going to continue this and continue the debate with the hope - and I 
am also going to put it to you another way - we are not really standing up here just with a complete 
concept that all you people are going to vote for Bill 1 and Bill 2. We don’t want to shorten this debate 
because we are hoping that maybe, maybe this Government will recognize as it has in the past that this is 
bad legislation, and withdraw the bill. By withdrawing the bill, it won’t be a question of saving face, it 
will be a question of really doing it. I don’t know if you people are really aware when I talk about public 
reaction and time, the importance of time. As I said to my friends to the left, this is the real purpose in 
debating this legislation, not to win the vote. If we expect to win the vote there is no purpose in debating 
because we are going to lose the vote. 
 
I want to tell you what we are really saying. We want to give the opportunity to the public of 
Saskatchewan to react in honesty and with knowledge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there is beginning to be a bit of reaction. Beginning to 
be a bit of reaction. I happen to have here an ad that comes from, I believe, the Globe and Mail, all the 
way from Toronto. I should like to read it to the Members of the Government because it is an indication 
of what would happen if we had gone and followed the advice of the Conservatives, you know what 
would have happened? There never would have been this ad. There never would have been an 
opportunity for thinking people regardless of what side of the fence they are on, to sit down and express 
an opinion. There would never have been an opportunity because if we had followed the advice of the 
Conservatives we’d all be home now. The Member for Athabasca would be out skidooing, the rest of 
you would be out on the farm or wherever you would go. This Legislature would be forgotten, then you 
would pour the thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars to propaganda on the 
people of Saskatchewan. Government advertising. The first thing you know you would brainwash them, 
the people of Saskatchewan would begin to think, well, it must be a good thing. Nobody raised Cain, 
nobody expressed opposition. But because of what we are doing there is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — There is a reaction and I am going to read that reaction because I think it is 
important. It doesn’t even come from Saskatchewan. It is a group of concerned citizens in another 
province who are worried about what is going to happen to this country if we let you birds get away with 
what you are trying to do. It starts off: "The taxpayers’ money." That is a very legitimate statement. 
 

There are in fact more ways to lose money in the potash business than say a shoe factory. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1350 
 

I don’t like to bring up that shoe factory because - I do believe the Attorney General has used it a couple 
of times but I suppose it is a realistic or practical example. But I don’t like to use it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — On a Point of Order. Mr. Speaker, I think you ruled earlier today that Members were 
not to go into detail into bills, but they were in principle to argue the why or debate why we should or 
should not sit at 10:00 or 11:00 o’clock. I would like you to rule on that. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I will try to stick to it but I am trying to point out to the Members 
opposite the reason we do not want this Motion to pass is to give an opportunity for the bill and its 
implications to be widely known and discussed around Saskatchewan and Canada. I am pointing out that 
had we passed this Bill when we first came in the House, within two or three days, there would have 
been no opportunity for public reaction. If we lengthen the debate in this House another two hours a day, 
then all of a sudden we will cut off reaction from the public. 
 
I think it is important to point out that by delaying this bill, by debating this bill very hard and rigorously 
in this House we have got a reaction not only in Saskatchewan and Canada to indicate what lengthening 
the two hours of this House would do and to point out to Members what kind of reaction so that they 
will appreciate the arguments of my colleagues. I in no way want to lengthen the debate in this House 
for two hours. And I would just indicate the reaction, Mr. Speaker, and then I will get back as quickly as 
I can to the main issue of the debate. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, further to the Point of Order, I think earlier today 
you ruled that Members should not go into detail explanation . . . 
 
MR. MALONE: — He is speaking to the whole Motion. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I realize he is speaking to the whole Motion. 
 
MR. LANE: — Then what’s the problem? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I have the floor. 
 
MR. LANE: — Do something with it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — If you would shut up I would. Why don’t you take your shoe off and fill that gap, on 
second thought take both of them and fill it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think you ruled earlier today that people are to speak to the Motion before us and not to 
go into detail or extraneous matters that do not relate to the general Motion. I ask you to rule on that. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it is quite clear that any Member will have 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1351 
 

ample opportunity to extend the debate on Bill 1 and Bill 2 as much as they wish or as little as they wish 
depending upon what their views are. Extending the debate on this may be indirectly extending the 
debate on Bill 1 and Bill 2, but that is not the point of this debate. The point of this debate is the 
elongated hours. I ask the Member to relate to that closely. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I accept your ruling once again and I am speaking, I hope, to the 
elongation of the sitting hours in this Assembly. I am trying to point out the reason for my opposition. I 
listened to the Member for Moose Jaw North talk about his experience in the House of Commons, what 
he thought a filibuster was and the great purpose and motivation they had. I listened to somebody else 
talk about additional research and I think I have been more germane to the debate, Sir, with due respect, 
than most of the debate on that side of the House. I will try, I am just going to point out again the 
importance of not whistling this bill through the Legislature, because we want to get 
public reaction and public education. Surely one of the very reasons we are here, gentlemen, is for an 
opportunity to give the public the views that go on here, that is why we have the Press Gallery, that is 
why we have reporting on the Session in the Legislature, is to educate and give the public of 
Saskatchewan an opportunity to view and hear and understand and have a knowledgeable opinion of the 
laws that are passed in this House. That is a pretty serious responsibility for Members of the Legislature. 
That is one of the reasons it isn’t the normal practice of this House to commence the House at 10:00 
o’clock in the morning. That is one of the reasons for the normal practice of the House to start at 2:30 
o’clock. So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, once again I will try to read this very quickly: 
 

Why Premier Blakeney says he wants to get into the potash business. He says he has four reasons. He 
wants to regulate production but he already does this. He doesn’t need to own the companies to 
regulate production. Of course he is talking about prorationing which is regulation. 

 
He says he wants to ensure expansion of the industry. He doesn’t have to take over existing companies 
to do this. He can start his own mine or better still he can create a favorable atmosphere for potash 
companies. 

 
He says he wants to ensure the cash flow of the province. But Mr. Blakeney’s Government is already 
taking over 80 per cent of the revenue. Saskatchewan tax revenue from potash will be an estimated 
$120 million in ‘76. 

 
He says he wants more Canadians in the management. We suspect that what he really means is that he 
wants more bureaucrats in the management. Because he wanted more Canadians there are easier ways 
to do it than taking over the companies. 

 
This is rather interesting. By extending this debate, this kind of reaction in the city of Toronto. It is a 
pretty knowledgeable group of people. The National Citizens Coalition is pretty knowledgeable about 
what is going on in Saskatchewan. That is because of debate that has been extended over a period of a 
month. 
 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1352 
 

Surely no one of that side of the House - you know what we will do, you and I will see in this 
Legislature when Estimates come up a debate of ten hours on $100,000 because somebody feels quite 
strongly about it. Here we are talking about one billion dollars. Now you want to extend the sitting of 
the House two hours in order to get through it and that I think is a shame. It is a terrible shame. Mr. 
Speaker, to show you the reaction this kind of extended debate has brought from Ontario, it talks about 
Mr. Blakeney and oil: 
 

On the very same day Premier Blakeney said he was thinking of taking over the potash business he 
said that he was going to give the oil companies money for exploration and development in 
Saskatchewan. Think about that for a moment (it says). The potash people risked a lot of money, spent 
a lot of time developing the potash business, after a long time it became profitable, now the 
Government wants to take it over. 

 
In other words what they are really suggesting is that you can’t have your cake and eat it too. 
 

At the same time the Government wants the oil companies to spend a lot of time and money 
developing the petroleum business. If you owned an oil company wouldn’t you suspect that Premier 
Blakeney just wanted you to develop the industry just so the province could take it over. Would you 
be willing to invest money in Saskatchewan? 

 
This is kind of amazing that after five weeks of debate that this kind of knowledgeable reaction is 
coming from the rest of Canada. I am going to suggest to you gentlemen, by not extending this debate 
two hours, that what we are really going to do is we are going to find everybody in Saskatchewan, five 
weeks from now or two months from now, there won’t be a single person in the Province of 
Saskatchewan who is not familiar with potash. Potash will be a byword in every house. They will also 
be very knowledgeable and they will be so knowledgeable they will be able to make an intelligent 
decision in 1979, a very intelligent one and that is exactly what we are tying to do and that is why we 
don’t want to agree to extending the debate for another two hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk again a little bit about what the weapon of the Opposition is. Some of you 
seem to have a great lack of understanding of what kind of tools the Opposition has, particularly the 
back benches over there. I should like briefly to point out to you some of the equipment that is given to 
the minority in the democratic system. It is important because the minority is part of the process that 
makes democracy. If we didn’t have this minority group on this side of the House we would be living in 
a dictatorship. That is what this particular resolution seems to be leading to. So what the minority or the 
democratic process offers to the minority in the House are a few weapons. First of all the protection of 
the Speaker. I think all of us are going to say that the Speaker is gathering the respect of both sides of 
the House for his fairness and his knowledge and his understanding of the real issues of the Legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The second thing that the 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1353 
 

democratic system offers to the minority or the Opposition in the House, are the rules of the House. 
What we are really asking in this Motion is to set aside the normal rule. We are saying that that 
particular rule of starting the House at 2:30 in the afternoon is a protection for the minority or for the 
Opposition in the Legislature. No question about it. That is there for their protection. That is why in this 
province we don’t have that rule where we can go on and on and on until 1 or 2 in the morning, except 
under closure. So we do have that protection. Yet you gentlemen want to set that protection aside for 
your own narrow doctrinaire purposes, which is exactly what you are doing in this Motion. 
 
The third thing the Opposition has, the third weapon, if you want to call it that, is the opportunity to 
stand up and debate. Through the means of the debate to convince the public. As I said one may lose the 
vote but one may win the war. That is the real basic function of the Opposition. If you want to call that a 
filibuster, you go ahead, it doesn’t bother me, it doesn’t bother me at all. Because I do intend to 
filibuster. When I get on Bill 1 and Bill 2, I certainly do. There is just no way I am going to let you pass 
it if I can help it. My colleagues may pull me down, I don’t know, but I repeat what I said at the start. I 
hope in March we are still talking about potash. I hope in March the people of Saskatchewan still know 
that Bill 1 and Bill 2 are before this Legislature. I honestly think it is possible, I think it is possible. I 
think if you Members want to go home for a couple of days for a Yuletide meal, we’ll accept that. I 
think we will all agree to that. Would you fellows like Christmas dinner at home? We’ll all get 
Christmas dinner, why we could send out for Kentucky Fried. I am serious, we could go home for a 
couple of days so nobody would be deprived of the opportunity of getting home with their families and 
their friends. We could come back between Christmas and New Year’s, get home for New Year’s for a 
couple of days. Get back after and get right at it. Then I think we would get right down to the hard core 
and we will begin to see. I think that this is a very bad time to be debating this Bill. 
 
This is another reason that I want to hold it over. Everybody is so busy at the Christmas season, 
shopping, down town, businessmen making money, night shopping and so forth. People have limited 
opportunity to read the newspaper, watch television, to listen to the radio. I think it is important - is the 
bull moose going to speak, the old bull of the woods, I really hope so because I have been telling, I want 
to tell the Member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer), I’ve been telling the gang that it is delightful to 
listen to you. Not very bright but very colourful. I hope that you are going to get up and participate in 
this debate because I tell you, Mr. Member for North Battleford, I would personally be disappointed, 
because, as I say you sometimes don’t make much sense but it is always colourful and interesting. We 
would be glad to have the old auctioneer stand up and participate. In fact, I will make him the same offer 
as I made the Member for Moose Jaw North. As soon as I finish I will ask my Members to let the 
Member for North Battleford stand up and participate so that we can hear exactly what he has to say. As 
I say I will be interested in your thoughts because I think the people of the North have watched what has 
gone on in the timber industry, just as the people in Estevan and Swift Current and Shaunavon and 
Morse have seen what has gone on in the oil industry under Bill 42. Your people have seen what has 
gone on in the timber industry, therefore, I 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1354 
 

think it will be important that they make sure that they understand about potash. 
 
I really think it is important and another reason I don’t want to lengthen the sitting day is because I 
really think that any time anything is important, as is Bill 1 and Bill 2, should never pass this House 
without every Member standing up and expressing exactly what he feels. For example, I know the 
Member for Melfort (Mr. Vickar) doesn’t agree with this Bill. His whole way of life and his philosophy 
of life is against it. I know party rules and party loyalty, but I think he should get on his feet and tell the 
people of Melfort, tell them what his position is on this Bill. That is why it is absolutely vital that we 
don’t extend that sitting day for two hours. I hope the Member for Moose Jaw North gets up and talks 
about more than the 10:00 or 11:0 sittings when the potash bill gets back. That is another reason I don’t 
want to lengthen the day because I want to hear and the business community in Moose Jaw want to hear, 
exactly what the Member for Moose Jaw thinks about this takeover. 
 
I should like to hear from all the rest of them. My good friend the Member for Weyburn. He is pretty 
well respected, I think he should get up in this particular debate and express his opinion, tell his 
constituents about the reason he thinks it is important and therefore if we lengthen the sitting day, you 
will never get that opportunity. I want to see that you get that opportunity. 
 
I am thinking of the Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie). I think because he is a lawyer, he should get 
up on his feet to tell the people of Saskatchewan the legal implications of a couple of the sections of 
those Acts which give more power . . . 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — I wonder if the Hon. Member would consider a serious question in the midst of his 
serious dialogue at this particular time. I should love to ask a question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned with the length of time that we have been in the sittings up to now. But I 
am wondering and I appreciate the fact that the Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley has indicated 
that we need a lot of time to educate the public of Saskatchewan, that we need a lot of time to express 
our opinions and I am more than willing and I want to have that extra time myself to again express my 
opinion in so far as this certain legislation that is before this House. I am wondering whether or not 
because of the fact that every minute, every hour, every day, is very, very necessary for us to express our 
opinions in so far as certain legislation is concerned, whether or not the Hon. Member possibly wouldn’t 
agree with me that if, in fact, that is true, and I am sure he agrees with me, is that not true - he nods his 
head in agreement - then I would ask him that if that is true and if he agrees with me then why wouldn’t 
we need the extra time for very limitedly asking for at this time in order that we can make our views 
known and also that those Hon. Members on that side of the House can make their views known so that 
the public of Saskatchewan can become fully familiar with what this important legislation that he refers 
to is all about? Because there is other legislation too that I am concerned about. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — There aren’t any of you 



 
December 18, 1975 

 

1355 
 

who have enough guts to stand up and talk about Bill 1 and Bill 2. The Minister of the Saskatchewan 
Potash Corporation (Mr. Cowley), can you imagine in this House, the Minister who is responsible for 
the Potash Corporation, $1 billion, doesn’t have enough courage to stand up in the House and he has to 
get a colleague to get the bill through. 
 
The Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) in this House who will be responsible for the repayment of $1 
billion doesn’t have enough guts to stand up and talk. And you tell me to extend the time so that you can 
stand up and express your opinion. I want you to look, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North, look at this 
Order Paper. There is nothing on there from Government Members except the odd thing, it is all 
Opposition. You backbenchers are a bunch of sheep. You don’t ask any questions, you don’t express 
any independence, you don’t represent your constituencies. You don’t represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. All you are is a bunch of sheep who do what the Attorney General tells you to do. That is 
why. You tell me to stand up here and extend the length of debate. We will be here in February talking 
about potash and I will tell you something and I hope you are right and that is that the Minister 
responsible for the potash corporation will have the courage to get on his feet and talk about it. The 
Minister of Finance, can you imagine any bill as important as a billion dollar takeover and the Premier 
of Saskatchewan has not entered the debate? Can you imagine that? I will guarantee you that there isn’t 
a bill that is passed by any Legislature in the Dominion of Canada, even in the House of Commons that 
debate has gone on as long as this without the Premier or the Prime Minister entering the debate and 
explaining to the citizens of the province or of Canada exactly what is going on and what is the thinking 
of the Government. 
 
I want to tell the Member for Moose Jaw North - just a minute, I would love to have you ask another 
question, I am enjoying this. Just sit down, when I sit down you can ask another question. I am going to 
tell him that if you want to demonstrate to the people of Saskatchewan that you have some ability, some 
ideas, some view, that you have got a capable back bench, that you are not a bunch of sheep, then don’t 
vote for this Motion. See that this debate carries on so that your people will know where you stand. Did 
you say you wanted another question? 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Yes, if I may, I would be only too pleased. We may as well prolong the agony 
because it is going to go to 9:30 anyway. I should like to ask the Hon. Member if I may, that if in fact he 
has read the routine proceedings and realized the number of individual resolutions that have gone on the 
Order Paper by individual Members and how many Members have put those on? Also I’d like to ask the 
Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, if he wouldn’t agree with me that this is a deliberate, 
deliberate attempt at blackmailing this House and the public of Saskatchewan into not knowing what’s 
going on because your people are not prepared to put the facts on the table because you haven’t got 
them? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I want to tell the Member for Moose Jaw North that he really hit the nail on the 
head. We haven’t got the facts 



 
December 18, 1975 
 

1356 
 

nor have the people of Saskatchewan got the facts. This Government is running around and asking the 
people of Saskatchewan to take a $1 billion debt on their shoulders without telling them where they are 
getting the money, they are not telling them how much it is going to cost, they are not telling them about 
the interest, they are not telling them, for example, even how much they are making from the potash 
industry this year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If the Members would sit down. I’ve been very courteous to you and on 
Monday when I stand up again I should love to have another question but I should like to finish 
responding to your last question. 
 
I am going to tell you something, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North, that you have finally hit upon one 
of the real basic issues of this debate, the lack of facts, the lack of knowledge, the reason the Premier 
hadn’t spoken, the reason the Minister in charge of the potash corporation hasn’t spoken, the reason the 
Minister of Finance hasn’t spoken, the reason the Attorney General is pushing this bill through, because 
you don’t want them to know the facts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sit down. 
 
MR. G. McNEILL (Meadow Lake): — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, this has gone far enough. 
He hasn’t spoken one time on what’s happening about 10:00 or 11:00 o’clock. He has mentioned the 
fact that we are not representing our constituencies, I want to point out that the first time Meadow Lake 
has been represented in 11 years is since I . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think you get to a point in a debate where even a person of my patience loses his 
patience and loses the ability to hang on and keep the debate in order. I used to have an old friend that 
sat in this Legislature by the name of Toby Nollet and he used to say, "You might as well let the tail go 
with the hide." I think the rules have gone out the window in the last while and I think the questions 
have been out of order and the answers have been out of order. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — All I want to say is that I was merely responding to questions as you know and 
if the questions led to the answers I am sorry for the Member for Meadow Lake. I do apologize for him, 
if you would tell your colleague not to ask such idiotic questions I wouldn’t have to get in that position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to call it 9:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


