
























































Hansard: March 26, 1975


1312 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

26th Day 
 

Wednesday, March 26, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. D. F. MacDONALD: (Moose Jaw North) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce and to welcome 
to this Assembly 66 Grade Eight students from King George School in Moose Jaw. They are here with 
their teachers, Mrs. Delaysac, Mr. Murray and Mr. Segal. I think they are very brave to have come out 
on such a stormy day. I am disappointed that Regina didn't give them a little better welcome as far as 
weather is concerned. 
 
They have had a tour of the building and I am going to meet with them about 3 o'clock or shortly 
afterwards, and I shall be very pleased to answer any questions that they may have for me at that time. I 
should also like to wish them a safe journey home on this very stormy day. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse) Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity as well to introduce to you 
and through you to the Members of this Assembly approximately 40 Grade Twelve students from the 
town of Herbert. It is extremely gratifying for me to introduce these students as the Herbert High School 
is the school in which I obtained my high school education. 
 
They are accompanied today by their Grade Twelve teacher, Mr. Larry McCoriston and their bus driver, 
Mr. Albert Voth. I got it in this time, Albert, last time when you were down I forgot to introduce you. I 
am looking forward to meeting with the students later on this afternoon and will appreciate talking to 
them at that time. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS:(Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the 
Members of the Assembly a group of students from St. Joseph School in Saskatoon. They are 38 in 
number and I believe they are Grade Six and Seven students, accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Exner 
and - I am not sure I can pronounce this name correctly I think it is Miss Kanesal. I understand that they 
started out from Saskatoon and had some idea of turning back but they braved the weather and made it. 
 
I hope they enjoy their tour of the Legislature and I will be available to talk to them about 3 o'clock and 
answer any questions they may have with respect to the Assembly. I hope the Members will join with 
me in wishing them welcome and also hope they have a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1313 
 

MR. A. THIBAULT: (Melfort-Kinistino) Mr. Speaker, I have a group of students that have not arrived 
yet and I will be asking leave later on to introduce them. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY: (Last Mountain) Mr. Speaker, I draw to the attention of the Member for 
Morse, that accompanying the students from Herbert is the former president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation, now the principal of the Herbert School, Mr. Klippenstein. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Mr. Speaker, just to add to the Minister of Education . . . 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: . . . it was my understanding that Mr. Klippenstein was accompanying them but I couldn't 
see him up there, possibly I need my glasses changed. I might point out as well that one of the first 
schools that Mr. Klippenstein taught in was the Herbert High School and I had the good fortune of being 
one of Mr. Klippenstein's first students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

COST ESTIMATE OF POLITICAL PAMPHLET - MISS JAN DEWAR 
 
MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish to direct a question to 
the Minister responsible for Social Services and the Minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Are you aware of allegations made by one Mr. Glen Knight that a public servant was required to do a 
cost estimate for your New Democratic Party partisan political pamphlet and that person was one Jan 
Dewar. And are you aware that her most recent employer prior to employment with the Government was 
one Wylie Simmonds of the NDP Ad Agency, J.A.C. Struthers? Is the Minister aware of that allegation? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: No. 
 
MR. LANE: Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to table the application for employment of one Janet Dewar, 
which indicates that her last employer prior to being hired by the Government, the application dated 
January 20, 1975, was one Wylie Simmonds, defeated NDP candidate, shareholder and major push 
behind J.A.C. Struthers, the NDP Ad Agency. As a supplementary question is the Minister responsible 
for the Public Service Commission and the Department of Social Services prepared to table all memos, 
instructions, that he has given to his executive assistant or that were given by his executive assistant to 
one Mr. Ian Potter and to one Mr. Glen Knight with regard to the hiring of Miss Jan Dewar? 
 



 
March 26, 1975 
 

1314 
 

HON. A. TAYLOR (Minister of Social Services) Mr. Speaker, I am certainly not prepared to table 
instructions from myself to my executive assistants. I have assured the Member and I will assure him 
again, I did not hire or fire the particular person whom he refers to. I have not seen the application form. 
It may well be as he says but I have no knowledge of it. 
 

HANDLING OF ADVERTISING FOR DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question I 
should like to direct to the Minister of Social Services as well. Perhaps before getting to the question the 
Minister could give me some indication if he is prepared to table the documents I asked for yesterday, I 
believe he said he was going to take it under advisement. 
 
My question this time, Mr. Speaker, is that to me one of the most serious allegations in this whole 
Knight business is that the Struthers Agency in effect controls the advertising of the Department of 
Social Services. That is that Mr. Struthers allegedly saw the ad about the Family Income Program, 
phoned Mr. Hinds of the Government Information Service and then the ad was finally placed with 
Struthers. My question to the Minister is, who handles the advertising for the Department of Social 
Services? Does Mr. Struthers' firm have exclusive rights to do this? If somebody else does it, do they 
have the power then to phone Mr. Hinds and ask that that power be taken away and given to Struthers? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: Mr. Speaker, at the present time Struthers is the agency our Department is using. Any 
advertising we do being placed through an agency would be placed through Struthers at this time 
 
MR. MALONE I wonder, are you prepared to answer the other part of the question about the 
documents I asked for yesterday? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: Mr. Speaker, the Member asked yesterday if I would table memos between myself and 
Mr. Glen Knight. I have asked my staff to check, there have been no memos between myself and Mr. 
Knight. I have communicated at times with my Deputy Minister. He communicates normally with the 
other civil servants but there are no memos, in fact I would have assumed if there had been that the 
Member for Lumsden would have them, because it is reported that he has the files. 
 
MR. MALONE: May I ask a supplementary? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: You have already asked a supplementary. 
 
MR. MALONE: I didn't ask a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, when I rose the second time I just asked the 
Minister if he was prepared to answer the question of yesterday which I asked in my first question. I 
didn't ask a supplementary. 
 
In view of your comments about J.A. Struthers being your 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1315 
 

credit agency for the Department of Social Services and in view of the comments that have been made 
by Mr. Knight . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: You must just ask your question in a supplementary. 
 
MR. MALONE: Mr. Speaker, surely I am entitled to a short preface, I don't think I have ever abused 
the privilege of a preface before. Well, would the Minister, in view of his statements and in view of the 
statements of Mr. Knight and in view of Mr. Hinds involvement, table in the Legislature the agreement 
between the Department and Mr. Struthers and any written communications between the Department 
and Mr. Struthers, the Department and Mr. Hinds and Mr. Hinds and Mr. Struthers' company about the 
Family Income Plan ad. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: Mr. Speaker, there is so much involved there, I am just not sure. I can only suggest that 
the Member put that on the Order Paper and we will look at it. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

CHAMPION BULL AWARD 
 
MR. M. KWASNICA: (Cut Knife) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to bring to 
the attention of all Hon. Members, that 'T.J.H. Standard', owned by Mr. John Sidoryk of Lloydminster 
has won the Grand Champion Bull Award at the 70th annual Regina Bull Sale last night. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KWASNICA: 'T.J.H. Standard' was grand champion in the Horned Hereford section of the Regina 
show considered as the world's largest show of purebred bulls. Mr. Sidoryk, who is a well known farmer 
east of Lloydminster, also won the first prize in the pair of bulls class as well. 
 
I want to congratulate Mr. Sidoryk on behalf of all Members of the Legislature and wish him continued 
success in the future. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE - CLARE POWELL 
 
MR. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question of the Premier. I should like 
to ask the Premier if Mr. Clare Powell is on leave of absence and if so the date that the leave started, the 
extent of time, the duration of the leave, the reason given for asking for leave of absence and who is the 
replacement? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Premier) The answer is, yes, he is on leave of absence. The date on which 
he went on leave of absence I do not recall but it would be about the first of the year. I do not know what 
reasons were given but undoubtedly it will be personal reasons since that seems to be the favorite 
phrase. With respect to the 



 
March 26, 1975 
 

1316 
 

period, I believe the leave was indefinite and I do not know when it will terminate. The person who is 
acting as his replacement now is Mr. Lowell Monkhouse. I am not sure whether he is a replacement in 
the sense that he bears the same title, but Mr. Powell left the staff and Mr. Monkhouse came on staff. 
The duties are slightly varied but essentially Mr. Monkhouse is doing those duties. 
 
MR. GUY: Just a supplementary question. Since he doesn't know why he went on leave, I might say 
that he is working on the publicity committee for the NDP for the province. And I also notice that Mr. 
Lowell Monkhouse is also on that same committee. I would ask the Premier if he has requested leave of 
absence to work on that committee which also has Mr. Struthers on that particular NDP committee? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: He has not so far as I am aware, if indeed Mr. Monkhouse is on that committee. I 
have no reason either to confirm or deny that. I have no reason to believe that the work of the committee 
is being carried on during office hours and what he has done outside office hours is I am sure neither the 
concern of the Member for Athabasca nor the concern of the Member for Regina Centre. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT: (Melfort-Kinistino) Mr. Speaker, if you don't mind, may I have leave to introduce 
a fine group of students from Prudhomme. They braved the weather this morning to get to Regina and 
make a tour of the city. It is one of the few tours that they have made. They are here, 38 in number, and 
are led here by their school bus driver, Mr. Julius Hryniuk and their school teachers, Mr. Klassen and 
Mrs. Sandra Bodnar. 
 
I know that the House will join with me to wish them welcome. I also want to point out that it is one of 
the few bilingual schools in the province that is visiting here today and I want to congratulate them for 
that. Being that it is a bilingual school I just want to wish them bon voyage. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY: (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, as the present MLA for Prudhomme I want to join the 
future MLA in welcoming the students and adults from Prudhomme school. I want to mention that 
Prudhomme is very rich in things cultural, primarily French and Ukrainian and, of course, others. I know 
it is a bad day so I am hoping that you will have a good time in the Legislature here and at various other 
places you visit. Have a good journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PROCEDURE FOR APPLYING FOR LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 
MR. T. WEATHERALD: (Cannington)Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Minister in 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1317 
 

charge of the Public Service Commission, what is the procedure when a person applies for a leave of 
absence. Are they required to give the reason for requesting the leave of absence? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: Yes. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: Would the Minister be prepared to report to this House tomorrow the number 
of people who have asked for leave of absence, the reasons being for political purposes or for personal 
reasons? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: The answer to that, is no. There is no way I can get it in time for tomorrow. In times 
past the Opposition have put a question on the Order Paper. It has been answered and we would be glad 
to do that. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: Mr. Speaker, on the Order Paper may be you would answer . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: We have had . . . 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: I think if the Minister, we will even give him until next week to tell us how 
many have asked for leave of absence. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: If the Hon. Member is prepared to give his answer next week you can place it as a 
written question on the Order Paper. 
 
MR. WEATHERALD: We want to see . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Well, put your question on the Order Paper then. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of 
Agriculture) that Bill No. 27 – An Act respecting the Stabilization of Returns from the Production 
of Agricultural Commodities - be now read a second time. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse) Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, I believe, requires a 
considerable amount of study, especially, Mr. Speaker, in light of the Provincial-Federal Conference 
which will be coming up shortly. I wish the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) would get up on his 
feet and make a speech in this House. It seems the only speech that he gave was when he announced the 
new highway program for 1975 and that was so poor I can't blame him for being a bit shy at trying to 
speak again. I think, Mr. Minister of Highways, that if you have something to say all Members of this 
House will be very pleased to hear you say it in the customary fashion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: This Bill, Mr. Speaker, according to the perusal 



 
March 26, 1975 
 

1318 
 

that we have made, is a Bill somewhat similar to The Natural Products Marketing Act in terms that it is 
very severe and strict. Stipulations and regulations can be made by the Minister of Agriculture in terms 
of the licensing, the assessment of fees and the operation of this particular Bill affecting the 
Saskatchewan farmer. I would for that reason beg leave at this time to request further time to study this 
Bill and ask leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. G. MacMurchy 
(Minister of Education) that Bill NO. 35 - An Act to amend The School Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few comments on this Bill. I 
am going to support the Bill and the only area I do want to comment on is where it gives the power to 
establish a joint board for the operation of facilities between the school and the community or any other 
association. I think that this is a natural evolution that has occurred out of the Lighted School House 
grant. It is only a very few years ago that one of the great difficulties in rural Saskatchewan particularly 
was that the largest complex in the community, the school and the school facilities was practically run 
and dominated by the school board with very little opportunity for citizens of the community or young 
people to use that facility after school hours had been completed or the school day had been completed. 
'There has been a gradual evolution, there have been agreements now between the community and 
recreation boards to use that facility at night. 
 
But one of the difficulties is that a lot of communities which are willing to make a contribution toward a 
hall or a rink or a swimming pool and if they can work in co-operation with the school board, there will 
be a real advantage for the community. This particular amendment now makes it possible for a joint 
board to operate it and I would suppose, make a financial contribution if I'm not correct on both things. 
 
I also know that there are many communities in the province now in the process of building a 
hall-gymnasium, which is done I both by the school board and the community. Now this does give them 
the power that they can jointly operate it and jointly run it as well as jointly finance it. I think therefore, 
that this is a good amendment and I'm certainly going to support it and it's long overdue. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Kowalchuk that 
Bill No. 33 - An Act to amend The Provincial Parks, Protected Areas, Recreation Sites and 
Antiquities Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) You know, this is not a very large Act, less than a 
page and a half, but it fits in to one of the complaints that we've had since this Government first came to 
power. One of the complaints that a growing number of people in this province have about this 
Government, an uneasiness is growing across this province, and that is the power grab the NDP 
Government, the 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1319 
 

power they are giving to themselves and the power they are giving to the people they employ. 
 
In this Bill, in this very short, innocent appearing Bill, what are they doing? They are saying they are 
going to give, first to duly appointed and hired law enforcement officers, more power within our 
provincial parks, than they have outside our provincial parks. I think that's wrong in itself. 
 
There are problems within our provincial parks, problems of law enforcement and I'm sure there are, just 
as there are problems of law enforcement outside our provincial parks. We don't see any move in our 
society and I think if we did it should be resisted, to give even more power to our policemen. In fact, 
right now there is a strong feeling in many quarters of our society that maybe we've given too much 
power to policemen in this province and this nation. 
 
But here we have a move by this Government to give them even more power. What happens to an 
individual when he goes inside a provincial park? Suddenly, if we pass this Act, a mounted policeman or 
a law enforcement officer can approach people without a warrant, can seize their trailer, he can seize 
their boat, he can search them without a warrant. Well, read the Act. The Minister of Highways (Mr. 
Kramer) shakes his head and ' laughs. Read the Act. That's exactly what it says. For your benefit I'll read 
it. You're asking this Legislature to give more power to policemen inside a provincial park, than we give 
them outside the provincial park. We're talking about giving them more power to combat what? 
Pollution. Of course, pollution is a serious problem, but to combat pollution as we do to combat the 
spread of drugs, for example? We don't give our RCM Police the kind of power you're giving them in 
here. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: We certainly do. 
 
MR. STEUART: Well you certainly don't. And then on top of that, search without warrant, seize 
without warrant. Let's take a look at what else they are doing in this Act. They are also going to give 
some of these powers to people who aren't even policemen. They are going to give these same wide 
powers to people who are not trained as policemen, who haven't got the responsibility of policemen. To 
whom are these people responsible? They will be responsible to the Minister of Renewable Resources 
(Mr. Kowalchuk). Again a Minister of the Crown is being handed unbelievable powers by the NDP 
Government. 
 
Simply because people are within a provincial park, they are going to be stripped of their rights that they 
have outside the provincial park. Not just at the hands of duly appointed police officers, but at the hands 
of park authorities. People with little or no training in police work and people who are not responsible to 
the public at large through the RCMP or police commissions, the people who are responsible only to the 
Minister of Renewable Resources, and without any training, that I'm aware of. No suggestion that they 
are going to have special police training. Even if they had, it's far too much power to give them. 
 
I don't think there are any excuses where the Minister can stand up or his officials and say well, we're 
having some problems inside our provincial parks, will do. I'm sure you are. 
 



 
March 26, 1975 
 

1320 
 

But this is not reason enough to strip people of their civil rights because they happen to wander inside 
one of our provincial parks. I think this Bill should be referred to a committee at the very least. I think it 
should be referred to a committee and allow people to make representation, allow the public to take a 
second look at it. We met with representatives of the Saskatchewan Association on Human Rights at 
noon today. 
 
Now they are talking about powers given to policemen, in this province and outside this province. Yet 
here at the same time that these people are rightfully concerned about what's happening to law 
enforcement in this country and to the rights of citizens as a result, this Legislature, very quietly and no 
one speaks on that side of the House, passes the Bill. We're prepared to do this without even giving the 
public time tot a second look at it I would think the very least that this Government would do, would be 
to refer this to a committee, let the public be heard. Then after representations have been made, if the 
Government after serious second thoughts still feels that they need to give these wide sweeping powers 
to employees of the Government inside our provincial parks, to combat something that in the whole 
scheme of law enforcement is relatively a simple matter, not nearly as serious as other crimes where we 
don't arm even our police, our trained police, with this kind of authority, if they still feel that way, then 
I'm sure they'll pass the Bill. 
 
But I sincerely believe that you're rushing this thing through. I think you've received some advice from 
your civil servants that they need this kind of power and this is the kind of advice you tend to get from 
some of the people in the civil service, we need this kind of power. I can well remember bringing a Bill 
in when I was Minister of Natural Resources. They were having trouble with people doing night hunting 
and so they wanted to pass a bill and the now Attorney General and maybe the present Premier, as 
Leader of the Opposition, but I remember the now Attorney General in the Opposition got up and he 
was horrified. 
 
Our officials, the same officials that are advising, I'm sure, the Minister of Renewable Resources that 
they need this kind of power advised me and we brought the Bill in that if they found anybody with a 
gun or a flashlight, that could be taken as evidence that they were doing night hunting, they could be 
charged. The Opposition, I remember, joined by Members on the Government side of the House at that 
time, resisted this and we took it out and I think they were right. I think Members on that side as well as 
Members on this side should take a look at this and they should resist it. I think all too quickly we tend 
to legislate away the rights of our people because we see a problem. I'm not doubting that there are 
people turned loose in our parks and maybe the police don't go in there regularly enough and that our 
park officials feel from time to time they should be armed with more power, more jurisdiction than they 
have to stop sometimes hoodlums, sometimes people polluting and littering and so on. 
 
But to hand these kinds of powers, for that reason, I think that we are taking a sledge-hammer to kill a 
fly. I think we are over-reacting and I would seriously ask the Government to refer this to a committee to 
take another look at it before they proceed with it. I think we are making a mistake here. I think our 
freedom and our independence in this country and in this 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1321 
 

province is continually being eroded because bureaucrats tend to see problems and because they have 
problems they want to be given almost unlimited power to solve those problems in their own way. We 
the elected people tend to forget the people we are elected to represent and that their rights must be 
considered along with the needs and the rights of the people who are working in our park system. I am 
convinced this is far too much power, this is an unnecessary Bill. I would hope the Government would 
withdraw it and if they wouldn't do that, I would hope that when the minister rises to close debate he 
would ask us to refer it to a committee and allow the public to be heard and let us all take a second look 
at this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, just a word or two about this Bill. First of all 
let me say that I don't share the degree of anxiety that the Leader of the Opposition and some of the 
Members opposite do about the powers with respect to this Bill. 
 
Quite clearly the Bill does seek to increase the level of power or the level of activity of both the tourism 
people in the department and of the RCMP. Let me give you an example. Section 21 says all officers of 
the department may do such and such a thing. This is modified, however, later on in Clause 4 of the 
printed Bill to limiting it, saying that Section 21 for the purposes of this Act shall mean only a park 
superintendent and a conservation officer. 
 
Now I would suggest, respectfully, to the House that both of those types of individuals are people with 
seniority with maturity, and above all with a high degree of responsibility both to their department and 
to the public. So that it isn't a blanket type of authority which has been given to all of the officers of the 
department. It is not the type of thing that some Members might suggest. Namely department officials 
running amok, using the authority which is given to them. It is in fact very narrowly circumscribed. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the powers of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Again, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to say that I have a high degree of confidence in the activities of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. I 
do not say that they are incapable of error or that they are incapable of acting over zealously, thereby 
transgressing on the human rights of any individual. Yes they are, because after all they are human 
beings like all of us. But nevertheless we are dealing here with highly trained individuals of probably the 
finest force in this country and probably if not only the finest in the country, one of the best throughout 
the entire world. So there is a degree of control in whom we vest the power, the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police. But over and above that his powers are limited to sub-clauses A, B, C and D of the Act 
only. An authorized person can move in with these powers of arrest only pertaining to those offences, A, 
B, C and D, and you can refer back to the Act, where these are the limited offences such as the 
rowdyism in the park and others relating to the park. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that under 21 (B) of the Bill, again the key words are that the RCMP 
officer must have, and I quote "Reasonable grounds for believing an offence". Now reasonable grounds 
for suspecting the commission 



 
March 26, 1975 
 

1322 
 

of an offence has a judicial interpretation. If an RCMP officer exercising the powers of seizure or any of 
the powers under the Act, does so without reasonable grounds, this is a comment which the judges know 
how to interpret. This is a very definite circumscribing power. 
 
For example, under the impaired driving sections a police officer can without any specific authority (I'll 
come back to that in a moment) stop a car and ask the operator to conduct certain tests or make some 
arrests, subject to the one qualification, reasonable grounds, the reasonable grounds. The courts have 
interpreted the reasonable grounds in that class of drinking and driving offences in a way such as to 
circumscribe the powers of the individuals involved. So the point that I want to make is that I am as 
concerned as the Leader of the Opposition, the Premier, the Members of the Government, about the 
question of abuse of police power or the abuse of administrative powers. This is why we've established 
the Ombudsman. This is why we've established the Human Rights Commission. These are all checks 
against government and agencies of government. That's why we take some criticism sometimes and 
embarrassments for things, which are checks against the abuse. 
 
Having said that, I say that this Bill does in fact carefully circumscribe those questions which are the 
anxieties that the people opposite raise, and I say legitimately raise. I'm not imputing bad motives on 
their part. 
 
What are we trying to deal with here? The Minister has explained this in his opening remarks. I'm not 
the Minister in charge of the department, but I don't think that there is a Member in this House who has 
toured a provincial park who would disagree with the Minister of Tourism about the increasing incidents 
of vandalism and rowdyism, upon which, with reasonable grounds a police officer may act quickly. 
What is he going to do if there is a party in the middle of a park at 2 o'clock in the morning and there is a 
disturbance or some other degree of vandalism going on? What do you expect the police officer to do? 
Do you expect him to go all the way, 15 miles or 20 miles into town and get a Justice of the Peace or a 
Magistrate and get a warrant for the arrest? Well, by that time everybody clears out. That's precisely the 
type of difficulty which we are advised by the officials of the Department of Tourism and Renewable. 
Resources has been the action in the provincial parks areas. 
 
Now we have to protect the rights of individuals. I think our record is good on that one. But let's not get 
ourselves to the point where we're protecting the rights to such a degree with a vast majority of our 
people who are law abiding and using our provincial parks, as responsible citizens, have their rights and 
privileges disturbed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's the view that I take of this Bill. I'm not firm in that view, I mean I'm subject to 
any other representations that may come about and I'm sure the Minister of Tourism is the same. We get 
advice from officials as the Leader of the Opposition has rightly pointed out. Now I don't share the 
Leader of the Opposition's concern . However, I acknowledge that he has raised some points and I'd like 
to have an opportunity, very sincerely I say this, to consider further aspects of this and his comments. 
 
MR. STEUART: Read the Bill. 
 



 
March 26, 1975 

 

1323 
 

MR. ROMANOW: I've read the Bill carefully and I want to tell the Member opposite that I've read the 
Bill carefully, very carefully indeed and I say that the powers here are no more oppressive than any of 
the powers that were given by the former government under some circumstances. All right, I'm not 
trying to paint out what you did and what we did, but that is a simple fact of the matter. All right, if there 
is too much power and it it's not warranted for the situation, let's take a look at this. You've made some 
suggestions to us about a committee and the like. I want time to consider that suggestion and 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:46 o'clock p.m. 
 


