
























































Hansard: March 21, 1975


 
 

1152 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

23rd Day 
 

Friday, March 21, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. F. MEAKES: (Touchwood) Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to introduce to 
this House, through you, Sir, 30 Grade Twelve students from the Kelliher High School, led by their 
teacher, Mr. Ohly. I believe they were touring the city this morning and they are here for a short 
while. I hope that their stay here is enjoyable and educational and I hope to meet with them as soon 
as they leave the Chamber. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear' 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT: (Melfort-Kinistino) Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the House and you, Mr. 
Speaker, to join with me in welcoming a fine group of students from the Kinistino High School. 
There are 31 of them in the gallery. They are led here by their teachers, Mrs. Pat Coates, Mrs. 
Louise MacFarlane and their bus driver, Bob Stevenson. They are all Grade Twelve students. They 
left this morning at 6: 30, had a long trip and they are touring the city of Regina which will be very 
educational this afternoon I am sure they are going to get some impression of the Legislature. I also 
want to wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.K. COMER: (Nipawin) It pleases me to introduce to you and through you to Members of 
the Legislature, a group of 35 students from L.P. Miller Comprehensive High School in Nipawin, 
seated in the Speaker's Gallery. L.P. Miller is a fine school serving Nipawin, White Fox and Carrot 
River. They are accompanied here by their teacher, Larry Herman and their bus driver, Mr. Lloyd 
Hornseth. These students left Nipawin at 6:30 this morning and have so far visited the Museum of 
Natural History and after leaving the building this afternoon they will visit the RCMP Museum. 
 
I am sure that all Members will want to join with me in welcoming this fine group to Regina and in 
hoping their stay here will be educational (I am sure all Members will co-operate to make it 
educational) and in wishing them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. I.W. CARLSON: (Yorkton) Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to introduce a 
group of students from the Calder School. There are some 22 of them seated in the west gallery. The 
town of Calder is in the new Pelly constituency and on behalf of the Member for Pelly, who is 
unable to be here, I am making this introduction. I should like to say, however, that Calder is part of 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1153 
 

the old Yorkton constituency which I have represented for this past almost four years. 
 
The students are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Roe, their bus driver, Mr. Rohatensky and his 
wife and Mrs. Melnick. I would like to ask all Members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming this group of students to the Assembly today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

REMOVAL OF THE ESTATE TAX 
 
MR. E.F. GARDNER: (Moosomin) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to ask 
a question of the Minister of Finance. There have been Press reports lately of statements by Premier 
Barrett of British Columbia that he is considering the removal of the estate tax in B.C. because he is 
losing capital to Alberta. If this happens, of course, it would be even more disastrous for 
Saskatchewan because we have people who tend to retire to British Columbia. Would the Minister 
then consider removal of the estate tax completely in Saskatchewan in view of this? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. ROBBINS: I think we are not necessarily governed by the actions of Premier Barrett in 
B.C. We gave consideration in terms of the estate tax and we have made adjustments for the current 
year. 
 
MR. GARDNER: Well, just a supplementary. The Minister I don't believe did answer the question. 
I am wondering if B.C. does act in this regard then I am sure everyone would realize the disaster it 
would be for this province in losing capital. If British Columbia does that would the Minister 
immediately remove the estate tax in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: It's not the prerogative of the Minister to erase any tax. It must be considered by 
the Government and that will be done in due course. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Robbins that 
this Assembly do now resolve itself in to the Committee of Finance and the proposed amendment 
thereto by Mr. Malone. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: (Morse) Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, it is again with a great deal 
of misgivings that we on the Opposition side of the House find that the Minister of Highways (Mr. 
Kramer) has again shown contempt for the Members of the Legislative Assembly. This is the third 
year in a row that the Members on this side of the House have not been provided with a highway 
capital construction outline or program for 1975. 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1154 
 

Last year, the same as this year, and as we've seen from this side of the House, Members on the 
Government side of the House have copies of that highway program. Copies of that highway 
program were in the hands of Government Members about two days prior to the Minister of 
Highway's speech in the House last night. As it happened last year, I the Opposition critic for the 
Department of Highways, had to go up and ask the Press for a copy of that highway program. This 
year I had to ask the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly for a copy of that highway program. We 
have now sat in the House for two days since his remarkable speech - I guess it was last night wasn't 
it - and we have yet to see a copy of that highway program. Yesterday evening after the Minister had 
completed his remarks, I asked one of the pages to go over and ask if it would be possible for the 
Minister of Highways to furnish the Opposition critic for highways with a copy of that report, and 
he flatly said, no. Now, I wonder why this is happening? Is it because the Minister again is 
demonstrating his views and his reasonings for playing politics with highways in this province? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: (Milestone) He's ashamed of it. 
 
MR. WIEBE: I think that's the answer, I think the answer that the Member for Milestone has 
mentioned is that the Minister is ashamed of that program. It's a wonder they even gave it to the 
Press. He admitted last night in his remarks that he didn't feel the highway program for 1975 was 
very good and he doubted whether that highway program would be completed. Unfortunately we are 
going to have to wait again until we see the Highway program in the Press before we know what 
highways will be looked after this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I go into my formal remarks on the Budget, I must make a comment on remarks 
made by the Premier of this province in which he called a senior Member of the Federal 
Government, Mr. Otto Lang, a liar. He charged, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Government and Otto 
Lang were determined to abolish the Crow's Nest freight rates in this province. This kind of 
accusation and misrepresentation can be expected from the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) 
and from the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), but surely not, Mr. Speaker, from a man who draws 
respectability and honesty as Premier of this great province. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the statements 
made by the Premier are unfortunate and I am sure that if he continues with this type of political 
game that it will not take very long and he will lose the rest of what little credibility he has left. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Since last fall, Mr. Speaker we have had a lot of discussion on the retention and the 
abolition of the Crow's Nest rates. Mr. Speaker, because of that discussion I don't think that you can 
find anyone in the Province of Saskatchewan that is in favor of the abolition of those Crow's Nest 
rates. The NDP seem to think that it might be a good idea because they might be able to gain 
something politically from it. Last week, Mr. Speaker, speaking at the RM Convention in Saskatoon 
in front of 1700 farmers, Mr. Otto Lang, the Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, 
responded to the wishes of the people of this province. At that meeting the Minister of Justice 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1155 
 

categorically stated that the farmers need not worry, that the Crow's Nest rates agreement will not be 
abolished. Mr. Speaker, this is something difficult for Members on that side of the House to 
understand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Here is a man who threw something out for discussion. Here is a man who listens to 
the people of this province. Here is a man who is still in touch with the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, for the last two and one half to three years have not been in touch 
with the people of Saskatchewan. If they had been in touch they would have brought down a Budget 
much different than the one which we are debating ' today. 
 
I welcome the Members opposite to tear up and down this country and say that the Federal 
Government and Otto Lang want to do away with the Crow's Nest rates. Because if they do, it ill 
ruin any little credibility that the Members opposite have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my speech is about 25 minutes, Mr. Attorney General I have got only 15 minutes air 
time so I think I will start on it now. Or have you got something else I could talk about. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: The Hog Marketing Commission. 
 
MR. WIEBE: Yes, the Hog Marketing Commission, that's an idea, maybe we should make a few 
comments on that. I am sorry to see that the Minister of Agriculture is not in his seat today, because 
one of the questions which I should like to have asked him, is a question regarding Saskatchewan 
agricultural pamphlets, which were sent out to each and every farmer throughout the province. You 
know the first two issues that went out were extremely good issues because they actually did tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what was going on within the Department of Agriculture and I think that 
was the main intent of those pamphlets. But the last one, Mr. Speaker, that they sent out is nothing 
but blatant, political partisanship. Garbage, Mr. Speaker, and it was sent out at the taxpayers' 
expense. The question I was wanting to ask the Minister of Agriculture, whether this particular issue 
was paid for by the people of the province or whether it was paid for by the NDP? Because this 
pamphlet is strictly a pamphlet on behalf of the Saskatchewan NDP and nothing else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the past few weeks my colleagues have dealt with many aspects of the Budget. 
Instead of generalizing I should like to deal for a few moments specifically with the Department of 
Highways and in turn, transportation. One only has to look at the condition of our highway system 
and this Government's 1975 construction program to realize that something is wrong in 
Saskatchewan. In the history of Saskatchewan our provincial highway system has never deteriorated 
more than it has during the past four years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1156 
 

MR. WIEBE: Everywhere you travel in this great province the results are the same: poor 
maintenance, slow construction. The past three years and this 1975 Budget definitely proves that 
point. The NDP hold our provincial highway system in very low priority. The 1975 highway 
program presented last night by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) holds very little 
encouragement for the people of Saskatchewan. He presented a program that was unbelievably 
pathetic. A program which he himself admitted was not good and could very well not be completed 
in this year. When you look at the NDP record in terms of highways that low priority can definitely 
be understood. 
 
Let's go back for a moment to 1963, the last full year of the then CCF-NDP Government. The NDP 
highway construction budget at that time was only a meagre $13.7 million. Under a Liberal 
Government, a government which put high priority on highway safety, capital expenditures on our 
provincial highways increased to an all time high of $45 million. Highways in this province were 
built that all people of Saskatchewan were proud of. A record of building long lasting quality 
highways, a record by a government which put a high priority on super and superior maintenance of 
those highways. Highways were built, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan were proud of. 
 
What has happened to our highway system since 1971? Budget' brought down by the NDP have not 
even covered the normal cost of inflation which meant that fewer and fewer miles of highway were 
being built each and every year. A good example of that is our 1975 Budget which we now have 
before us. In terms of the 1971 budget, highway construction this year should be $90 million. Every 
contractor in the province and your own Department of Highways officials will admit that the costs 
for highway construction and maintenance have risen 100 per cent since 1971. What's the priority of 
the NDP? Instead of a capital budget of $90 million to do the same amount of work that was done in 
1971, they are asking us to approve a budget of only $65 million. So in actual work to be 
accomplished this year, $65 million will build 30 per cent fewer highways then what was 
accomplished in 1971. This is the reason why our Saskatchewan highway program is not keeping 
pace with the demand. 
 
Time does not permit me this afternoon to go into detail of what is happening to our highways but I 
feel I must mention some examples. The most glaring is Highway No. 1 from Herbert to Valjean, a 
distance of only 33 miles. It has taken this Government four years to construct only 33 miles of 
highway and as yet, Mr. Speaker, there is no assurance that it will be completed by the fall of this 
year. This practice, Mr. Speaker, is not occurring only on No. 1 Highway but it is occurring on each 
and every highway being built in this province. Just think about it, can any government justify 
spending four years to construct 33 miles of highway. This 33 mile stretch is a bottle neck in the 
four-laning of No. 1 Highway. We can thank our lucky stars that no one has been killed or seriously 
injured on this dangerous stretch of highway. Another of this Government's inactivity is highway 
No. 19 running south from No. 1 to Hodgeville. This particular stretch of highway is so narrow and 
in such bad shape that one takes his life into his own hands just to drive on that particular piece of 
highway. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what the MLA for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross) is doing about that 
particular stretch of highway? What is he 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1157 
 

doing to help the people of Hodgeville? That stretch of highway Mr. Speaker, should be rebuilt 
immediately and put into a safe and good condition. I don't believe that the people of Hodgeville 
should be asked to wait any longer. 
 
A Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, would restore the confidence of the people in Saskatchewan in 
our highway construction program and immediately implement a program of highway construction 
that will keep up with the present demand, a government that will build highways which put a 
strong emphasis on traffic safety and superior maintenance. 
 
In summing up, 1975 looks like a very dismal year in terms of highway construction. 1975 will 
mean fewer miles of highway construction. 1975 again proves the very low priority which the NDP 
Government places on a good sound economic highway system. Mr. Speaker, it is time that a 
program was implemented that, again, placed a high priority on superior maintenance and keep of 
our provincial highway system. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party and a Liberal Government is 
dedicated to that principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can boast the greatest network of roads of any other province in Canada. 
A total of around 125,000 miles and yet less than 10 per cent, 12,000 of this total falls within the 
jurisdiction and responsibility of the provincial Department of Highways, in comparison the lowest 
percentage of any province in Canada. What does this mean? It means that the cost of building and 
maintaining over 113,000 miles of this province's roads, over 90 per cent, falls on the shoulders of 
our local municipal governments and in turn our rural taxpayers. 
 
Each and every year the major expenditure by local governments goes for the construction and the 
maintenance of our grid and rural roads. Costs of building and maintaining our rural roads have 
gone up over 100 per cent since 1971 and indications are that these costs will continue to accelerate. 
What does this Budget do to help our municipal governments and in turn the rural ratepayers? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does nothing. Allocations to municipalities do not even cover increased cost of 
inflation. Last fall there was a great campaign put on by the Department of Municipal Affairs 
announcing its new program of super grids, a program of hard surfacing of our rural roads. Mr. 
Speaker, again, actions speak louder than words. How does this Budget propose to help our rural 
municipalities? 
 
First of all financial assistance for market grid road construction is down $500,000; assistance for 
super grid the same as 1974, not even enough to cover inflation which means fewer miles; grants for 
maintenance of grid roads - an increase of only $31,000, with over 500 municipalities this means a 
pitiful increase of only $60 for each municipality in this province. This, Mr. Speaker, doesn't even 
cover the increased cost of diesel fuel for one week's operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Budget is a disgrace. It ignores the legitimate needs of local government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1158 
 

MR. WIEBE: Rural municipalities in Saskatchewan will be faced this year with huge increases in 
road construction and maintenance costs due to inflation. Expenses and demands are rising rapidly. 
Revenues from rural municipalities are obtained from a very fixed base, a mill rate on property. 
Senior governments on the other hand benefit from inflation. Percentage taxes such as income tax, 
sales tax, liquor tax, oil and gas resources revenues all rise rapidly with inflation. It does not take 
much to recognize that inflation hurts local governments, but directly benefits our senior 
governments. To correct this unfair situation a Saskatchewan Liberal Government would provide 
large, unconditional grants to our towns, villages and rural municipalities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: This, Mr. Speaker, is the only way that adequate services can be maintained in times 
of high inflation. The Liberal Party also believes that to help reduce the burden of building and 
maintaining the rural roads that an accelerated program should immediately be implemented to 
bring more of our major grid roads into the provincial highway system. If we wish to encourage our 
people to live in rural Saskatchewan and on our farms we, as senior governments, must be prepared 
to provide good all-weather roads to service our farms and rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a positive approach to a government which has lost touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: I should now like to turn to an issue which is of great concern to me as a farmer and 
as a Member of the Legislative Assembly. This is the issue of rail line abandonment and our 
grain-handling system. 
 
During the last two weeks the NDP, especially the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) and the 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer, have spoken more on this issue than any other issue in this 
House. They have been completely negative, Mr. Speaker. They have used scare tactics and yet they 
have refused to be positive in their remarks. As well they have declined to state their position on this 
issue. It is becoming very apparent that the only ones in Saskatchewan who are in favor of rail line 
abandonment are the railway companies and the Saskatchewan NDP Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: We can understand why the railways are in favor of abandonment, but why the 
NDP? The only reason that we can see is that they hope to gain some political advantage. Mr. 
Attorney General, where are your concerns? Where are your alternatives? Where are your 
recommendations and, for heaven's name, what is your policy? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1159 
 

MR. WIEBE: The NDP say that it is the Federal Government who is determined to abandon all the 
rail lines in Saskatchewan. Let's look for a moment at the facts. It is true that some rail lines have 
been abandoned in Saskatchewan, but we must ask ourselves, when? Mr. Speaker, the only rail lines 
that have ever been abandoned in Saskatchewan is when we had an NDP Government in Regina and 
a Conservative Government at Ottawa. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Again, let me repeat, the only rail lines that have ever been abandoned in 
Saskatchewan is when we had an NDP Government in this province and a Conservative 
Government at Ottawa. Among the Members of the provincial NDP Government now sitting 
opposite were Members who sat idly by and refused to rise to the defense of our rural lines and 
allowed and encouraged the abandonment of rail lines in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: It was only following 1964 that a Saskatchewan Liberal Government convinced 
Ottawa to call a halt to rail line abandonment in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough to sit idly by and like the Premier and the Agriculture Minister 
simply criticize other proposals and attempt to use this issue for political advantage. Whatever is 
decided will have a direct effect on Saskatchewan and as far as I and the Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party are concerned, that decision must be satisfactory to our farmers and help protect their rural 
way of life. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Decisions, Mr. Speaker, in this area will be made by the national Government in 
Ottawa. That decision will have a direct affect on Saskatchewan and will affect Saskatchewan more 
than any other province in Canada. 
 
The NDP in Saskatchewan have refused to state their position in this vital issue. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party is not afraid. We believe that the people of Saskatchewan should know 
how we stand on an issue as vital and as important as this one. I am pleased at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, to state the position of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party on rail line abandonment and our 
grain-handling system. A Saskatchewan Liberal Government will work together with rural 
municipalities, town councils, grain companies and farm organizations to ensure that the decisions 
made must be satisfactory to our farmers and help protect our rural way of life. 
 
There is no doubt that changes will have to be made in our transportation and elevator system, but 
we must ensure that these changes are beneficial to all and that before changes are made we will all 
have a chance to know what the alternatives are and that everyone will have a say as to how those 
changes should be implemented. The Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes that the debate on inland 
terminals, rail line abandonment, high throughput elevators must continue. Full information as to 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1160 
 

changes, implementation and effects must be aired and made available to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that one cannot look at the different aspects of the grain-handling and 
transportation system in piecemeal. To be effective it can only be looked at as a total package. To be 
included in that total package, the Saskatchewan Liberal Party recommends that no branch lines be 
abandoned until the railway companies reveal their costs of operating branch lines and the criteria 
used to determine freight rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: We recommend that no branch lines be abandoned until full expanded regional 
hearings and full public discussion is held. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: We recommend that those branch lines that are not scheduled for abandonment after 
the hearings are completed be immediately transferred into the permanent system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: We recommend as well that senior governments, railway companies and 
grain-handling companies be more specific about what their proposals are. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Mr. Speaker, we encourage the continuation of branch line subsidies to maintain 
services on those branch lines which are still uneconomical but considered essential to the wellbeing 
of the economic and social life of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes that a national transportation policy is long overdue. We 
believe that the Federal Government should provide a comprehensive statement or their 
transportation policy and that policy to include freight rates which encourage maximum processing 
of products within areas where they are produced. There should be sufficient rolling stock, engines 
and hopper cars to ensure adequate rail capability to move anticipated volume. The Federal 
Government has the responsibility for upgrading and maintenance of needed railway beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a general agreement that to maintain the existing network of 
elevators would be too costly when measured against the services received. Of course, factors other 
than operating costs such as developments of the road system, location of services, schools, 
hospitals, banks, have some influence on grain delivery patterns and in turn on the structure of the 
elevator network. 
 
From the grain producers' point of view adequate service is measured in terms of hauling distance 
and service at that elevator. It seems evident that a more consolidated network of elevators is 
required if a service is to be kept at a 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1161 
 

reasonable cost. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes that some of the factors to be considered in identifying the 
required elevator network and, of course, our rail Lines should be the following points. Firstly, 
producer hauling distance. We believe that no farmers should be more than 25 miles from an 
elevator with an average of 15 miles. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Our road systems are extremely important and in instances where rail lines have been 
abandoned and as a result have created an increased burden on the rural municipality to maintain 
road services, senior governments, both provincial and federal should provide the financial 
assistance required. In dealing with the entire system trade service patterns such as medical, 
education, social, recreation and also the community settlement patterns which protect the ethnic, 
religious and other social groupings should definitely be considered and given top priority. 
 
In summing up, Mr. Speaker, a provincial Liberal Government will work with rural municipalities, 
town councils, grain companies, farm organizations to ensure that the maximum amount of rail lines 
will be transferred into the permanent system. We would support an elevator system based on the 
criterion that no farmer be more than 25 miles from an elevator, with the average of 15 miles. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Mr. Speaker, this is our position. I wonder how long the people of Saskatchewan will 
wait for the NDP to make their position clear. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
MR. E.F. FLASCH: (Maple Creek) Mr. Speaker, it is a distinct pleasure for me to speak in defence 
of another excellent Budget, the fourth such budget in a row brought down by this New Democratic 
Party Government since the election in 1971. It is certainly a Budget that makes anything the 
Liberals brought in in their seven years pale by comparison. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, if you can call it a pleasure, of listening to the 
Leader of the Opposition the other day when he delivered his reply to the Budget Address. In fact, I 
heard parts of his speech four times as I was driving to Regina. He didn't have much competition on 
radio that night. I can't say that I appreciated it any more the fourth time than I did the first. 
However, there was one statement that he did make that I thought was credible; he made that when 
he said that he was a political opponent of the NDP and that his opinion was naturally biased. 
 
He went to great lengths, Mr. Speaker, to attack our policy of assistance to senior citizens. In spite 
of the fact that this Budget makes provisions for assistance of $20 per month for single persons and 
$36 per month for married couples 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1162 
 

who are receiving the GIS, and in spite of the fact that total under various programs, aid to senior 
citizens has increased by about $36 million, the Leader of the Opposition labelled our efforts a 
disgrace. I recall, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago when the federal Liberal Government in Ottawa 
gave senior citizens an increase of 42 cents a month. Imagine, Mr. Speaker, an increase of 42 cents a 
month, not enough to keep the poor old people in liniment. Now, if our efforts in that regard are a 
disgrace, then certainly the efforts of the Liberals were a sin. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, let's just take a look at what other provinces in Canada are doing for 
senior citizens. British Columbia, under an NDP Government is providing assistance, in some cases 
a little more than we are providing. Manitoba, again under an NDP Government, is providing 
assistance in an amount a little less than we are providing. In Alberta, under the Conservatives' 
substantial aid was promised but the Legislature was dissolved and actually right now the people of 
Alberta have a promise. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that if the Conservatives are returned, they will do 
better in fulfilling their promises than Saskatchewan Liberals have done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Or the old senior citizens of Alberta won't get one red cent. 
 
All provincial governments that I've mentioned thus far are governments of a political stripe other 
than Liberal. Let's look and see what Liberal Governments in Canada are doing for senior citizens. I 
tried to find out, Mr. Speaker, but there wasn't very much to find. 
 
There was virtually nothing in Nova Scotia; there was nothing in Prince Edward Island and in the 
biggest Liberal province, Quebec, the one that has some control over a third of the people in 
Canada, there was absolutely nothing, not a thing! 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Comer) the other day suggested that a motto for the 
Liberals in the next election might well be 'Turkeys matter more'. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
they could use the motto 'Nothing's too good for our Senior Citizens', because that is exactly what 
Liberal Governments have given them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, needy senior citizens in all parts of our country should have an 
adequate pension income and it's the responsibility of the Federal Government to see that such is the 
case. Let the Government raise the income tax a point or two, Mr. Speaker, and earmark it for 
assistance to senior citizens. Then, those who could afford to pay, would pay, and would have no 
reason to complain. 
 
We listened to a lot of criticism by the Opposition of our 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1163 
 

policy in the field of resource taxation. In the best year, Mr. Speaker, under the previous 
government, resources yielded something in the neighborhood of $30 million a year. Compare that 
with the present income from resources of over $300 million a year! Most of this money, Mr. 
Speaker, is used to support new programs instituted by this Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, had we not changed the taxing policy, had we not taxed corporations, 
we would either have no programs in this province or we would have to go to the people as the 
Liberals did to raise the money. Liberals would sooner tax people than corporations. They go around 
saying, "You're strangling industry. You'll kill the goose that lays the golden egg." They criticize 
our taxation policies but at the same time they have all kinds of advice as to how we should spend 
the money we get as a result of those policies. 
 
I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to another remark made by the Leader of the Opposition in his address, 
and that concerns the newly formed Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. He made reference to the 
members of the Board of Directors. He named them, he mentioned Mr. Ching and Mr. Lloyd and he 
discussed each of them a while and in the end in each case he said, "Business experience, nil." Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that he, too, has had some experience in business. Most of it bad. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask you, using his own yardstick as measurement, does his success in business 
qualify him for the job of Premier of this province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: No, no. 
 
MR. FLASCH: I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to have to ask 
themselves that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are told by the Opposition we should reduce or eliminate the sales tax. This Budget 
has done that on reading materials and meals. The Liberals when they were in office reduced the 
sales tax by one per cent one year and then a few years later put it right back up to five per cent 
again. That is how they kept their promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early in our term of office, I can recall the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 
getting up in this House and declaring an emergency situation and asking for priority to debate the 
unemployment question in this province. He said there are 20,000 people out walking the streets in 
this province and we were not doing anything about it. Mr. Speaker, he didn't get up this year; he 
didn't get up last year. After four years under an NDP Government, we have the lowest rate of 
unemployment in this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: On top of that in the last year and one-half the population increased by 6,000. 
 
The agricultural picture in the province is generally bright, but in the constituency of Maple Creek 
when we speak of 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1164 
 

the agricultural industry, we think of cattle too. And for cattle producers things are not so rosy. Mr. 
Speaker, the cost of baler twine has increased in the last three years from $7 per bale to $28 and $30 
per bale. The cost of fence posts and barbed wire, in fact all costs of production have risen 
continuously and have remained high while prices have dropped. The old law of supply and demand 
has its shortcomings. 
 
As the Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins) stated in his address, this Government is willing to 
co-operate with the Federal Government in bringing in a meaningful livestock income stabilization 
plan. Such a plan is essential. The people who are established in the industry can take one or two 
bad years, Mr. Speaker, but young people who are just starting out are very discouraged with the 
present low prices. 
 
I should like to mention, a point brought up by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) yesterday. 
He stated that this Government provided cash advances to cow-calf operators and then he said, we 
charged them 14 per cent interest at a time when the industry is in terrible shape. He did not mention 
that for the first year the Government pays the interest on that money and that we have made money 
available in this Budget to do that this year and it is only after the first year that that interest is 
charged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have reserved their harshest criticism for the Land Bank program. The 
Leader of the Opposition calls it a socialist plot and a land grab. He doesn't like 'land grabs'. He 
doesn't mind resources grabs by corporations, but he doesn't like a good land program. And he 
continuously harped about the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan, conveniently forgetting that the 
Land Bank has been a vehicle which has placed many young people back on farms in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: And if it hasn't placed them there it has helped many of those who are there to 
maintain a viable economic operation 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) criticized the Land Bank as well. He 
hung his arguments on the word "may"' in the option clause. I can say, as the Member for Pelly (Mr. 
Larson) said, that that clause is not even relevant at this time. We simply say, Mr. Speaker, that we 
will make that land available for sale after five years, and we will. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, the people of Maple Creek constituency have benefited substantially 
from having a NDP Government in power in the last four years. We have two new nursing homes. 
A new nursing home in Maple Creek, a 60-bed home opened two years ago; another 35-bed home in 
Leader, which will open on the 11th of April of this year. Mr. Speaker, we are presently installing a 
T-Bar in the Cypress Hills Provincial Park at a cost of some $54,000. I thank the Minister of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources for that. Provision has been made in the Budget to build a new 
store and a new cafe at the park. These will be welcome additions to a park that is already the focal 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1165 
 

point of recreation in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Winter Works has provided assistance to build arenas at Burstall and Richmond and helped to build 
a new town hall at Maple Creek and a school unit office in Maple Creek. I think the Liberals should 
appreciate the fact that we have done a great deal to improve working conditions in the school unit 
office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, I was born in the '30s and I remember very well some of the 
conditions of that time. As one fellow said to me, "What did we have in the '30s? We had nothing 
but dust and thistles and gophers and Liberals. And then the good Lord sent some rain and got rid of 
the dust. Scientific research helped us get rid of the thistles. We poisoned the gophers. And in 1944 
Tommy Douglas and a host of humanitarians came along and rid us of the Liberals." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, we had good times for 20 years and the spin-off of those 20 years 
carried us on not too badly for three more years under the Liberals. Then they sneaked into power in 
1964 and times started to get bad. Then in 1967 we got more Liberals and things got worse. And in 
1971, Mr. Speaker, we got rid of the Liberals and times improved again. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan will be determined to maintain the good times and not let the Liberals 
back into office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FLASCH: Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Motion and opposing the amendment. 
 
MR. G. LANE: (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, it is a little unfortunate that the Hon. Member who has just 
taken his seat, finally delivered a good speech in the House and it is unfortunate that it is his last 
speech in this Legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a few comments about the price of binder twine, baler twine and the high 
price of farm products and farm machinery. I was very, very disappointed yesterday to hear the 
Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) for the Province of Saskatchewan and the Blakeney Government 
deny to the people of Saskatchewan that they had promised a Prices Review Board back in 1971. 
Because that was a promise of the New Democratic Party back in 1971, to deal with the high cost of 
farm machinery; it was a promise that was made and probably a promise that will be made again in 
1975, a promise that has not yet been kept and a promise that will never be kept by the NDP 
Government. 
 
I was most disappointed too, to note the lack of press coverage of a rather momentous 
announcement last Friday in Saskatoon, when the Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 
Board made it clear once and for all that Crow's Nest rates would be maintained in Saskatchewan 
until such time that the farmers themselves wanted changes, changes that they clearly do 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1166 
 

not want. And it is the position of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan that the Crow's Nest rates will 
be maintained as the cornerstone of a national transportation policy, a program endorsed by Mr. 
Lang. It is unfortunate that the Premier of Saskatchewan has in effect called the Minister of Justice a 
liar as he did the other night in Watrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was interested, too, in the comments about the cost of farm machinery and high 
prices. The minor Minister of Co-operation (Mr. Cody) as a matter of fact made a commitment in 
the Commonwealth back in 1973, one of the last promises he will ever make, for he called, too, for 
the Provincial Government to establish a Prices Review Board to deal with the high cost of farm 
machinery. And to show why he is the minor Minister of Co-operation with the smallest Department 
in the Government, it is also interesting to note that that same Minister made one of the great 
predictions of all times when he said that under the FarmStart Program, the Saskatchewan livestock 
industry would flourish in the months ahead. A promise, again, by the NDP, a promise made and a 
promise broken and promise not kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in speaking on behalf of the constituents of Qu'Appelle constituency, I have a few 
comments to make. We should like to welcome that new part of Qu'Appelle constituency, some of 
the sub-divisions of Regina such as Glen Cairn, parts of North Uplands, parts of Walsh Acres 
sub-division, part of the Lewvan sub-division in the southwest corner, the University Park 
sub-division in the southeast corner, all parts now of the NDP gerrymander of Lumsden 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that several promises have been made by the NDP in Glen 
Cairn sub-division, something about a high school there. I should like to take this opportunity to 
remind the residents of Glen Cairn that prior to 1971 the present Member representing that area also 
promised a high school for east Regina, another promise made, another promise not delivered and 
seemingly we have the death-bed repentance of the NDP in Glen Cairn, as they try desperately to 
make another promise, the promise made in 1971 and not kept. Mr. Speaker, Glen Cairn 
sub-division in Regina, has elected an NDP in 1971 and NDP Cabinet Minister. They have an NDP 
member resident in the area. They have elected an NDP member under the ward system for that 
area, for the city council in Regina and as yet they haven't a high school; they have no recreational 
facilities; they are still separated from the rest of Regina by the so-called Berlin Wall. Mr. Speaker, 
they are not listened to and they are not heard by the NDP and the NDP Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We are anxiously awaiting the remarks, Mr. Speaker, of the Attorney General of Saskatchewan, the 
Minister responsible for transportation, because we finally expect to hear what the NDP's position is 
on the matter of rail line abandonment and rail line retention in the Province of Saskatchewan. I urge 
every farmer and every person in rural Saskatchewan to start asking the NDP what their policy is on 
rail line abandonment, because there has never been a rail line abandonment in Saskatchewan unless 
there was a CCF-NDP Government in Regina and a Conservative one at Ottawa, and I think the day 
of reckoning is coming, when we have the reasonable and rational approach to rail line retention 
proposed by the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) the Liberal policy, a positive policy as opposed to 
the negative no policy approach of the NDP. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1167 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a couple of comments on the matter of senior 
citizens that was raised in the Budget. The grant by the Provincial Government of $20 per month for 
single senior citizens over 65 and $18 per month for each spouse of married couples over 65. 
Approximately 60 cents a day from the more than generous New Democratic Party. They also gave 
our senior citizens $3 a month reduction in medicare, amounting to 10 cents per day and a hearing 
aid. I have said it before and I will say it again that the senior citizens can't live on your dole of 70 
cents a day and they can't eat the hearing aids you have given. Your approach to the senior citizens 
is unfortunate and sad to say the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the urging of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan a senior citizens' commission was 
established two years ago. The letter of transmittal of that particular commission said and I quote: 
"We urge your commitment to action", when they tabled their report to the Government, but no 
action was taken through the year of 1973, no action, period, was taken until election year, when the 
NDP policy of 70 cents per day for the senior citizens was proposed. Fifteen million is given to 
SaskOil, $7 million to our senior citizens. It is cheap politics taken to the ultimate extreme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Liberal Government will make a serious and reasonable commitment to our senior 
citizens. We will guarantee an adequate income with a minimum income of $350 a month for single 
persons and $500 a month for married couples. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: A firm, reasonable and deserving commitment to our senior citizens, not just a 
nominal sum given at election year like the Blakeney New Democratic Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Minister responsible for Welfare in Saskatchewan is not in his 
seat at the present time, because I have some comments to make with regard to the welfare budget 
of the New Democratic Party. 
 
In 1971 the cost of welfare in Saskatchewan was $35 million and that was when, supposedly, times 
were very difficult according to the Members opposite. But now in boom times welfare costs have 
increased to $58 million in the Province of Saskatchewan. The Member for Kindersley (Mr. Taylor) 
now has a budget for Social Services which has risen from $49 million in 1971 to $137 million in 
1975-76, nearly tripled under the Blakeney NDP regime. We are simply, I suggest, paying more and 
more money and getting no results for the monies that we have paid. 
 
The Premier laughs at that statement and I don't think that this is a laughing matter. I think that 
when the Minister responsible for Welfare in the Province of Saskatchewan proudly says there are 
only 40,000 people on welfare in Saskatchewan he is doing a disservice to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the figures given by the Minister, of course, are not to be believed 
anyway. He says that in 1973 there were 60,000 people in Saskatchewan on welfare and is now 
down to 40,000, when in fact the annual report of the Department said 51,000 and now 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1168 
 

we are down to 42,000 according to the latest figures of the Department. Every figure given by the 
Minister responsible for welfare in Saskatchewan, the Member for Kindersley, is completely at 
variance with the annual report of the Department, completely at variance with the quarterly 
statistical report of the Department and, of course, have no credibility and is not to be believed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding, for argument's sake we are prepared to accept his 
figures of 40,000 and I think that it is obvious and I think that all Members of this House will agree 
with me, that our welfare system has failed for the people and has failed miserably. There is no 
longer any public confidence in our system and the recipients themselves are not satisfied and are 
not pleased with the operation of the system in the Province of Saskatchewan. It's simply not 
working. And I suggest for the recipients in Saskatchewan it's a total failure It is a system which 
merely adds more and more programs and costs more and more money with fewer and fewer 
positive results. 
 
In 1970 the poverty line in Saskatchewan for a family of four in rural areas was $4,300. In 1974 it is 
$5,500. We have spent an extra $100 million in that period of time and all we have done is increase 
the poverty level by approximately $1,200. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we treat the physically and mentally handicapped exactly as we treat the 
unemployable. We treat the widows and single parents the same as those who do not want to work 
or who are unemployed. The Liberal Party says this is wrong, morally wrong and socially wrong 
and wrong for the people of Saskatchewan. The NDP approach of bringing in program after 
program and spending more and more money is proving a total failure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in the words of the Governor of the state of New York that work is 
essential to a healthy individual and a healthy society. Welfare should be a bridge for those able as 
well as a shield against want. Welfare benefits should aid those who work and need supplemental 
help but welfare benefits will not be a substitute for work. 
 
A Liberal Government will start all over again, in the field of welfare and start afresh. And our goals 
will be to establish a major work oriented program consisting of work incentive payments, work 
training, work tests and work relief. We will begin to evaluate programs based on their cost 
effectiveness to make sure programs are accomplishing what they are set out to do. We will use 
experimental programs which may or may not be temporary programs to encourage recipients to 
work and make work acceptable and possible. We will institute work on public service projects 
through a public service work program which will not compete with the private sector. We will 
reorganize the department supplying Social Services to make services more accountable to the 
general public. Above all, Mr. Speaker, as the cornerstone of our policy we will separate out of our 
present system categories, the aged, the physically and mentally handicapped categories and take 
them out of the present structure and not lump them into the melting pot that we have under the New 
Democratic Party. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1169 
 

In summary, a Liberal Government will start all over again in the field of welfare, start from scratch 
to increase assistance to the truly needy, to strengthen the family responsibility, to require those able 
to work to seek work or train for a job or serve their community to improve the internal services to 
strengthen our ability to audit procedures at a local level and to make it possible to evaluate on a 
cost effectiveness basis those programs that are now operating or will operate. 
 
In 1973 the Blakeney Government overpaid on welfare in Buffalo Narrows $100,000. In 1974 the 
Blakeney Government overpaid on welfare in La Ronge $500,000. Over 97,000 cheques were 
issued in 1974 in Saskatchewan for welfare payments with only a single signature with no 
countersigning. These abuses, this waste and mismanagement will be ended with a Liberal 
Government. We will totally reform our Welfare system to begin to solve problems and to end 
poverty and give all individuals a true opportunity to attain self-sufficiency in this province of ours. 
We will treat senior citizens on welfare differently than those who refuse to work, not as advocated 
by the NDP. We will treat the physically and mentally handicapped differently from those who 
refuse to work and we, the Liberal Government will treat those who have family problems 
differently than those who are unable to work. It's time to start all over again, it's time to start from 
scratch and the object of paying more and more money and more and more programs in solving 
fewer and fewer problems and merely raising the poverty level every year has simply proved non 
workable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that the problems of the Qu'Appelle basin took such short shrift in the 
Budget presented. Mr. Speaker, for all practical purposes the problems of the Qu’Appelle basin and 
the Fishing Lakes were ignored in the Budget presented by the NDP. Last year thousands of dead 
fish floated to the beaches and into the town of Fort Qu'Appelle. The smell was atrocious, the algae 
was like thick pea soup and made swimming and recreational activities impossible. Tourists and 
summer residents were turned off by the complete deterioration of the Fishing Lakes and 
unfortunately under the Blakeney Government the implementation of the Qu'Appelle basin report 
has merely become a political football. Meeting after meeting on implementation is used by the 
NDP as a forum to merely attack Ottawa and not to take positive action to clean up the lakes. 
 
The Liberal Party makes the following positive commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. We will 
end the political bickering over implementation of the Qu'Appelle basin report. We will start to 
co-operate with Ottawa and not confront, to implement the Qu'Appelle basin report 
recommendations. It will be a high priority of a Liberal Government to clean up the Fishing Lakes 
with a policy of a once in a lifetime grant to solve problems and not try to make political capital. 
 
Provincial civil servants who do not co-operate in cleaning up lakes and insist in confronting Ottawa 
will not be tolerated by a Liberal Government. A Liberal Government will restore the Qu'Appelle 
Valley to its rightful position as one of the most beautiful areas in Saskatchewan and the leading 
year round recreational area in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and will not support the Motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1170 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Saskatoon Riversdale) Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
take part in this Budget Debate, Budget 1975-76. I sincerely hope that the remark that I just heard 
the Member for Lumsden make about non-toleration of civil servants was a remark that he made in 
haste rather than after deliberately having thought out the position. This is all too reminiscent of the 
typical Liberal position about non-tolerating civil servants, a Liberal position of, in effect, 
retribution against civil servants who would offer any kind of independent thinking to a 
Government, certain Liberal Government of the day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is day five or six of the Budget and quite frankly I have a newspaper 
clipping in my hands and it's been puzzling me. The newspaper clipping is under date of December 
9, 1974 and it refers to the Liberal convention in December of 1974 in Regina. And it's been 
puzzling me because the newspaper quote says this: 
 

Provincial Liberal leader Dave Steuart said Saturday the party's three day convention proves . . . 
 
And listen to this Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan Liberals have definitely shed their image as right wingers, we're becoming a centre 
of the road party. 

 
And as I said that clipping has confused me after five or six days of listening to the Members 
opposite in the debate. I was wondering what party he was talking about because every position that 
the Liberals have taken in this particular Budget speech has been consistently reactionary, 
consistently right winged, consistently the same as the Liberals between 1964 and 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: But I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, that it did give me real pleasure to see 
the Leader of the Opposition assume a new role, the role of financial critic for the first time. For 
some of us it brought back to mind his debut as Provincial Treasurer. It does for me because that 
was my first year in the House. His first day as Provincial Treasurer, that black Friday 1968 when 
he brought down his first Provincial Budget. Now that budget, Mr. Speaker, was absolutely good 
training ground for financial critics. That budget heaped hundreds of new taxes on Saskatchewan 
people. This Budget provides a $100 income tax cut across the Board. That budget imposed a tax on 
the sick in the form of deterrent fees. This Budget provides for expanded health programs without 
deterrent fees and without health insurance premiums. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: That budget of 1968 on which today's financial critic cut his teeth put a sales 
tax on all restaurant meals. This Budget removes taxes from all meals. He raised the gasoline tax, 
we reduced it, Mr. Speaker. If putting together Saskatchewan's worst budget ever in 1968 is good 
training, then the Member for Prince Albert West has impeccable qualifications to be the 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1171 
 

financial critic of this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Of course he has some illustrious predecessors. 
 
There was, of course, my good friend Ken MacLeod. He was financial critic. He's been elevated to 
the Bench and I congratulate him. 
 
MR. STEUART: Jealousy will get you nowhere! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: No, I'm not jealous there. 
 
MR. STEUART: Oh, yes you are! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: There was Cliff McIsaac, Member for Kerrobert – Kindersley, he was financial 
critic. He was elevated to the House of Commons. Maybe a little touch of jealousy there, Mr. Leader 
of the Opposition, you're right. And then there is the Member for Prince Albert West, today's 
financial critic. All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that he'll surely fulfil all the necessary qualifications 
and be elevated to the Senate, to the Senate of this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: And I'll be the first one to congratulate him for that. He is in training now, I see 
today, to get some tips to see what it's like. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a good foundation has been laid for Saskatchewan's future. But as we enter the 
latter half of the '70s there are new challenges which must be overcome. These challenges I think 
fall in three major areas. Number one, transportation, transportation as it particularly affects rural 
Saskatchewan. Number two, maintenance of the family farm and our rural way of life. Number 
three, natural resource development policy, particularly of those non-renewable resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next four years this province will need determined and responsible and 
progressive leadership as it has never had before if we're to meet our great potential. In Premier 
Blakeney and this Government of Saskatchewan, this province will get that leadership. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Let's examine very briefly these three areas. 
 
Transportation. Mr. Speaker, everybody knows that Saskatchewan and the people of this province 
are anxious, that's an understatement, anxious. They're worried, they're-frightened, they're 
concerned about the Liberal Government policies in transportation. Speaking in Edmonton in 
October, 1974, just a few short months ago, the Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, 
Otto Lang, the Liberal leading spokesman for the West in the Trudeau Cabinet, put the Crow's Nest 
freight rates on the auction block. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1172 
 

MR. ROMANOW: In an interview with an Ottawa reporter after, after the Edmonton speech, Mr. 
Lang defended his Edmonton proposal of doing away with the Crow's Nest rates. I quote from the 
Leader Post article written by Jim Petro and it says this: 
 

Farmers would benefit and definitely not lose under this proposal . . . 
 
Referring to Mr. Lang's proposal. 
 

. . . to end the Crow's Nest rates and pay federal compensation into a special fund or even a direct 
contribution to the farmers. 

 
Members will know that big headline about a Crow's Nest rate fund to be the new proposal for 
abolition of the Crow's Nest rates. And I quote again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Although it is not the first time Mr. Lang has approached the possibility of ending Crow's Nest 
rates, it is the first time he has suggested this special compensatory fund. Basically it is believed to 
be the first step in a complete rationalization of the grain-handling and transportation industry. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just mark those words. It's not the first time that Mr. Lang has approached the 
possibility of ending the Crow's Nest rates. Everybody in Saskatchewan knows it's not the first time 
that Mr. Lang believed that the Crow's Nest rates should go. And note the words of the story. It is to 
be the first step in a complete rationalization, a Liberal rationalization of the grain-handling and 
transportation industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. _ROMANOW: Now, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite can shilly-shally around, and jump 
around and say, "Oh, these are some words that . . ." but these aren't words, Mr. Member for 
Meadow Lake from an ordinary taxpayer. They're not even words from a backbencher or a 
Government Member in Saskatchewan. These are words from the Federal Minister in charge of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, the leading federal representative in the Federal Cabinet Otto Lang. Now is 
it little wonder, is it little wonder, Mr. Member for Meadow Lake, that some people in 
Saskatchewan, farmers, farm organizations, politicians view with fear these statements of Mr. Lang. 
And why not? What will it mean if Mr. Lang has his own way? It will mean that the freight rates 
paid by our farmers to have their grain hauled by rail to the lake head or the west coast would likely 
be increased four to five times or even more. It will mean - oh, well, the Member for Moosomin 
who also believes in the abolition of the Crow's Nest rates laughs at that figure. And it is four to five 
times Ask the Wheat Pool, ask anybody, that's what it will mean once you do away with the Crow's 
Nest rates. It will mean up to $200 million per year or more, Mr. Member for Moosomin, that will 
come out of the farmers in your constituency and go to the pockets of the railway company. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1173 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: And what does Mr. Lang say the farmers get in exchange? Oh, well, they'll 
offer some . . . 
 
MR. GARDNER: On a Point of Privilege the Member speaking has misquoted me. I said very 
definitely in this debate I was in favour of retention of Crow's Nest rates. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! That is not a Point of Privilege that's a Point . . . 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, if a man misquotes somebody in this 
House, it is a Point of Privilege. And the Attorney General is deliberately misrepresenting the 
Member for Moosomin with a cheap political objective. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: And it's time, Mr. Speaker, that they stand up here and start telling the 
truth about the Crow's Nest rates. Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General is deliberately trying to 
misquote. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! The Member is supposed to address the Chair and not turn your back on 
the Chair and turn the other way when the Speaker is calling for order. We've had a lot of it in these 
days here, statements going back and forth and this is not the right time to be jumping up and saying 
a Point of Order and in referring to a statement. A Point of Order does not refer to a statement. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, in a very sad way I'm kind of glad to see the outbursts from the 
Member for Milestone and Liberal Opposition on the radio, because it characterizes to all of the 
people of Saskatchewan the tactics and the bankruptcy of policy of the Liberals opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: The only thing that the Liberals have done, Mr. Speaker, in this House is to do 
exactly the type of thing the Member for Milestone did. And I picked up the comments from the 
Member, his desk mate, the Member for Moosomin, when he laughed, when he laughed in 
skepticism and doubt at my statement that the Crow's Nest rate removal would mean four to five 
times. That's what I said and you did laugh because you didn't accept my phrase. And that's a fact, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I say to the Member for Moosomin that he may be cavalier about these Crow's 
Nest rates, he may not be concerned about whether or not the Crow's Nest rates are removed but for 
the farmers in his riding it's going to cost $200 million a 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1174 
 

year or more out of their pockets and into the pockets of the CPR. Is that where you stand? Now 
what do you get in exchange? What do you get in exchange? Oh, well, Ottawa is going to give us 
some sort of Crow's Nest rate fund, a sum of money over some unknown period of time to all 
farmers, perhaps over all Canada. I say, Mr. Speaker, that it has become increasingly clear that the 
abolition of the Crow's Nest rates is really a part of an interlocking scheme, and I say scheme 
deliberately to alter the entire western Canadian grain-handling system with a benefit to the railway 
companies and the private grain trade. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I also go so far as to say it's not only 
part of a scheme, it is the key to the Liberal Party plan. Without a change in the Crow's Nest rates 
nothing else can work. There can be no selective freight rates to force farmers to truck their grain to 
points chosen by the railways. There can be no massive rail line abandonment. There can be no 
secure future for inland terminals and no destruction of our viable country elevator system. The 
Crow's Nest rates are the key. It's impossible to comprehend the full cost to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Liberal plans to abolish the Crow's Nest rates and abandon branch lines and country 
elevators are to be implemented. I know one thing is clear. If the Crow's Nest rates are abolished, 
our provincial grain transport system will become a road system, feeding just a few large inland 
terminals on main lines and closing up country elevator points and damaging our small towns and 
villages. Doing away with the Crow's Nest rates will benefit no one in western Canada, well not 
quite no one. Yes, it will benefit the CPR and it will benefit Cargills, but it will benefit no one else. 
It will cost the farmers dearly. Increased road haulage costs, expensive new trucks, fuel bills, it will 
cost the farmers millions in higher rail charges. It will cost governments untold millions in extra 
road building and repairs. Above all, Mr. Speaker, above all, it will cost all of us our Saskatchewan 
rural way of life. A high toll . . . 
 
SOME. HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Now all of a sudden the provincial Liberals are saying that the people don't 
want this suggestion of Otto Lang's, that somehow they are concerned. Well, why wouldn't the 
people of Saskatchewan be concerned? I mean, we are an agriculturally based economy. Why 
wouldn't we be concerned with the Minister of Justice and the Canadian Wheat Board when he says 
he's thinking of doing away with the Crow's Nest rates? Well, the Wheat Pools of western Canada 
got together with all the Ministers of western Canada in charge of transport and agriculture and the 
Press reports sum up the conclusion. I quote from the Leader-Post: 
 

The overwhelming consensus of the meeting was that the statutory Crow's Nest rates must not be 
tampered with. 

 
And with that we New Democrats agree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: But now, the Liberal Party opposite, somehow, would like to hook on to this 
little wagon because they are feeling the political heat in the country. The provincial Liberal Party 
would now have us somehow believe that they too want to save the Crow's Nest rates. This, Mr. 
Speaker, from the same Liberals who support the concept of large inland terminals. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1175 
 

That's what the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) did today in his remarks inferentially. Inland 
terminals which can only survive on the Crow's Nest rates being abolished. This from the same 
Liberals who support rail line abandonment because . . . 
 
MR. WIEBE: The Minister, the Attorney General has again misrepresented the remarks which I 
made in this debate. At no time did I say that the Liberal Party was in favor of inland terminals. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, people on the radio know exactly what the Member for Morse 
said and I don't blame him for being sensitive about this position. I don't blame the Member for 
Morse or the Member for Milestone for being so sensitive about the Crow's Nest rate policy because 
they know that there isn't going to be one of them re-elected with their position on Crow's Nest 
rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: This comes from the same group of Liberals who support rail line 
abandonment, Mr. Speaker, because it's efficient. That's what I heard the Member for Lumsden (Mr. 
Lane) say on television about four - bring him in to object to that - four months ago on television on 
CFQC TV. Abandonment he says, because it's efficient. This from the very same Liberals who are 
now going to be helped by Mr. Lang in the forthcoming provincial election because, according to 
the Leader-Post, from Mr. Lang as he says, they helped me a lot. I guess one good turn deserves 
another good turn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, don't believe these death bed promises from the Members opposite. Can Saskatchewan 
voters really believe that the Liberal Member for Morse will stand up to Mr. Lang and tell him what 
he can do with his proposal on Crow's Nest rates? Can anybody in Saskatchewan believe the Leader 
of the Opposition would stand up to the Prime Minister of this country and tell him what to do with 
the Crow's Nest rates? Can Saskatchewan voters really believe that a provincial Liberal government 
will be able to stand up to a federal Liberal government? I don't for one moment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I don't for one moment and I say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan 
that a vote for the Liberals in this coming election is a vote to remove the Crow's Nest rates, to 
abandon thousands of miles of rail line and country elevators. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I say, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is not going to go along with this Liberal 
scheme because we are vitally dependent on a sound transportation system. We New Democrats 
believe that the basis of that system is the maintenance and the improvement of the rail network. We 
say that decisions about rail lines and transportation must be made by the provinces and the 
communities of those provinces, in our best interest and not by the railway companies in their best 
interests. I say above all to the people of Saskatchewan that Premier Blakeney 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1176 
 

and New Democrats, we weren't elected to preside over the massive abandonment of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What is needed now is leadership, decisive in the next four years to convince the entire nation that 
Saskatchewan needs a transportation system that works for the entire country, as well as this region 
of western Canada. I say to the Farmers and to the farm organizations and the small businessmen 
and the mayors and the reeves of the municipalities and towns of this province that Premier 
Blakeney will continue to stand up to the designs of some federal politicians and corporations to 
guarantee the best transportation system for the West. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Now, Mr. Speaker, let me move on to the question of the maintenance of the 
family farm and a rural way of life. I've already discussed the impact of federal Liberal transport 
policies on the future of the family farm and rural Saskatchewan This efficiency that the Liberals 
keep on bandying about. Efficiency, the pass word for corporations and Liberal politicians. 
Efficiency for whom? Efficiency with what end result? Is it the Federal Task Force on farming type 
of efficiency where two out of three farmers must get off the farm lands? Is it the CPR type of 
efficiency so that the Crow's Nest rates can be removed and grain rates go shooting up? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that type of efficiency has produced, that type of Liberal policy has produced ghost 
towns, dying businesses and fewer family farms. Well, I'm concerned for the future of rural 
Saskatchewan because I know that our large cities and towns are only as strong as rural 
Saskatchewan is strong. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I'm angered with Liberal policies, 
federally and provincially, which say they will undo all that Premier Blakeney has done in four 
years to help stabilize our rural economy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Oh yes, they'll do away with the Hog Marketing Commission. They'll do away 
with the Hog Stabilization Plan. They will do away, no I'm sorry they won't do away with 
FarmStart. They'll make some changes to FarmStart. They will do away with the Land Bank. Oh 
yes, but I want to tell the Members opposite it's not good enough to simply condemn and to criticize, 
you have to have some positive proposals. 
 
Now, let's examine Land Bank. The Land Bank has put several hundred new farmers bank on the 
land for the first time. More than 1,100 farmers have been helped by the Land Bank in its short 
period of operation. No one is forced to sell his land to the Land Bank, but hundreds have chosen to 
do so, of their own free will, because they have confidence in the plan. They are anxious to pass 
their farms to their children without going the old style mortgage route, which is the Liberal 
proposal. The Land Bank wants the land to stay with successful and enthusiastic family farmers and 
not to be bought by land companies. That's why a farmer leases the land for five years before having 
a chance to buy, if he wishes to buy. Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank has been a success. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1177 
 

Now, the Liberals criticize some administrative problems that crop up from time to time in the Land 
Bank. Yes, there have been some administrative problems in its early years. But, I still say to the 
Members of this House that it is a progressive step of this Government to try to do something 
positive rather then just make critical speeches, positive about preserving the family farm and our 
rural way of life. But not you Liberals. You don't have an alternative. You simply sit back and 
criticize. You condemn. You criticize everything. Leadership is something more than merely 
complaining and criticizing and trying to arouse fears. For the last few months, the Liberals have 
been running an expensive ad on TV and radio and newspapers, but criticizing again, the Land 
Bank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three things are totally false in that ad. I think the whole ad is false, but three things 
definitely are. First, they say that our grandparents came to Saskatchewan from countries where the 
state owned the land. That is false. The majority of the people of this province came from countries 
where a very few wealthy landlords and not the state owned the farm land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I want to tell this House that what I particularly resent as a member of the 
minority group in this province is the attempted scare of that statement about grandparents leaving 
because of state farms. I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition and Liberals opposite that 
thankfully our eastern European population has long ago learned of Liberal ways and they've 
dismissed those scare tactics. In fact I say it will backfire on the Liberals come the next election. 
 
Now, secondly this ad says that the Land Bank will not sell land to the farmers after five years. That 
is false. In fact, if I was Eugene Whelan, I might say that's a damn lie. But I'm not, Mr. Speaker, and 
I won't say it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Premier Blakeney has clearly stated this Government's policy. The Land Bank 
land will be sold to a lessee after five years if the lessee so desires, and no amount of Liberal 
misrepresentation or speculation or rumors can destroy that fact. It's in the legislation and that's the 
stated policy of the Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Now, thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal ad says that the Land Bank is really 
nothing more than a land grab. That too, Mr. Leader of the Opposition is false. In fact, next to the 
statements about the Matador Co-op, which not unsurprisingly reveals a total ignorance about 
co-ops, Mr. Speaker, this is the funniest part of that Liberal campaign ad. The ad says the Land 
Bank now owns 260,000 acres of farm land. Mr. Speaker, that scares me right out of my pants. In 
two fiscal years the Land Bank has 260,000 acres of farm land. Imagine! Well, that means we only 
have 140,656,480 acres to go. Now at the present rate, Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank will take only 
1,174 years to make this land grab complete. 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1178 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Well, Mr. Speaker, I've been wondering for years and years since I've been a 
student and now I finally know what's meant by "creeping socialism." It's creeping so slowly that 
only the Members opposite can see it. The truth is that statement is a figment from Liberal ad man's 
imagination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal campaign against the agricultural policies of this Government and in 
particular the Land Bank, is an excellent example of their total lack of solution and leadership to our 
future farm problems. 
 
Progressive leadership will be particularly required in the next four years for this province, if we are 
to maintain the momentum in favor of rural Saskatchewan, if we are to maintain the momentum in 
favor of rural Saskatchewan, if we're to save the things that we've got going for us now. Not slick 
ads, not criticism constantly, because anybody can do that, not slogans about freedom or worrying 
about grandparents and where they come from. No sir, Mr. Speaker, what's needed now is 
leadership, leadership in FarmStart, in hog stabilization and agricultural implements and Land Bank, 
to maintain and to protect our rural way of life. That's this Government's policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, in Premier Blakeney we have that type of leadership. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the third major concern for the future of this 
province and that is natural resources and their development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the basic policy of our Government is that resources of this province belong to the 
people of this province and that the first benefit of exploiting those resources come to the people of 
this province. Our policies on oil and potash reflect that basic uncompromising principle. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals in Regina and Ottawa are vehemently opposed to that policy. For 
example, both Otto Lang and the Leader of the Liberal Opposition say that Bill 42 on oil will be 
repealed if the Liberals are elected provincially. It's confirmed again, again, again, again today. 
 
What is Bill 42? What does Bill 42 allow the province to do? Mr. Speaker, Bill 42 was passed by 
this House in December of 1973. Simply put the price of crude oil had risen so dramatically in the 
months preceding the passage of the Bill, that this Government had to make a fundamental decision. 
The decision was this. Who gets the benefit of the rapid and windfall increases in the price of our 
oil? Now Bill 42 answered it for our side. It said that the profits . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: Alberta did the same. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I'll come to that in a moment. Bill 42 said that the profits of the oil companies 
were no longer reasonable. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1179 
 

Indeed from about $4 a barrel in the period in 1973 to now at about $12 a barrel, I think even the 
Leader of the Opposition would agree with me, is a windfall. Oil companies would get a windfall. 
Now Bill 42 simply states that the oil producers are left with the same prices that they had received 
In 1973 on the average and those prices on the average are 60 cents a barrel more over 1972. Prices 
which they accepted prior to any world increase, prior to any Bill 42, they accepted as being fair and 
reasonable. Bill 42 said, okay, if it was fair and reasonable then, it's fair and reasonable now, the 
windfall comes to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, there is another important aspect of Bill 42. A short while after it was passed the Prime 
Minister called a national energy conference. Bill 42 allowed our Premier and this province to argue 
before the premiers of this nation that the resources of Saskatchewan belonged to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I say that our Premier displayed leadership and guts when he took the cause of 
Saskatchewan to the rest of the country. Now you recall his position. One, that there should be one 
price for oil across Canada, a price below the world price. Two, that the cost of subsidizing the 
Canadian price for our fellow Canadians in the East should be borne by all Canadians, not only 
Saskatchewan and Alberta or the western Canadian provinces. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, with the Premier's leadership the rest of the country for the first time was 
beginning to hear the complaints and to understand some of the grievances of the West. After all, 
Saskatchewan has paid for decades, paid to the industrialized East and central Canada at the expense 
of our own development. Canadian national policies up to now have been designed to keep the West 
really as producers of raw products. Above all at this conference Premier Blakeney argued 
Saskatchewan should not again, yet again, be called upon by Ottawa and Toronto and Montreal to 
under-value our precious and non-renewable resources. With these resources in high demand and we 
had to take every opportunity to get the top dollar value so that we can truly become full partners in 
Confederation and we argued that if we are going to give up any of these resources we need to have 
some changes in freight rates and transportation. We need agricultural stability for our farmers. We 
need industrialization for Saskatchewan to add to the industrial base of this province. 
 
Now in the end an agreement was reached which amounted to major concessions from 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. The magnitude of those concessions can be seen as follows. 
Seventy-five million barrels of oil are produced. Ottawa takes everything over $6.50. That means 
Ottawa gets $400 million a year from Saskatchewan residents alone in order to keep oil prices down 
in the rest of Canada. We agreed to that. That was an act of statesmanship by the Premier of the 
Province of Saskatchewan as art of the operation of Confederation. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan, I want you to know what the Liberals say 
about Bill 42. Now the Liberals say that Bill 42 must go. If they should by some chance win the 
next provincial election and Bill 42 is repealed, what would it mean to Saskatchewan in the light of 
what I have just stated? It means this. First, that the present ceiling on the returns to the oil 
producers, a ceiling which I remind you is 60 cents above the average in 1972 when they were 
making good 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1180 
 

profits, that ceiling of the oil producers would go, because that is what Bill 42 does. In short, rather 
than the people of this province getting approximately $150 million a year in royalties as we do now 
because of Bill 42, the oil companies would get that money instead. Mr. Speaker, imagine if you 
will, Mr. Leader of the Opposition if you will, $150 million every year out of the pockets of the 
taxpayers and directly into the pockets of the multinational oil corporations. And, if that is not 
enough, the Liberals say they are going to do the same thing for potash. 
 
Our revenues have risen from $3 million when we came into office in 1971 to something in the 
order of 90 million today. In short, what the Liberals say is that rather than the people of the 
province getting that $90 million in royalties from potash, which the potash corporations can afford 
to pay, instead of the people getting that income, the potash corporations are going to get that 
income now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is what repeal of Bill 42 and repeal of this natural resource policy will mean. In 
sum total - if the Liberals are elected and if they should repeal Bill 42 Saskatchewan taxpayers will 
lose in excess of $300 million a year from our pockets and directly to the multinational corporations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, that is Liberal natural resource policy. That is what they are going 
to do with Bill 42; that is what they are doing with the potash taxation policies. 
 
Now get this flip-flopping at the same time. Why they do all of this and yet in this Budget Debate 
they condemn us for not paying the pensioners enough. Someone should ask the Liberals, where are 
you going to get the money to keep these promises if at the same time you are giving away all 
resource revenues to the corporations? You can't have it both ways. If you are going to give away 
$300 or $400 million to the corporations, you are going to give some money to the pensioners or do 
something here, where are you going to get the money from? 
 
Well, we know where they are going to get the money from. They are going to tax, again, all the 
food - hotdog taxes, they will tax them on the food. They will do away with health plans. They will 
put on deterrent fees, they will do away with the drug plan or maybe give us a chance of a plebiscite 
on the drug plan. Well, you know they laugh at the drug plan but I will take the Bill and I will take 
the planning and I will take the word of the Minister of Health over any promise of a plebiscite on 
the drug plan that you will offer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition and the people of this province: if 
you are giving away $300 to $400 million - giving away - to the corporations, where are you going 
to get the money to do all these great and wonderful things you now hope the people of the province 
will buy, by way of election promises? There is no answer, Mr. Speaker. Because the Liberals will 
promise anything to get into power and then they won't do anything once they are in power. That is 
the 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1181 
 

record and everybody knows that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to know why the Liberals are doing this for the corporations. I want to 
know why is it that any political party that seeks to work for the advantage of the people of 
Saskatchewan, is prepared willingly to give away $400 million from the people to the corporations, 
especially when the corporations can afford to pay? Why are they doing this? Are they doing it so 
that the board of directors can get an extra carpet in Dallas or in New York? Why are they doing it? 
 
Secondly, I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the repeal of Bill 42 will mean to Saskatchewan. 
The repeal of Bill 42 will not allow this province to enter into federal-provincial negotiations, all of 
these things that we are fighting for, for the West, with any strong bargaining position. Because Bill 
42 says that the resources of this province belong to the province and that is our point, that is our 
starting point when we start negotiating with the rest of the country. By doing away with Bill 42 
provincial Liberals will be in effect saying to federal Liberals, okay boys you can do anything you 
want with Saskatchewan's natural resources. You can say anything you want about the 
non-deductibility of royalties for corporation taxes, we are not going to argue with you. That is the 
Liberal federal and the provincial attitude on this province's constitutional rights to the control of 
our resources. 
 
Well, I don't believe for one moment that that is the attitude of Saskatchewan people. I don't believe 
for one moment that they will allow another sell-out of resources by the Liberal Party ever again in 
the history of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I say, Mr. Speaker, that in a few short weeks our Premier and our delegation 
will, once again, be going to Ottawa to fight for the West and for Saskatchewan. I say this, as a 
young Saskatchewan Canadian, that we have an obligation to share our wealth and resources with 
our fellow Canadians in the East, yes, we do. We are a part of this country. But we are doing that 
now to the tune of $400 million a year. Is it unfair to ask for something in exchange for 
Saskatchewan? If we are to build on our prosperity; if we are to diversify, we need this revenue 
now. That is not a parochial or narrow attitude. We are paying $400 million every year to Ottawa. Is 
that greedy? Is it selfish, as the Leader of the Opposition said? Of course, it is not! We have 
recognized our responsibility as Canadians. I want to tell you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that we 
are as entitled as any Ontario person or Quebec person is entitled to reap some of the benefits from 
our own resources; to take full advantage of the natural advantages that we have in this province. I 
want to tell you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that we are entitled to maintain that if the Federal 
Government is seriously interested in creating an equal Canada from coast to coast, they will want 
to talk about a national, a truly national development policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I close, I want to say this. We have waited a long time to become a full partner in 
Confederation. That is all that we seek for Saskatchewan. That is what Bill 42 gives us, the 
necessary tools and weapons to do. That is what 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1182 
 

Bill 42 is all about. That is what our natural resources policy is all about. You Liberals say that Bill 
42 is going to be an issue. You are right it is going to be an issue in the next election campaign. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, the key is leadership. The key to the future is leadership. In 
Premier Blakeney we have a leader who bargains in the interest of Saskatchewan not in the interests 
of railway companies; not in the interest of large grain companies; not in the interest of oil 
companies; not in the interest of potash companies, so that they can get all this money, but for 
Saskatchewan. Our farmers, our business men, the workers, leadership thoughtful, intelligent, 
progressive, yes, leadership. I say that the Premier and his Government here is keeping 
Saskatchewan ahead. That is the goal that everybody wants and because the Budget meets that 
challenge 
 
I fully support it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT:(Regina WhitmorePark) Mr. Speaker, the debate in the House during Budget 
consideration has been pretty rational and considerate. I am disappointed in the Hon. Attorney 
General today because he behaved himself so well up to the present time, it is too bad that he 
spoiled his reputation in the final session on the Budget by his participation. He says that the policy 
of the NDP Government is to sell land to the farmers. Well, if that is the truth why doesn't he 
introduce an amendment to the Land Bank Act and put it in black and white so that the people of 
Saskatchewan will know what the policy is? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GRANT: You know as well as I and this House knows, that in the Bill and in the lease form it 
says, "may". It doesn't say a thing about the policy of the NDP Government. He is critical of the 
Opposition because they are criticizing. For his information I would like him to realize that the role 
of the Opposition is to criticize. 
 
Even though the Star-Phoenix may have backed down and got off the black list of the Premier, as 
far as the Budget is concerned, I noticed he was very pleased on the noon broadcast to find that they 
had joined the club and thought that the Budget was wonderful. I am really disappointed as I 
thought they had better judgment than that, but that is their privilege. 
 
I think the Attorney General could be termed the "Archie Bunker" of this Legislature today, because 
he said that he didn't want to use the word 'lie' in fact 'damn lie' was the expression that he was 
going to use. Archie Bunker wouldn't think of using that. His expression was "I didn't tell a lie, I just 
forget to tell the truth. And that is the way the Attorney General is today, he is forgetting to tell the 
truth, not only in connection with the question of the Land Bank, but the Crow's Nest rates, rail line 
abandonment and the oil situation in the province. He spoke of Bill 42 being a 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1183 
 

bargaining instrument as far as the province is concerned. I don't believe Alberta had such 
bargaining instruments and they didn't do too badly, they came out all right on it. The Premier was 
really the one who did a poor job bargaining. He came back complaining that they were going to 
lose $35 million in equalization grants and he knows as well as the rest of us that if his bargaining 
had been a little stronger the situation would have been a lot better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General cannot, by loud repetitious desk thumping, convince the people 
of this province that they are going to retain all the rail lines, because as pointed out it was under an 
NDP Government that the only rail line abandonment took place in Saskatchewan. I am sure that 
they honestly do not want to retain all the rail lines but they certainly try to give the impression that 
not a single inch of track will be pulled up. They realize that the longer the rails are left in the 
present condition, the worse they will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP Government has shown no leadership whatsoever in controlling public 
expenditures or taxes as far s this Budget would indicate. I think British Columbia and 
Saskatchewan have demonstrated one thing, that socialists are big spenders of the people's money. 
They want to be all things to all people and it appears that it is coming to the point where 
Saskatchewan taxpayers really can't afford to have the NDP in power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GRANT: It is true that Saskatchewan had a prosperous year during the last year and it is also 
true that this was mainly because of the farmers' income, which the NDP Government had little or 
nothing to do about causing them to be so buoyant. In fact, even though we did have a very 
prosperous year, I dare say it would have been better if the NDP hadn't been in the Government 
seats, because the oil industry, the potash industry and many other segments of our economy would 
have been in a better position. 
 
I say this, Mr. Speaker, bearing in mind the attitude of the Members to your right to business in 
general and industry in particular. The Attorney General, once again today, went off in a wild tirade 
about international corporations. My own summation is that if the NDP Government feels so 
strongly about corporations and big business they might just as well speed up their socialization of 
the oil industry and the potash industry in the province and let these industries know where they 
stand as far as Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
Let's look at the oil industry. Their socialistic attitude and their dog-in-the-manager attitude about 
private development has dragged the oil industry and the exploration industry to a standstill in the 
province. They so seriously damaged the oil servicing industry that they were forced to subsidize it 
and there is no doubt in anyone's mind, I don't think, that millions of dollars of possible investment 
money by-passed Saskatchewan merely because of their philosophy that when it comes to 
ownership of things, governments should be first, co-operatives second and private parties last on 
the list. 
 
I think that their actions during the past year surely 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1184 
 

must have convinced everyone that they are not kidding because while the Attorney General 
referred to it as creeping socialism, 300,000 acres of land is no small slice in the length of the time 
that they have been acquiring land through the Land Bank. 
 
This movement towards more government control and more socialism is evidenced by the Land 
Bank policy, Saskatchewan Oil Corporation, Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, Saskatchewan 
Investment Fund, their purchase of Intercontinental Packers. You could go on almost indefinitely. I 
would point out that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Robbins) in his comments listed a number of 
promises that were made and that have been delivered, but I would remind him that I don't recall 
any promise being made that there would be no vote on the Ward System in our two major cities, 
but nevertheless they delivered the Ward System without a vote. They didn't promise the people of 
Saskatchewan that there would be no vote on the Hog Commission yet we got one. They didn't tell 
the people there would be no vote on the take-over of Intercontinental Packers, but they did. They 
didn't promise no vote on the expulsion of industry in the province by taxation but nevertheless they 
have done it. 
 
To give you an idea as to how industry - and one particular industry - feels about Saskatchewan and 
the present Government, I should like to read a letter from the chairman of the Hudson Bay mining 
and Smelting Company to the shareholders of recent date. He was pointing out that the extra 
dividend of 50 cents paid last year had not been repeated: 
 

This does not mean that we have worked less hard or less effectively or that market conditions 
have been worse than in 1973. In fact we estimate that your company's profits before tax will 
increase by some $3 million. 

 
Higher than the previous year, but taxation by governments has gone up by $15 million over the 
previous year. 
 

This represents a tax rate of 54 per cent on profits on our operations in Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan and means that with $3 million additional profits taxes have gone up five times this 
amount. 

 
And it points out that: 

 
The federal mining rate is 50 per cent whereas in Saskatchewan the potash operations, the 
combined rate is 75 per cent and on marginal operations in excess of 100 per cent. 

 
He was also very critical that the provincial taxes on production or even on mine reserves being 
levied regardless of a company's ability to pay. He suggested that if the shareholders of the Hudson 
Bay Mining and Smelter Limited wanted this to continue they should keep their voices quiet and not 
raise them to either Ottawa or to the provincial capitals. I am not a shareholder of the company but I 
would hope that some of the shareholders have voiced their opinions to the Provincial Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone including governments seem to pay lip service to fighting inflation and I 
think the socialist governments of British Columbia and Saskatchewan are probably the worst 
offenders. The NDP spending binge in four years has 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1185 
 

seen increases totalling 150 per cent in budgets, of which 25 per cent comes about this year. How 
can any Government expect restraint by others when they set such a horrible example themselves? 
The Saskatchewan NDP Government reminds me of the proverbial drunken sailor and there is no 
doubt about it, it will be the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are going to wake up with the 
headaches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budgets cannot be perfect, they should be merely guidelines. But there are three areas 
where they can certainly fail and that is they can be either too small, too large or have wrong 
priorities. In this second "Robbin Budget" it cannot be described as being too small but it certainly 
qualifies in the other two categories, too large and the wrong priorities. There is absolutely no effort 
to reduce the Government load on the taxpayers, in fact the combined spending of the Federal 
Government, municipal governments and the Provincial Governments now must exceed 40 cents 
out of every dollar of gross income. I don't know when the point is going to be reached when the 
taxpayers say, "You have gone far enough." Actually this is socializing by taxation. Big Brother 
Government, year by year, takes more and more to squander in spheres where government has no 
right to be. Our NDP Government Members are limited in business experience; they appoint 
non-business people all too frequently, to Crown corporations, boards and agencies. They employ 
defeated politicians, or inexperienced party supporters who, with the aid of inexperienced civil 
servants, are to operate sizeable business endeavors. Frequently these operations are monopolistic in 
nature with little or no competition and where there is competition, the Government enterprises have 
an unfair advantage with the taxpayers' guarantee back of them. 
 
I was hoping that the Government would produce a bigger allocation toward the fight against 
alcoholism and was disappointed to learn that this year's allocation while it is up $235,000 is, I 
think, a considerably smaller percentage of the total budget than 1974. A government claiming so 
many goodies for the country cannot in all conscience justify such a limited budget to deal with all 
the problems generated by the consumption of alcohol. I am not advocating a larger budget, what I 
am advocating is that some of the vote buying items should have been omitted to provide a realistic 
budget for more treatment and rehabilitation of the victims of social habits which feed the 
Government $50 million in revenue. 
 
Your Highway Safety Committee is convinced that firm steps must be taken to educate, rehabilitate 
and penalize where necessary, those who drink to excess and drive. Our Government, the 
government to your right, must be prepared to allocate a greater proportion of the Budget to deal 
with this social problem. 
 
Turning to Industry and Commerce, it would appear that 1975 is a stand-still year, with the 
exception of a new program for disadvantaged persons. The proposed $900,000 steel complex study 
no doubt will be largely underwritten by Ottawa, and there is no mention of this. With only ten lines 
devoted to explaining plans for the Industry Department, it is an indication that their budget of $6 
million may produce reports and involve advice by 117 people, but do little or nothing to attract new 
investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
The anomaly is a strange one. One hundred and seventeen 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1186 
 

people supposedly to aid industrial development, while other Ministers and staff are doing their 
utmost to scare industry out of Saskatchewan, and prospective investors away from Saskatchewan. 
Looking at the Government's action on succession duties, it is evident that they realize they were too 
harsh in 1972. These duties do more harm than good and they should be abolished. 
 
Last year, the Premier tried to justify the increased exemption to offset rising prices. How can he use 
the same argument when he raised the special exemption for a spouse by 400 per cent, from $50,000 
to $250,000. I would say that if they keep on at this rate that in a few years they will do exactly what 
we have been recommending for a number of years, eliminate this unnecessary double tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1975 Budget is a clear indication of how our Government benefits by inflation at 
the expense of the taxpayer. It fails to acknowledge the need to leave more dollars in the hands of 
the people without Government acting as the middleman to skim off the cream. The $100 income 
tax reduction is long past due. Provincial income tax has been too high for several years. Only $27 
million will be returned when possibly $100 million in excess was taxed since 1971. It is interesting 
to note that the Budget anticipates an increase of $29 million in individual income tax so that they 
are well able to give a refund of $27 million. 
 
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, too many dollars are involved in discouraging investment in 
Saskatchewan, too few to make Saskatchewan attractive for investment. Government is involved in 
too many areas of our lives and the Budget moves still further in this direction. 
 
The NDP Government is great at paying lip service to our senior citizens but they fail to mention 
that the Federal Government is a big contributor to their guaranteed minimum amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have only touched on a few areas where our Budget is out of step with reality. It is a 
spendthrift budget aimed at buying the taxpayers' votes with their own money. 
 
Since this will probably be my last session, I should like to take this opportunity to make a few 
personal remarks on my retirement from politics. In 1964, Mr. Speaker, my constituency consisted 
of most of Regina City south of Wascana Creek. Time has a habit of bringing about change and this 
has been true in Regina South. Over the years my constituency has changed to the point of complete 
disappearance at the last redistribution. Thus it would seem that my retirement was planned by 
politicians to coincide with my approach to the old age pension. I'll only miss it by a few months 
and I think this is pretty good and accurate planning when governments are involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over a thirty year involvement in civic and provincial life, I feel I have been most 
fortunate in the support given to me by voters, staff and colleagues and the understanding at times of 
Members opposite. Holding public office has many satisfactions to offer and I recall two in 
particular. The first was my appreciation of being Regina's first native born mayor and subsequently 
a Minister of the Crown. 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1187 
 

Even sitting in the Opposition has its rewards, and possibly fewer frustrations than being a 
backbencher on the Speaker's right. Mr. Speaker, my years in this Legislature have been most 
rewarding and I thank you and the Members and staff for the courtesies extended to me. 
 
I am sorry that this, my last chance to discuss a Budget, didn't afford me an opportunity to support 
the motion but I am sure you have gathered by this time that I will not support the motion but I will 
support the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) Mr. Speaker, first of all I am very pleased to participate in 
the Budget Debate and particularly for the opportunity of following the Attorney General. After 
sitting here and listening to him, he really gave an indication of what the Members opposite think of 
the Budget, because he indicated that they are really frightened, frightened about rural 
Saskatchewan, frightened about what is going on in the farm communities, frightened about the 
possibility of their re-election. You know, I have been in this business for about 15 years and I have 
yet to see an election where the old bogey man of rail line abandonment, and rural Saskatchewan 
didn't come up, but never like it came up with the Attorney General. Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder he 
brought it up because the family farm is in danger, because the agriculture policies of the NDP have 
been a disaster. I am going to tell the Premier something and I am sorry he is not in his seat, because 
if the Members opposite are so proud of this Budget in exactly 45 minutes the Budget Debate will 
be over. I challenge the Premier to prorogue this House and go to the people. Let's have the election 
right now. Let's see the Member for Lloydminster and the Member for Yorkton or the Member for 
Regina go out and try to defend this Budget to the people of Saskatchewan, because you won't have 
an opportunity and the Premier won't dare. You know, I'll tell you why because this Budget very 
clearly defines some of the issues in this election campaign. The Attorney General said, Oh, the 
Member for Indian Head, they are extra scared, because we will get to know each other a lot better 
and this Budget a lot better. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what are the issues in this election campaign that is coming 
up that has come out of this Budget. The first one, issue number one in Saskatchewan, is the Land 
Bank. The Attorney General mentioned the Land Bank and he tried to salvage the minds of the NDP 
and the supporters of Saskatchewan by saying the NDP will sell the land. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to ask the Minister of Agriculture, there are now thousands of farmers in the Province of 
Saskatchewan who have leased land for five years, six years, seven years and ten years, who want to 
buy the land and the NDP refuses them. Land that has been purchased and owned by the Lands 
Branch of the Department of Agriculture that was being sold by a Liberal Government, but when 
this Government came into power it was turned off and the NDP has not sold one solitary acre since. 
Why then will they sell land in the Land Bank? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's look at the total package. The Attorney General talked about agriculture. No 
wonder the NDP are frightened in rural Saskatchewan. The Hog Commission that was forced down 
the farmers' throats has turned out to be an 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1188 
 

inefficient operation. It's turned around and what the indication is, it has destroyed the competition 
in Burns in Prince Albert, it's stopped 300 or 400 jobs. Second, they turned around and restricted 
farm ownership and denied Canadians the right to own land in this province. Do you know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Once again so the Land Bank will have the opportunity of buying every available parcel. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, they purchased Intercontinental and they squandered $10 million. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, this Budget provides another $10 million and you notice how conveniently the 
Attorney General said 260,000 acres, it is over 400,000 acres and at the end of this year it will be 
600,000 or 700,000 acres. And at the end of 1976 it will be 1 million acres. Mr. Speaker, the farmers 
are frightened of the Land Bank, they are apprehensive and they are concerned and because the 
Land Bank is bidding against them and against their funds. They know that there are political 
allocations, they know that the capital is being funded by pensioners' funds and they know that there 
is no option to buy. Every farmer in this province knows. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the farmers 
of Saskatchewan know that a vote for the NDP is a vote for state ownership of farm land in this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: What is issue No. 3? 
 
Deterrent fees for prescription drugs, that is what is going to be another issue in this election. Of all 
the hypocritical people I have ever heard in this House, one particularly is the Minister of Health 
(Mr. Smishek). Remember how they detested the principle of deterrent fees for the sick and the old 
and the lame. What does this prescription fee do? First of all ten per cent of the people of the 
Province of Saskatchewan will pay 50 per cent of the cost. Who will that ten per cent be? It will be 
the old, aged and the people who are chronically ill. There will be no limit, it will be the same on a 
person who spends $100 for drugs or somebody who spends $2,000 for drugs. It will be worse than 
any Liberal deterrent fee. Ninety thousand people of the Province of Saskatchewan will pay 50 per 
cent of the cost of the prescriptions or the deterrent fees. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the chronically ill will know that a vote for the NDP is a vote for deterrent fees 
and prescription drugs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: What is issue No. 4? Mr. Speaker, the deliberate destruction of the oil 
industry in the Province of Saskatchewan will be issue No. 4 in this province. Here we heard the 
Attorney General stand up here and discuss Bill 42. He said, Bill 42 is the thing that gave us the 
power to go to Ottawa and negotiate. Well, you know what Mr. Blakeney did when he negotiated? 
He gave $400 million away to the rest of Canada. That is what he did and if Bill 42 gave him that 
power, by gosh, we don't need that. What is his resource policy? He has got a very strange policy. 
He stands up in this House and says that the Federal Government has no right to resource taxation 
fields. In the next breath he demands equalization payments. Equalization payments come from 
somewhere, they come from the 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1189 
 

timber in Ontario, they come from the oil in Alberta, they are coming from the mines in British 
Columbia. You and I know that the resource industry of Canada has contributed hundreds and 
hundreds of millions of dollars in equalization payments in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does Bill 42 really do? There was a rather interesting ad in the paper today, or an 
article in the paper, "Oil Field Activity at Virtual Standstill." Mr. Speaker, a virtual standstill. You 
know by 1980 the Dominion of Canada will be short of oil, and this Government has virtually lost 
development. What did they do when they became the Government? They promised that the 
Province of Saskatchewan would develop these resource industries through public ownership. They 
established SaskOil. They turned around and they passed Bill 42. They established the Potash 
Corporation. They may now make it absolutely impossible for any potash mine in Saskatchewan to 
develop unless it is government controlled. What have been the results? In the month of January 
there were three oil wells completed in Saskatchewan, over 300 in the Province of Alberta. The oil 
industry is virtually gone, virtually gone from the Province of Saskatchewan and it is booming in the 
Province of Alberta. There were more oil wells drilled last year in the Province of Alberta than there 
were the year before. Mr. Speaker, there has not been one single potash mine expand or projected 
capital development since the reserve tax. Mr. Speaker, is this the kind of development that public 
ownership is promising the people of Saskatchewan? It will cost us hundreds and hundreds of 
millions of dollars in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this at a time when energy costs are skyrocketing and when there will be a predicted 
shortage in five or six years in this country. But the real tragedy is that we are missing a golden 
opportunity, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated, to give Saskatchewan the kind of 
strength and economic base that it needs for the future. This is the kind of a thing that we are 
missing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, don't ever worry that the business community in this province knows that a vote for the 
NDP is a vote for the continued strangulation of industrial development and growth in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: They know, too, Mr. Speaker, that the people that it will hurt will be the small 
businessmen like the oil and technical workers, the employees who would have had jobs, the 
consumer who's going to have to pay high taxes. 
 
Issue Number five. The continued decline of rural Saskatchewan. Now you know we heard the 
Attorney General talk about rural Saskatchewan. We heard him talk about the family farm. The 
Premier stood up and said, "I'm pleased that there are 3,000 people more in the Province of 
Saskatchewan." But what he really tried to hide and what the Attorney General really tried to hide is 
what is going on in the rural communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
What is going on in the rural municipalities? You know, Mr. Speaker, I have here the latest 
Statistics Canada survey for 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1190 
 

the Moose Jaw area. It shows that every single municipality in fact since these statistics of last year, 
is down in population. It showed that practically every town and village is down in population. 
Rural Saskatchewan is declining at an accelerated pace. There are over 16,000 people who are no 
longer in the rural municipalities in the Province of Saskatchewan in the last two years. There are 
over 102 out of 130 towns where there is decline in population. Let me give you some examples. 
Arm River from 482 down to 424. The town of Morse from 984 down to 862. The town of Harris 
from 482 down to 443. Every RM and every town in Saskatchewan is losing population. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because of the failure of the NDP to do anything for rural Saskatchewan. This, Mr. 
Speaker 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: Let me give you an example of what they did in the Department of Municipal 
Affairs. No wonder the Minister of Municipal Affairs did not talk in this debate. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, they turned around and gave Consumer Affairs a 90 per cent increase. They gave Public 
Service a 70 per cent in crease. They gave the Department of Government Services a 55 per cent 
increase. They gave the Department of Finance a 43 per cent increase. They gave the Department of 
Co-ops a 31 per cent increase. All to hire more civil servants and more bureaucratic control. 
 
What did they give the RMs and the small towns in Saskatchewan? Well first of all for the urban 
ones there were the unconditional operating grants one-tenth of one per cent. What did they give to 
them for the equalization formula? Minus two and a half per cent. 
 
Let's look at the rural municipalities. Assistance to main market farm roads - eight per cent. 
Equalization grants four per cent. Grid road maintenance - two and a half per cent. Super grid 
surfacing - zero per cent. Assisting main market roads - minus 30 per cent. Mr. Speaker, these 
figures are an insult to the rural municipalities and the councillors of this province. It's going to 
mean dramatic increases in mill rates in every municipality and every town and village in 
Saskatchewan. Why didn't the mayor stand up and mention these figures when he talked about 
Regina and the prospective mill rate increase for the city of Regina? Mr. Speaker, no, rural 
Saskatchewan is declining, rural Saskatchewan is accelerating its decline because of the agricultural 
policies of the NDP and because of their bankrupt policies for growth and development in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: And those, Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan, know that a vote 
for the NDP is a vote for decline in population, a vote for the decline of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What's issue number six? Mr. Speaker, the sad and dismal extravagance in government. Mr. 
Speaker, the sad and dismal record of this Government in the field of fiscal responsibility for the 
taxpayers' money will long be remembered. I don't have to record them for you, the auditors 
recorded them for us. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan, a half a million dollars in 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1191 
 

shoe box. The welfare, overpayments in one community, a half a million dollars. Service Printers, 
the Commonwealth, political graft and that's what it is, political graft. We have the political 
advertising. Millions of dollars in attempts to promote the re-election of the NDP. The Hog 
Commission. The auditor would not audit the books because of obvious inefficiency. The Base 
hospital. We heard the Minister of Health stand up here yesterday and attempt to defend the fact that 
the Base hospital is not open, the fact that the Base hospital is not functioning, the fact that it's a $20 
million building and standing idle. The Hearing Aid scandal. Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. On 
top of that we have four or five thousand new civil servants in Saskatchewan which means more 
bureaucratic control. No, Mr. Speaker, a vote for the NDP is another vote for inefficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will the issue of number seven be? The loss of the individual rights and the 
erosion of local autonomy. The Leader of the Opposition likes to refer to the NDP and their power 
grab as their 'lust for power.' In the unbelievable urge that the Government can manage the affairs of 
individuals or of people or municipalities, or local governments better than they can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you some examples. They attempted to seize control of the university. 
They attempted to seize control and only after the academic community revolted did they back off 
and attempt to put in some semblance of local autonomy. The seizure of powers by the Minister of 
Education from the trustees and removal of the right for boards to negotiate salaries for the teachers. 
The imposition of the Ward System in the cities without giving the assent or vote to the citizens. 
The threat to private business to lock their doors. The Natural Products Marketing Act without 
giving the producer a vote or any control to run his own affairs. Mr. Speaker, even the Human 
Rights Commission devised as supposed to protect human rights, is acting without any common 
sense or any reasonable attitude toward human discrimination. Mr. Speaker, you'll remember the 
Hudson's Bay store where on a Men's Night the Human Rights Commission immediately challenged 
them for a promotional stunt providing a little additional service for men. You know it's no wonder 
that the Minister of Health is bringing in a Bill to legalize a change of sex in Saskatchewan because 
they want to do away with Ladies' Night, Sadie Hawkin's Day, so no more will you be able to get 
your wife into the hockey game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know that a vote for the NDP is a vote for the continued 
erosion of human rights and individual liberties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there is another issue. And the issue is going to be the Premier's enemy list. 
You know it's kind of interesting. Imagine the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan who should 
be here to support all the people. The man who should be here and be the spokesman for everybody, 
beginning to enumerate those people he considers his enemies. And you know he named the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party and we're kind of proud of that. It's nice to be on that list and 
particularly at the top of that list. Then he named the media and a few other people in Saskatchewan. 
Well I'd like to add to his list, because as soon as he has the courage to call an election there's going 
to be a lot of other people that are 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1192 
 

going to be against him. The farmers who don't believe in state ownership of farm land are going to 
be on that list The businessman whom he declared war on for four years is going to be on that list. 
The oil and technical workers from Estevan and the oil fields are going to be on that list. The nurses 
who refuse to work for the Government are going to be on that list. The pharmacists who are now 
fighting with the Minister Of Health are going to be on that list. The school trustees who have been 
robbed of their rights of local autonomy are going to be on that list. And, Mr. Speaker, even the 
teachers are going to be on that list because teachers are mad at the Government for the mess that 
they've created. Mr. Speaker there is no question the Premier has an enemy list of people who have 
rejected the amount of regimentation and control and the poor leadership of the Premier of this 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's going to be another issue and that's the one the Attorney General brought 
up and that's the Crow's Nest rates. You know, it's kind of interesting every time the NDP are in 
trouble on the verge of an election ready to campaign farm to farm, town to town, they've got to find 
something to talk about besides Jack Messer and his disastrous agricultural policies. Mr. Speaker, 
and not only that they want to try and pin the label of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party on the Crow's 
Nest rates and on rail line abandonment. It was kind of interesting because I've been at a few 
meetings, I've been at a few meetings on the Crow's Nest rates and rail line abandonment. And the 
interesting part of it is that there has been nobody, no one who accepts with any kind of validity, the 
wild misrepresentations of the NDP in this province. The reason they don't accept it is because they 
are sick and tired of the NDP coming up at every election and trying to throw the bogey man of rail 
line abandonment in front of them. They know that they're in serious trouble. You know somebody 
told me that they took a survey of rural Saskatchewan, the NDP did, and one of the farmers said, "I 
sure told them what I thought of the Land Bank. I sure told them what I thought of the Hog 
Commission." And you people know exactly. You people know exactly your position in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I'm going to tell you, you're going to try and rally the troops but it's not going to 
work. It's not going to work, Mr. Speaker, and the reason it's not going to work is because the 
people of Saskatchewan know that the first man in Saskatchewan who spoke against any change in 
the Crow's Nest rates was Dave Steuart last November. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: He was the first man in Saskatchewan who spoke against changing the Crow's 
Nest Agreement at the Liberal convention in Regina last November. Mr. Speaker, they know that 
John Gardner and Tom Weatherald and the farmers in the Liberal caucus know the reason why they 
want to preserve the Crow's Nest rates. 
 
But you know the disappointing thing about it, the disappointing thing about it is that the NDP is 
refusing the role of leadership in the transportation system, because it is time for a decision. It is 
time for a decision. There are many lines where the railways have been applying for abandonment 
for the last ten years and the Federal Government has refused to invest any money. They've spent 
millions of dollars on water transportation, millions of dollars on air transportation and they've left 
the railway system practically intact as it was ten 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1193 
 

years ago because of the applications for abandonment. It is time that the decision was made that 
many of those lines will not be up for abandonment and that they would be put in the permanent 
system. And that is why it is time for a decision. There are rail lines in Saskatchewan today that 
cannot handle hopper cars, rail lines that will stay and be part of the permanent structure and yet this 
particular Government won't stand up and face the responsibility and say, let's make that decision, 
let's put them into the permanent system, let's hold those public hearings and get this decision settled 
once and for all. 
 
It is time, Mr. Speaker, that the Federal Government invested as much in the railway system as they 
did in dredging in eastern Canada, in the harbours in Vancouver. It is time that they started, Mr. 
Speaker, to turn around and put investment in the rail system in this province. There are also all 
kinds of communities that don't know whether they're going to have an elevator and grain 
companies are not rebuilding old facilities There are also companies that would like to invest in 
secondary industries in small communities in rural Saskatchewan. They won't do it because they 
don't know whether the railway will be there in the future. It is time for a decision in Saskatchewan 
and it's time that the NDP as the Government of this province provided some leadership. It's time 
that they quit trying to make a political issue against the Federal Government. It's time that Roy 
Romanow who is the Minister in charge of Transportation stood on his feet in this Legislature and 
co-operated and got those public hearings over and get the permanent structure of the rail system in 
Saskatchewan here for now and for the next 25-30 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crow's Nest rates and rail line abandonment will backfire on the NDP and it will 
back fire for one reason, for one reason, because Jack Messer and the NDP agriculture program in 
Saskatchewan has been a disaster. It's been a disaster. It's driven people off the farm. It's driven 
people out of rural Saskatchewan and Mr. Speaker, it infringes upon the very rights of farmers and 
the citizens for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana Centre) Mr. Speaker, it seems that every year I have 
the dubious honour of following the Member for Milestone, the Member with a one track mind 
which is generally derailed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: He says, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is in trouble in relation to the 
electorate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Wouldn't they like to be in that kind of trouble! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: That noisy little nuisance 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1194 
 

from the northern woods, the Leader of the Opposition who thinks that some day he might be 
premier of this province. Actually if we look at the record we can see why we would assume that he 
should soon be seated in that other place. Senator Hicks, at one time the Liberal Premier of Nova 
Scotia, went to his reward. Senator Robichaud, one time the premier of New Brunswick went to his 
reward. The Leader of the Opposition has never been the Premier so he could argue, that's no 
criterion, but Senator Molgat from Manitoba, former leader of the Liberal Party, went to that other 
place. Senator Hastings from Alberta, Liberal leader in Alberta now is in that place. Mr. Perrault 
from British Columbia, defeated federally, now is in that other place. We are honoured today to 
have a former Member of this House, Senator MacDonald, visiting us, the former Liberal leader in 
this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: I note, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition spent a fair bit of time checking 
with him on the rental rates in Ottawa this afternoon. He's got his spot all picked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of presenting to this House one week ago the fourth consecutive 
balanced Budget of this Government. A Budget which has basically completed the commitments 
made to the people of Saskatchewan by the New Democratic Party in the 1971 election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: In that Budget, Mr. Speaker, we have substantially increased the Property 
Improvement Grant relieving property taxation to a level equivalent to a 22 mill tax reduction. We 
have cut 1971 income taxes by $100. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: We took, Mr. Speaker, 70,000 of our lower income taxpayers off the provincial 
tax roll. We eliminated the sales tax on meals put on by the Liberals and we eliminated the tax on 
reading materials. We raised the exemptions for succession duties significantly. To the Old Age 
Security Guaranteed Income Supplement recipient we have added $20 a month for single persons 
and up to $36 for a married couple. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Operating grants to schools, Mr. Speaker, are increased by an unprecedented 
$26.2 million, a total increase in school grants of some $63 million since 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Operating grants to universities will rise by 25 per cent. As announced by my 
colleague, the Minister of Social Services, we have substantially raised the provincial subsidy to 
private paying residents of special care homes. The Member for Milestone talks about the senior 
citizens being 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1195 
 

poorly treated. They provided $56,000 in subsidies for senior citizens in nursing homes and this year 
we provide $8,100,000. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: For the handicapped we provide a new Transit Assistance Program together with 
social, recreational grants. Library grants have been increased by 40 per cent over the current fiscal 
year. We've provided $1.25 million in matching grants for international development projects. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Mr. Speaker, naturally I expected the Members opposite to resist the obvious 
temptation to lavish praise on this Budget. Nevertheless I had hoped to hear constructive comments 
from them during that five-day debate. I sat patiently; I listened I attentively and I heard none, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition rose twice to speak on this debate and what did we hear? Mr. 
Speaker, the farmers in this province were collectively insulted when the Member for Prince Albert 
(Mr. Steuart) said we were giving $13 million to pigs. It was people not pigs who received those 
payments. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Mr. Speaker, he insulted every taxpayer when he said that they were being bribed 
by our progressive tax cut. He went so far as to ask that "The tax cut be treated with the contempt it 
deserves." That kind of comment, Mr. Speaker, certainly explains to me why he never stooped so 
low as to cut taxes when he was in charge of the Provincial Treasury. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: And what about the thousands of individuals who are participating directly or 
indirectly in our programs to provide grants for international development projects? Surely he must 
have had some praise for them. Not a word, Mr. Speaker! Only insults. He characterized those 
concerned citizens as people "who want to run around sticking their noses into somebody's business 
in some other country." What kind of a comment is that from a Member who is aspiring to be this 
province's Premier? I might add, aspiring in vain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition claims that our tax cut is inadequate, leaving 
Saskatchewan citizens among the most heavily taxed people in all Canada. That is simply not true 
and he knows it. Our income tax with the effective rate of about 34 per cent this year will mean that 
only wealthy Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia, the three 'have' provinces, can claim to have 
lower rates. And let's not forget, Mr. Speaker, that even in those provinces they still charge their 
citizens substantial medical premiums. Excluding Alberta, we have the lowest sales tax and gasoline 
tax in all of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1196 
 

motor license fees are the second lowest in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: It became abundantly clear to me, while sitting in this Assembly during the past 
week, that the Members opposite have very little substantive constructive criticism to offer. A fair 
number of them took great pleasure in stating that our $100 tax cut merely brought our provincial 
income tax back to the 1971 level. Mr. Speaker, let's review the facts. 
 
In 1971 the provincial rate was 34 per cent. When tax reform was introduced by the Federal 
Government in 1972 the provincial rates for the nine provinces were adjusted by the Liberal 
Government in Ottawa to yield approximately the same revenue under the new taxation system. 
They know that, Mr. Speaker. For example: a family with an income of $10,000 paid $472 at the 34 
per cent rate in 1971 and $462 at the 37 per cent rate in 1972 - $10 less. Mr. Speaker, the calculated 
tax in 1972 at the 37 per cent provincial rate, is actually less for all income levels than the 1971 
taxes at the 34 per cent rate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: In 1973 we did raise the tax from 37 to 40 per cent in order to provide tax relief in 
other areas such as the property tax. That was a tax shift based on the ability to pay and we do not 
apologize for that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: That increase represented an 8 per cent increase in the rate. Now we have 
introduced a $100 tax cut, roughly equivalent to a drop in the Saskatchewan rate from 40 per cent to 
an average level of 34 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that represents more than an 18 per cent drop in our 
rate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: May I give you a few examples: in 1964 under a CCF Government a person or a 
family with a $6,000 income and two dependent children paid a provincial income tax of $114; the 
same family in 1968 under a Liberal Government paid $157; the same family still under a Liberal 
Government in 1971, before the 1971 election, paid $162. That is an increase of 42 per cent while 
they were in power. In 1975, under an NDP Government we removed that tax entirely. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: In 1964 a family on a $10,000 income and two dependants paid $333 provincial 
tax under a CCF Government; in 1968 under a Liberal Government $415; in 1971 still under a 
Liberal Government $472. In 1975 under a New Democratic Government $315, a reduction of 33 
per cent over the Liberal rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1197 
 

MR. ROBBINS: Mr. Speaker, even if we go to a relatively high income family of $20,000 per year 
with two dependent children, 1964 under a CCF Government the provincial income tax was $1,225; 
1968 under a Liberal Government provincial income tax was $1,685; 1971 still under a Liberal 
Government it was $1,736 an increase under the Liberals of 42 per cent. In 1975 under a New 
Democratic Government down to $1,372, a decrease of 21 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: The Leader of the Opposition wants us to make the tax cut retroactive to the 1974 
taxation year. Mr. Speaker, last year I formally asked the Federal Minister of Finance, the Hon. John 
Turner, to have the federal authority administer a provincial tax cut for 1974. He informed me that 
due to the lateness of the Federal Budget, which didn't come down until November 18th, this would 
not be possible. Only a tax reduction commencing in 1975 could be enacted and this, Mr. Speaker, 
is exactly what we have done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: The Member for Prince Albert misled this House when he stated that the tax cut 
would not take effect until next year. I stated last Friday, payroll deductions will be adjusted at he 
earliest possible date, July 1, 1975 to reflect the tax cut. 
 
For the six month period from July 1, 1975 to December 31, 1975 the tax cut will be doubled up 
with the tax cut applicable in 1975 available in 1975 for most Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Our $7 million of income supplementation to senior citizens has come under 
criticism by the Opposition. In this period of sustained inflation this Government sought to provide 
some increased assistance over and above the established federal pension levels. The Leader of the 
Opposition says the Liberals will pay $350 for singles. I believe him, $350 with a decimal between 
the three and the five. When Liberals keep one per cent of their promises they really outdo 
themselves. They say our payment isn't high enough; they talk about $350 a month for single 
pensioners and $500 a month for couples. That is an excellent goal, but, Mr. Speaker, the Federal 
Government should undertake the financing of that massive program for after all it is a national old 
age pension. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: I ask the Leader of the Opposition if he has any idea of what such a proposal 
could cost? It would cost somewhere between $63 million and $80 million per year. 
 
The Liberal Government between 1964 and 1971 didn't pay one cent in supplements. How could 
any Saskatchewan elector today believe that they would implement pension supplements costing 
$60 to $80 million now? 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1198 
 

With respect to senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, I should like to make one further point. Our income tax 
cut coupled with new tax deductions in 1975 will mean that senior citizens will be entitled to have 
as much as $8,500 a year in income without paying one single cent in provincial income taxes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: Mr. Speaker, Opposition Members attempt to belittle the Budget. That is their 
prerogative. Reference has been made by Members opposite in this debate to the tenuous food 
situation and the fact that many people habiting this globe are starving or are on the verge of 
starvation. We have taken some effective action to assist these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would remind this Assembly that at the end of 1974 the world had approximately one 
month's food supply in terms of cereal grain reserves. Three month's supply is considered the 
minimal requirement. Mr. Speaker, the world require an additional 22 million bushels of grain 
production each year to cope with the increase in the world's population. In 1974 world cereal 
production declined by 50 million bushels. In other words we suffered a short fall of some 72 
million bushels in terms of the world's needs this year. We may well ask what will happen if 1975 
cereal grain production should fall below normal. The results would be critical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Opposition Members constantly remind us of their faith in the Federal Liberal 
Government and particularly of the virtues of their political paragon The Hon. Otto Lang, Minister 
of Justice. Unfortunately for Canada and the world he is also the Minister in charge of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. He is in this context, the Dean of MPs, that is misplaced persons. Little wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that at the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegates passed a motion 
calling on the Prime Minister to remove him from that office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: We should look at the record, Mr. Speaker. In 1970 the Hon. Otto Lang 
introduced the LIFT program. The Federal authority paid farmers not to grow wheat. They, Mr. 
Speaker, effectively reduced Saskatchewan's wheat production in that year by 225,320,000 bushels, 
a three year supply of the shortfall in world production needs which occurred in the 1974 crop year. 
No guesswork here, Mr. Speaker. The acreage in wheat in Saskatchewan for the past 30 years has 
averaged 16,6000,000 acres per year. In 1970, as the result of LIFT it was reduced to 8 million 
acres. The Saskatchewan wheat crop in 1970 averaged 26.2 bushels per acre The annual Wheat 
Board report signed by the Hon. Mr. Lang, indicated the average price received on that year's 
production was $1.67 l/4 cents per bushel. A loss in excess of $376 million to Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Worse still, Mr. Speaker, much worse, was the production loss and the resultant grain loss to world 
grain reserves. A loss, Mr. Speaker, which should never have occurred, an economic and social 
disaster. This is the same Minister who wants to do away with the Crow's Nest rates; to abandon rail 
lines, to promote inland terminals, weaken the Wheat Board 



 
March 21, 1975 

 

1199 
 

with a feed grain policy which makes no sense for grain producers. And now, Mr. Speaker, in 
relation to our oil resources, this Minister threatens taxation of Crown corporations, if the province 
uses this method as a means to protect their economic rent from their own resources. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, the Wheat Pool delegates showed good sense and clairvoyance. We most 
certainly Otto Lift Lang. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: I should like to make a few remarks with respect to some of the comments of the 
Members opposite this afternoon. 
 
I was interested in the comments of the Hon. Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant). I have a good 
deal of respect for the Member for Whitmore Park. He said, however, that the Budget was too large. 
You could cut $200 million off the Budget with a stroke of a pen if you went back to the net 
budgeting they used in the years gone by. I should like to know what he would cut out of the 
Budget? Would he cut out the subsidies to nursing homes of $8 million? It wasn't there when the 
Liberals were there. Would he cut out $5 million on medicare? It wasn't there when the Liberals 
were in power. Would he reduce school grants by $63 million and therefore let the mill rates rise by 
22 mills? Would he remove the senior citizen's income package? Would he do away with the 
funding for the drug program? Would he remove the $13 million expended in terms of Hog 
Stabilization which saved the hog industry last year? In addition, would he remove the $72 million 
in tax relief that we brought about through income tax reduction, E and H tax reductions, gasoline 
tax reductions and other items? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) in his amendment states that we have not 
provided enough for local governments. Assistance to urban municipalities in 1975 will be over 16 
times, 1,600 per cent greater than it was four short years ago. Relief to taxpayers under the Property 
Improvement Grant will be some three times greater. This combined program of tax relief and 
unconditional funding does ease the burden of the property tax and permits urban municipalities to 
continue o exercise their right to their local autonomy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying I will oppose the amendment and support the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS – 10 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart MacDonald (Milestone)  MacDonald 
Coupland Gardner (Moose Jaw N.) 
Guy Weatherald Grant 
Lane Malone  
 



 
March 21, 1975 
 

1200 
 

NAYS – 31 
Messieurs 

 
Blakeney Pepper Tchorzewski 
Dyck Michayluk Taylor 
Meakes Byers Matsalla 
Smishek Thorson Faris 
Romanow Whelan Owens 
Snyder Kwasnica Mostoway 
Thibault Carlson Gross 
Baker Engel Rolfes 
Kowalchuk Cody Hanson 
Brockelbank Robbins Kaeding 
MacMurchy   
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS – 31 
Messieurs 

 
Blakeney Pepper Tchorzewski 
Dyck Michayluk Taylor 
Meakes Byers Matsalla 
Smishek Thorson Faris 
Romanow Whelan Owens 
Snyder Kwasnica Mostoway 
Thibault Carlson Gross 
Baker Engel Rolfes 
Kowalchuk Cody Hanson 
Brockelbank Robbins Kaeding 
MacMurchy   
 

NAYS – 10 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart MacDonald (Milestone)  MacDonald 
Coupland Gardner (Moose Jaw N.) 
Malone Guy Weatherald 
Grant Lane  
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:27 o'clock p.m. 
 
 


