




















































Hansard: November 12, 1975


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Wednesday, November 12, 1975 

 

1 

 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the 

twenty-first day of October 1975, the meeting of the First Session of the Eighteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan and the Assembly having met: 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-

Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present 

Legislature until later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker according to 

law. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Blakeney, addressing himself to the Clerk moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Romanow, that John Edward Brockelbank, Esquire, Member for the Constituency of Saskatoon 

Westmount, do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was resolved that John Edward Brockelbank, Esquire, do 

take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair and the Mace was laid on the table. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

I beg to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of the high honor the 

Assembly has been pleased to confer upon me. 

 

While I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I feel that I also leave all 

political partisan feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all and to the best of my 

ability the various and important duties pertaining to the high office of Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil 

the important duties thus assigned to me. 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

2 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly, whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable 

them to discharge their duty to their Queen and Country humbly claim all their undoubted rights and 

privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person at all 

seasonable times and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favorable consideration. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to declare 

to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and 

Government, and not doubting their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, 

he grants and upon all occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour 

upon all seasonable occasions and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will 

constantly receive, from him the most favorable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following 

Speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the Eighteenth Legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

THE ECONOMY 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy in 1975 has maintained the buoyant pace it set in 1974. 

 

Our population has continued to increase, and halfway through the year reached 920,000. 

 

September was the eighth successive month in which Saskatchewan enjoyed the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

This year’s wheat crop of close to 400 million bushels was substantially larger than last year’s 

and of higher average grade. 

 

The agricultural industry, however, faces substantial increases in production costs with cattle 

producers in particular caught in a serious cost-price squeeze. 

 

My Government is disappointed that federal initiatives in income stabilization for agricultural 

producers continue to fall far short of the need. My Minister will continue to press for realistic 

stabilization programs which are fully responsive to changes in farm production costs. 

 

But, despite the uncertainties facing beef producers, Saskatchewan’s economy continues to 

perform at near-maximum capacity — a performance matched in few other jurisdictions in North 

America. 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

3 

 

AGRICULTURE 

 

In recent years, my Government has given priority to the development and preservation of family 

farms as the basis of our Province’s agricultural industry. FarmStart and Land Bank are two important 

new programs designed to help young people start farming. 

 

By March 31, 1975, the FarmStart Corporation had made loans and grants of nearly $44 million 

to 2,035 applicants. Of these, more than half had not been farming two years previously. 

 

The Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission has met with similar success. Since its inception, it 

has granted leases to about 1,400 farmers. Here again, three out of five either were not farming 

previously or had operated one-half section of land or less. 

 

My Government will continue to place strong emphasis on stabilizing agriculture and revitalizing 

our rural areas. As part of these efforts, you will be asked to consider amendments to The Land Bank 

Act, 1972, which will clarify the intent of the Act and define more precisely the specific path of the 

program. 

 

You will also be asked to approve amendments to The Dairy Products Act, The Conservation 

and Development Act, and The Agricultural Implements Act, 1968. 

 

ANTI-INFLATION PROGRAM 

 

My Ministers have responded positively to the Federal Government’s call for provincial co-

operation in a concerted attack on inflation. It is my Government’s view that decisive action is needed, 

and that — to succeed — such action must break the inflation psychology. 

 

But a program of restraints must be comprehensive and must be as fair and equitable as possible 

for all groups in society. In the judgment of my Government, the initial federal proposal fails these two 

tests. Therefore, while my Government stands ready to co-operate, my Ministers have sought a number 

of changes in the program as first announced. 

 

These are the areas of major concern. 

 

First is the fact that it is proposed to control wages firmly without a correspondingly firm control 

of prices and profits. Any price increase ultimately deemed to be excessive may take a number of 

months to roll back. My Ministers continue to press for a system of selective price controls on key 

commodities, like steel, cement and fertilizer, which would require that price increases be justified by 

cost increases and approved by the Anti-Inflation Board before taking effect. 

 

Second, low income workers are being asked to shoulder too large a share of the burden. My 

Ministers were pleased that the federal government raised the level of individual incomes not subject to 

controls from $6,000 to about $7,000, but this is considered to be still too low. 

 

Third, the wage control measures appear to be too inflexible to allow for fair resolution of transitional 

contract settlements 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

4 

 

or for adjustments which would restore regional parity among classes of employees. Large numbers of 

Saskatchewan workers are affected by this rigidity — public employees, teachers, nurses and 

construction workers, among others. 

 

Fourth is the question of controlling professional income. In my Government’s view, net 

incomes of professionals cannot be effectively controlled by fixing fee schedules. Rather, a federal 

income surtax is required. 

 

These concerns have all been put vigorously to the federal government. The extent to which the 

federal program may be changed is not yet clear. Thus, provincial action to complement federal action 

will only take its full shape in the weeks ahead. 

 

Nevertheless, my Government will proceed on several fronts. 

 

You will be asked to consider legislation to place controls on rents. 

 

In seeking contract settlements with employees in the public sector, my Government will be 

guided by the federal proposals, subject to appropriate adjustments designed to maintain fair rates of pay 

for various classes of employees in relation to their counterparts in other prairie provinces. 

 

To protect workers at the lower end of the wage scale, my Government will increase the 

minimum wage to $2.80, effective January 1, 1976. 

 

My Government will actively assist the federal Anti-Inflation Board in monitoring price 

increases and will provide an avenue for relaying citizen complaints for investigation by the Board. 

 

My Government’s capital spending on public works has been severely restrained since 1974. 

This restraint will continue. Many new capital programs will be deferred, and the number of positions in 

the public service will be held at or close to the 1975 level. 

 

Other restraints in the area of public spending will be announced by my Minister of Finance 

when he presents his Budget. 

 

HOUSING 
 

In general, my Government welcomes the federal government’s new housing proposals. If they 

prove to be adaptable to Saskatchewan’s particular needs, they should assist many families to obtain 

suitable houses or rental units at costs they can afford. 

 

My Ministers have urged that the federal government adopt a firmer stance in directing the 

chartered banks to put a greater share of their funds into housing. 

 

In Saskatchewan, provincial credit unions have played a leading role in funding housing 

mortgages. And contrary to national and regional trends, housing starts in Saskatchewan continue to 

increase. After a record 7,700 starts last year, the construction pace has accelerated in 1975. Through 

September, housing starts in centres with a population of 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

5 

 

10,000 or more were up 45 per cent over the comparable period in 1974. Yet vacancy rates in many 

centres remain extremely low, reflecting an unsatisfied need for housing which must be met. 

 

Thus, while my Ministers will continue their efforts to make federal programs more directly 

applicable to Saskatchewan, you will in addition be asked to approve expansions in provincial housing 

assistance programs. Special attention will be directed to increasing the supply of serviced land, 

providing more rental housing and encouraging co-operative housing developments. 

 

To assist senior citizens to meet rising costs, you will be asked to amend The Senior Citizens 

Home Repair Assistance Act, 1973 to increase the maximum amount of the grant payable. 

 

RESOURCES 
 

My Government’s resource development policy is well known. The cornerstone of that policy is 

the right of the people of Saskatchewan to receive their fair share of benefits from the development of 

their resources. 

— benefits in public revenues; 

 

— benefits in jobs from the harvesting and processing of resources; 

 

— benefits in conservation of scarce resources for future generations; 

 

— benefits in achieving a greater control over their own destiny. 

 

In pursuit of those objectives, my Government has adopted a flexible approach, sometimes 

innovative, but never doctrinaire. It has launched new approaches to public ownership; it has sought 

joint ventures between the Government and private developers; it has encouraged and assisted the 

private sector. 

 

With each approach, the test against which the Government has measured its action has been and 

continues to be: What route will provide the greatest public benefits, now and in the future? 

 

Growth and expansion are important, but clearly these are not the only goals. Resources must be 

conserved for future generations and the degree of control by Saskatchewan people over those resources 

increased. 

 

It is recognized fully that now and in the future Saskatchewan will need expertise and capital 

from outside our province. 

 

Opportunities for broadening and expanding our economic base must be pursued. But the price 

in loss of revenue and loss of local control must not be too high. 

 

In its approach to the Province’s timber resources, for example, my Government has reclaimed 

from the large private operators the right to manage the resource in the public interest. The large private 

operators remain. But less saw 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

6 

 

timber is now being used to produce a lower value product — pulp. Many fewer prime spruce plywood 

logs are now being used for the production of lower value 2 x 4s. 

 

Instead, my Government has established a publicly-owned mill at Hudson Bay. New or 

revitalized sawmills, privately and publicly owned, are operating or under construction in other parts of 

the commercial forest area. 

 

My Government will continue to develop the timber industry, with a mix of public, private and 

co-operative enterprises and with the objectives of achieving a fuller use of the raw material and the 

highest degree of timber processing within the Province, all within the framework of sound conservative 

practices. 

 

Saskatchewan is relatively rich in energy resources — petroleum, coal, uranium. Development 

policies have been adapted in the particular circumstances of each. 

 

With the sudden rise in the price of oil, my Government moved decisively to capture the windfall 

increase in the value of oil for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

A new Crown corporation — SaskOil — was created to participate in the development of new 

oil reserves and in acquiring existing reserves. Today it holds reserves totalling nearly 9 million barrels 

of oil or natural gas equivalents. 

 

Saskatchewan has never produced within its borders sufficient natural gas to meet its own needs. 

Therefore, the Government’s policy has been directed towards assuring an adequate supply of natural 

gas for our citizens in the future. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation has steadily increased its 

ownership of or access to natural gas resources. 

 

My Government will continue to encourage exploration for new reserves. It is true that no major 

new oil pool has been found in Saskatchewan for many years. But the search will continue both by 

SaskOil and by the private industry. Exploration is expanding. My Ministers have held extensive 

discussions with the oil industry over the past several months. They will be announcing almost 

immediately important changes in oil royalty regulations which will offer substantial new incentives to 

encourage private oil exploration. These changes will reinforce the renewed interest already evident in 

oil exploration in the Canadian Prairie basin. 

 

Saskatchewan has large reserves of lignite coal — a resource which becomes more valuable day 

by day. At present, most coal production is used to produce electric power for the provincial system. The 

Poplar River plant will expand that use. But both the Department of Mineral Resources and the Power 

Corporation are exploring new techniques such as coal gasification for the decades ahead. 

 

Legislation will be introduced at this Session to help ensure that future development of our coal 

resource, both private and public, is consistent with sound conservation practices and future energy 

requirements. 

 

My Government will continue to protect future supplies of 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

7 

 

conventional energy resources for Saskatchewan people through these means. 

 

Uranium is a fuel of the future. The dimensions of our uranium resources are not yet fully 

known, but the promise of new discoveries is bright. Here, my Government’s approach has been to seek 

joint exploration ventures with mining companies. My Government has entered into some ten joint 

ventures, sharing the risks, but also ensuring that the public will share in the future rewards. One 

promising uranium find has already been made through a joint venture arrangement. 

 

There will continue to be an important role for private enterprise and the individual prospector in 

the development of uranium and hard rock minerals. 

 

In one important resource area the policies being followed by my Government have been less 

successful in combining growth and expansion with an assured fair return to the people of this province. 

 

I refer to potash, perhaps our most important non-renewable resource. 

 

Saskatchewan’s reserves of potash are among the largest in the world. 

 

Potash is an essential element to raise food productivity in many areas of the world, particularly 

in those areas deficient in food production. 

 

Current production of potash in Saskatchewan is exclusively in the hands of private corporations, 

most of those subsidiaries of giant multinational conglomerates. None has any significant ownership or 

control by Saskatchewan residents. 

 

My Government has attempted to work out an accommodation with these companies which 

would — through regulation, taxation and participation in their future expansion — guarantee greater 

production capacity, an assured fair return to the province and a greater ownership role for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My Government has been frustrated in these attempts. 

 

The response of a majority of the companies has been to decline to provide information required 

to be provided by law, to decline to proceed with expansion required to meet anticipated future demand 

and to challenge in a series of legal actions the right of the Province of Saskatchewan to conserve the 

resource and to collect taxes from the industry. 

 

My Government has given careful consideration to its stated objectives of ensuring expansion of 

potash production and an assured fair return and a greater participating role for the people of 

Saskatchewan and has concluded that these are valid and vital objectives to be pursued. 

 

My Government is faced with three options. 

 

First, it could retreat from its objectives, accommodate its policies to the willingness of the 

industry to comply, and surrender for future generation of Saskatchewan people their heritage from this 

vast resource. 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

8 

 

This course is unacceptable. 

 

Second, my Government could stand still, permit present uncertainties to continue and, through 

attrition, delay the expansion of potash production. This course involves serious risks for Saskatchewan. 

 

- a risk of loss of Saskatchewan’s key position in world potash production; 

 

- a risk of huge losses in future tax revenues; 

 

- a risk of being ordered by a Court at some time in the future to repay hundreds of millions of 

dollars  already collected. 

 

These are risks my Government is not prepared to take. 

 

The third option is to regain provincial control of our potash resource by taking decisive action. 

 

This is the course my Government proposes to pursue. 

 

You will therefore be asked at this Session to approve legislation which will enable my 

Government to acquire the assets of some or all of the producing potash mines in the province. 

 

Where the terms of an agreement for sale can be reached between my Government and a selected 

potash company, it will not be necessary to invoke the legislation. Where such an agreement cannot be 

reached, however, the legislation will enable my Government to expropriate the Saskatchewan assets of 

that company and will place in the hands of an impartial board of arbitration and determination of a fair 

and equitable price for the assets acquired. The arbitration board’s decision may be appealed to the 

Courts by either party. 

 

Although the size of the potential investment by the province is large, it will be a fully self-

liquidating investment, paid for by potash mined in the future. No tax increases will be required, nor will 

general tax revenues be diverted to meet capital requirements for this venture. 

 

Present jobs in the industry at all levels will be preserved. Indeed, through early expansion, 

hundreds of new jobs will be created. 

 

My Government believes that by achieving effective control through ownership of a major part 

of the industry it will be possible: 

 

- to ensure orderly expansion of production in Saskatchewan to meet growing world needs; 

 

- to regulate production to conserve potash in the best interests of Saskatchewan people; 

 

- and to ensure a secure flow of revenue to all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Other important benefits will flow from repatriating 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

9 

 

control to Saskatchewan. The industry will offer new and challenging opportunities in research and 

senior management to Saskatchewan people here at home. Through Saskatchewan control of potassium 

fertilizer, there may be opportunities to see that Saskatchewan farmers are guaranteed adequate supplies 

of nitrogen and phosphate fertilizers at reasonable prices. 

 

In summary, my Government’s objective is to assure the greatest possible benefits for 

Saskatchewan people by gaining effective control of the Saskatchewan potash industry through 

ownership. 

 

My Ministers will also place before you new legislation respecting the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
 

Over the past several years, a number of changes have been proposed in the conduct of the 

business of this Assembly, ranging from the admission of television cameras to changes in the oral 

question period. My Government will recommend that the Assembly establish a Special Select 

Committee to consider these and other possible changes. 

 

My Ministers will also recommend the establishment of an independent committee of citizens to 

consider and recommend on remuneration paid to Members, provisions with respect to a third party and 

related matters. 

 

In his last report to this Assembly, the Ombudsman made certain recommendations to amend 

The Ombudsman Act, 1972. You will be asked to approve amendments to that Act which broaden the 

jurisdiction of the office of the Ombudsman. 

 

TRANSPORTATION 
 

My Government is giving high priority to transportation problems. In modern society, fast and 

low-cost movement of people, and of the products of the province’s farms and industries, is essential. 

 

A well-planned transportation system, in which all different types of transportation services are 

co-ordinated, will be the objective. Major changes in the system as proposed by the railways must be 

challenged; such changes will cause irreparable harm to farms and rural communities as well as to 

industry. 

 

To protect and advance the interests of the people of our province, and more particularly rural 

people, legislation will be introduced to create a new transportation agency. The agency will provide 

ways in which the people can participate in planning any changes in the provincial transportation 

system. In part it will provide direction and advice to provincial groups and local communities 

concerned with proposals for rail line abandonment and reorganization of grain handling facilities. It 

will work closely with the recently established Saskatchewan Advisory Council on Transportation. 

 

AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE 
 

My Government has for some months been developing a new 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

10 

 

system of vehicle classification and a new rating system for drivers which are designed to provide 

greater stability in insurance costs. It is hoped that work will be completed in time to place legislation 

before you at this Session. 

 

ENVIRONMENT 
 

My Government has signed a ten-year Qu’Appelle Implementation Agreement with the 

Government of Canada. Flood protection works at Lumsden and the first stage of the tertiary treatment 

plant at Regina have been completed. During the coming year, work will continue on a wide range of 

additional works to protect and enhance the environmental quality of this beautiful river valley. 

 

You will be asked to consider legislation which will assist local governments and provincial 

agencies to plan more effectively the use of land in flood plains and around recreation lakes. 

 

In a few months, the final report of the Churchill River Study Board will be completed and made 

available for public review and discussion. My Government intends to appoint an independent Board of 

Inquiry to review development proposals, to assist the public in their review of the findings of the 

Churchill study, to hold public hearings, and to make specific recommendations. 

 

HEALTH 
 

Earlier this year, my Government introduced the first universal Prescription Drug Plan in 

Canada. This program serves all Saskatchewan citizens, but it is particularly important to the 

handicapped, the elderly and the chronically ill. Amendments to The Prescription Drugs Act, 1974, will 

be placed before you. 

 

In the past few months, the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living Program was also 

launched. This program provides wheelchairs, limbs and braches free of charge to those in need. These 

two programs joined the Hearing Aid Plan, the AWARE Program, the Children’s Dental Plan, and other 

innovative programs introduced since 1971. 

 

The recent pronouncements of the federal government on cost-sharing arrangements, together 

with the ever-increasing costs of providing hospital and other institutional care are sources of great 

concern to my Government. As a result, there will be a renewed effort to streamline our health system, 

with continuing emphasis on preventive health measures and community-based service structures. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Mental Health Act. 

 

TRAFFIC SAFETY 
 

My Government has taken the first step recommended by the Special Committee on High Traffic 

and Safety, by appointment of a co-ordinating committee. You will be asked to act on a further 

recommendation of the Special Committee by 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

11 

 

approving a new Emergency Medical Aid Act designed to protect Good Samaritans who provide 

emergency medical assistance from the possibility of a civil suit. 

 

CONSUMER AFFAIRS 

The Department of Consumer Affairs is continuing to promote and protect the interests of 

Saskatchewan consumers. It recently began publishing a weekly food price index for Regina and 

Saskatoon supermarkets in order to help consumers get the best buy for their food dollar. 

 

Following the submission of the White Paper to the previous Assembly last spring, you will be 

asked at this Session to consider a new Consumer Products Warranties Act. This legislation will provide 

a new standard of protection for consumers in the purchase of household appliances and other products. 

 

CO-OPERATIVES 

My Government continues to support co-operative development. In the months ahead, steps are 

planned to emphasize the organization of housing co-operatives. 

 

Amendments to The Credit Union Act, 1972, designed to facilitate interprovincial credit union 

operations, will be placed before you. 

 

You will also be asked to amend the membership provisions of The Northern Co-operative 

Trading Services Act, 1959. 

 

STATUS OF WOMEN 

In past years, my Government has taken a number of steps to establish equal rights for women in 

employment. At this Session, you will be asked to approve measures designed to translate those rights 

into affirmative action. 

 

A new agency will undertake to open up new career opportunities to women at all levels in the 

public service, and to promote greater opportunities for women who work in the community at large. 

 

JUSTICE 

On December 17, 1973, my Ministers tabled a White Paper on conflict of interest in public 

matters. Since that time, much has happened in this area of the law. In order to assess these changes, my 

Government has asked the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan to undertake a detailed study of 

the entire matter, in the hope of recommending legislation as quickly as possible. 

 

Amendments will be introduced to provide for improved operations for Magistrates’ Courts and 

Justices of the Peace. My Government is confident that the steps proposed will further improve the 

administration of justice in Saskatchewan. 

 

CABLE TELEVISION 

The Canadian Radio and Televison Commission will hear applications for cable television 

licenses for four Saskatchewan 



 

November 12, 1975 

 

12 

 

cities in February. My Ministers are confident that the Commission will recognize the validity of my 

Government’s guidelines for cable development so that this service may be extended to a maximum 

number of households, in small communities as well as large, across the province. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favourably 

discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its 

deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

List of Members Returned to Serve in Legislature 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly had 

received from the Chief Electoral Officer lists of the names of such Members as had been returned to 

serve in the Legislature, as hereinbefore set forth. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed, after first having been 

perused by Mr. Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but 

such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman: 

 

That James Auburn Pepper, Esquire, Member for the Constituency of Weyburn, be 

Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

PAGE GIRLS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Colleen Jesse, Margaret Kosa, Joyce Mackenzie 

and Jacqui McAfee will be pages during the present Session. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:58 o’clock p.m. on the motion of Mr. Blakeney. 

 


