
























































Hansard: April 01, 1975


1345 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Tuesday, April l, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO ROSEMARY BROWN - B.C. MLA 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might take this 
opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to the House, a visitor from our neighboring Province 
of British Columbia, Rosemary Brown, Member of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of British 
Columbia for the constituency of Vancouver Burrard. Rosemary is sitting behind the rail on the 
Government side. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: I think the House may be interested in a little biographical material on Rosemary. 
You will have noted that her name is in the news as a candidate for the federal leadership of the New 
Democratic Party. Rosemary was born in the West Indies. She has lived in Canada since 1950. She 
received a B.A. degree from McGill and a Master of Social Work degree from the University of British 
Columbia. She was a social worker prior to her entry into politics. She worked for the Status of Women 
Council of British Columbia in the office of Ombudswoman. She was awarded the United Nations 
Human Rights Fellowship in 1972 and the National Black Award of Canada in 1973. Rosemary is 
married and has three children. 
 
On behalf of the Assembly I know you would want me to extend to Rosemary a warm welcome to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) I should like to join with the Premier in welcoming 
Rosemary Brown and tell her we, on this side, wish her all kinds of luck. It is a very brave person who 
would try to lead the national NDP anywhere and we wish her all kinds of success. Be careful, if you 
choose any of those Members opposite as campaign manager they will have lots of time after June 18th, 
but be a bit careful. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

LAND SPECULATION IN URBAN AREAS 
 
MR. J.G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University) Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the 
Premier concerning what I think is becoming an intolerable situation of land speculation in urban areas. 
There was a story in the Saturday Star-Phoenix under the by-line of 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1346 
 

Vern Greenshields and Wayne Lowrey to the effect that in less than two months, two individuals may 
have turned a speculative profit which on an annual basis implies a rate over 400 per cent. They made 
$65,000 at the expense of the public of Saskatchewan with land purchased for the government office 
block in Saskatoon. They purchased the land at $350,000 and sold it to the Government within two 
months for $415,000. The Minister of Government Services stated in the story that he was unaware of 
all this. The obvious question to ask of the Government is, given land speculation of this magnitude, and 
I have other cases which I would like to allude to, Boychuck for example, a piece of . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Just ask your question, you can't make a speech. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Premier whether the Government is prepared at this 
juncture to do anything about the obviously intolerable level of speculation in urban areas in 
Saskatchewan at the moment? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member's question, I think the short answer is 
that we are not contemplating any specific action with respect to the instance he raised concerning the 
office building at Saskatoon. The matter of land speculation is one that, I think, is attracting the attention 
of a good number of people. We are certainly attempting to minimize that in residential construction by 
the assembling of land on a widespread scale around the major cities and particularly around Regina in 
co-operation with the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the city of Regina. I think that has 
had a significant impact upon the cost of residential lots in this city and elsewhere in Saskatchewan. We 
have not found any way similarly to regulate the price of building lots which are already part of the 
capital, they already have been built upon. We simply have no way at this particular time of coping with 
this particular problem that the Hon. Member raises. If he wishes to pursue the point concerning the 
particular lot, I would suggest he might ask a supplementary and I will ask my colleague, the Minister of 
Government Services, to comment on the particular case. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Premier that the land assembly and 
Land Bank idea . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, the Member must ask his question. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: The question, Mr. Speaker, is that surely the Land Bank is not performing this 
function. I have a case from Boychuck of his realizing $2,700 - 100 per cent increase in the value of a 
piece of land, a lot purchased from the Land Bank - $3,300 to $6,000 in the course of four months. The 
Land Bank is not serving its purpose. It is not succeeding in the job of preventing speculation by 
developers. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! I think you must ask your supplementary question. 
 
MR. RICHARDS: The question is implicit in 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1347 
 

the statement, Mr. Speaker, to wit that the Land Bank does not do the job. There is a problem. Is the 
Government prepared, given the immediate case in which the Government has been burned to the tune 
of $65,000, given that private people are being burned by speculation, is the Government prepared to 
move to lease ownership in the city which I think is the only way ultimately to prevent speculation on 
land? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: The short answer is, No. The Government is not now prepared to move to a system 
of lease ownership in the cities. We try very hard to see that the lots find their way into the hands of the 
ultimate purchaser. The Land Bank referred to by the Hon. Member is not the Land Bank administered 
by my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, but the land assembly projects that are carried on by the 
three levels of government. I think the reference is probably to one in Saskatoon where Boychuck 
Construction will have purchased from the city of Saskatoon a lot for X dollars and sold it for two X 
dollars. Those are inordinately difficult to control in all cases and I think that the proposal to have all 
urban land lease-owned will not satisfactorily deal with that problem. In Britain there are all sorts of 
properties which are lease-owned and the leases become a subject of speculation just as surely as the 
title. So that doesn't solve the problem of speculation. Almost all of London is held on a lease-hold basis 
and there is wild speculation on the value of leases so that doesn't solve the problem. The problem he 
raises is a very real problem but we do not have an effective answer to it other than the one we are 
attempting to use of creating more lots and having them effectively available for the ultimate purchaser. 
Most of them find their way that way but certainly some of the builders .to in fact acquire them and 
speculate in them. While it is regrettable I do not think that we can now see a solution to this particular 
problem. 
 

J.A.C. STRUTHERS ADVERTISING AGENCY 
 
MR. STEUART: I should like to direct a question to the Premier. In regard to the financial problems of 
J.A.C. Struthers NDP Advertising Agency, I wonder if he could either confirm the figure that I have, 
that I am going to suggest which, granted, are ballpark figures and say they are right or if they are not, 
undertake to give us the figures which I think he should have or should be able to get available fairly 
quickly. 
 
To begin with we've been able to gather - would the Premier confirm this or give us the totals if it's not 
right – but J.A.C. Struthers in the calendar year 1974 on behalf of the Crown corporations and the 
Government of Saskatchewan placed about $1 million or more of advertising and that, according to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters, they were seven or eight months behind in December, 1974. 
It would mean that if they are doing that level of business they could be as far behind as $600,000 in 
paying to the advertisers on behalf of the Government's advertising they placed. This could mean they 
would be about $600~000 behind. Now the Premier said in his letters and in his interview that partly this 
reason would be that the Government was a couple of months behind . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: What's your question? 
 
MR. STEUART: My question is to confirm 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1348 
 

these figures. Is the Government two months behind or three months behind? It is quite common, I agree 
with him, for the Government to be behind. If they are even three months behind that would cut down 
Struthers' indebtedness or he could be called responsible for about $300,000. But it would still mean that 
the J.A.C. Struthers Company is about $300,000 . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Will the Member ask his question. 
 
MR. STEUART: I want him to confirm this, how far behind when he looked into it or had his assistants 
look into it or when the Attorney General looked into it or had his assistants look into it, how far behind 
was J.A.C. Struthers in paying bills on behalf of the Government or for advertisements placed for the 
Government's Crown corporations? How far behind was the Government and what has he done about it, 
if anything? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Members will appreciate that I simply do not carry 
those figures in my head. I simply do not know the level of the total billings that are handled by J.A.C. 
Struthers Advertising Agency or any other advertising agency. We would be happy to attempt to secure 
that information, but it is not something that I would have on hand. Nor do I recall how much Struthers 
was behind, nor do I think I ever knew how much Struthers was behind although I think maybe some 
members of my staff may have. I felt that was not particularly my province. As I attempted to outline to 
the Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters on one or two occasions, neither I nor Mr. Kinzel can 
give any undertakings on behalf of the Struthers group. While I was not in a position to attend to the 
matter of the Struthers' accounts forthwith nor in any other period of time since that was not primarily 
the problem of the Government of Saskatchewan, we did attempt to respond to a request from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters, we attempted to respond by seeing whether we could speed 
up accounts. I believe we were able to get our accounts or all the major accounts flowing to Struthers 
paid within a 90 day period. That is what we aimed at and I think we are approximately there. That is 
about a normal turn around on government accounts. I think in the case of Struthers we did ask that 
some accounts, if they were large, be followed through so that they didn't experience undue delay. So far 
as I am aware this had not been a matter requiring attention from the Government for a matter of four to 
six months. I certainly have not had it brought to my attention since last fall sometime, last September or 
October. So far as I am aware nothing out of the ordinary has been done since then although it is 
possible that accounts are still being followed up to see that they do not get delayed. But I think that 
nothing particularly unusual took place other than an effort to see that our payments to the Struthers' 
firm went out within the 90 day period. 
 
MR. STEUART: A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Wouldn't the Premier agree if the company 
was behind five or six or seven hundred thousand dollars in payments to advertisers, to the media, 
newspapers, radio and television where they were the sole agents in that regard of the Government, 
would the Premier not agree that this was a matter of some concern? Obviously he thought it was when 
he got involved in it and I don't disagree that he should have become involved in it. Would the Premier 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1349 
 

undertake to give us within the next day or two, how much - and I am sure he could find out - Struthers 
were behind? I think that is a legitimate question, he is paying them the money; how much the 
Government was behind; how much Struthers were behind say as of the 31st of December? We know 
how much money was involved and I think a good question is then, what they were doing with it? I 
suggest they were behind $200,000 or $300,000 and that is more than was needed to build up their 
business, they are not in a business where they have to pay for inventory and I think that the question 
should be asked and should be answered publicly. If they are this far behind and there is some evidence 
they are, what was happening to the money, what were they doing with the money? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to give you the figures of what the Government owed 
to Struthers. I don't know how long it will take but I certainly will try to find it. I will not undertake to 
give you what Struthers owed to anybody since I am not necessarily privy to what Struthers owed to the 
broadcasters or whether Struthers' figures or the broadcasters' figures are right. If you want to get that 
information you get it either from Struthers or the broadcasters because that is not within the knowledge 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: It should be. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Well maybe it should be but I have a different view of our responsibility. I tried to 
point out to the broadcasters that, while I was prepared to assist them, it was not my problem what 
Struthers owed them or what their dealings were with Struthers. And I made that as clear as I could. 
They, in their correspondence, felt the other way. They said to me, "Needless to say, we do rot share 
your opinion as to the Government's position in this matter. We find it difficult to believe you do not 
share the moral responsibility to say the least." I want to say very frankly that I don't think that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has any responsibility to see that anybody who deals with the 
Government, be it Struthers or a construction company or other, pays their bills on time. Other than such 
assistance as we can to facilitate accounts through the Government, we can not be the guarantor of all 
the accounts of people who do business with us. I made that clear to the broadcasters. It was our position 
then and it is our position now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: . . . difference. This is an NDP invented company and I think the Premier, and will the 
Premier . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! We can't debate here. You can ask a question but we can't debate. 
 
MR. STEUART: Mr. Speaker, just a minute. The Premier took that correspondence, handed it out to 
some of the Press yesterday, at least the CBC announcer was waving it on the television cameras, and I 
think it's a breach of the privileges of this House that he doesn't table it. I ask him now to table it so the 
Members of this House have the same opportunity to pursue it, to have a 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1350 
 

closer look at it as have the members of the Press. Would he now table it? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to table my correspondence to the broadcasters and I 
will tell this House that my letter to the broadcasters will be the whole letter. It will not be a piece of 
paper contrived by taking a piece out of one letter, a piece of another letter, photostating it and giving it 
to the Press as Members opposite did yesterday in a very disreputable manner. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: I will refrain from commenting or the sort of conduct whereby people take a 
selection from one letter, a selection from another and photostat it and give it to the Press as a document 
that is presumably to be relied on. I will present . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Speaker, would he table the letter and never mind . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:. . . exactly as you did with the Prime Minister's letter. 
 
MR. STEUART: Don't talk about your morals or your ethics in this House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! The Premier is on his feet and we can't have cross-fire this way. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: Let's talk about his morals . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, I'm attempting, I know with some difficulty to table the letters and I 
have here, Mr. Speaker, a letter that we sent to Mr. Fisher on June 17, 1974 - a letter which Mr. Kinzel 
sent and a letter which I sent to Mr. Fisher on September 19, 1974. These are my letters to Mr. Fisher. I 
do not propose to table Mr. Fisher's correspondence to me. You already have that, so I judge from seeing 
that the Press got it from Members opposite, and I think that while I'm entitled to table my end of the 
correspondence, I'm certainly not going to table his. And. that, I think, tells the story sufficiently well 
and these, as I say, are the full letters and I have not excerpted or extracted from them. I offer the full 
letters. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE: (Lumsden) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I'd like to direct a question to 
the Premier. 
 
Is the Premier aware that, notwithstanding the deep financial troubles J.A.C. Struthers were in and the 
fact that they were on the verge of being cut off by the Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters and 
they were seemingly in arrears of six to eight months on the payment of legitimate funds, is 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1351 
 

the Premier aware that in December 30, 1974, J.A.C. Struthers happened to have the funds to purchase a 
new office building at 3100 Dewdney in the city of Regina? Does the Premier not feel that he now has a 
moral responsibility to investigate J.A.C. Struthers and find out what happened to the money he has had 
paid to J.A.C. Struthers and why the long delay in payment to the Saskatchewan Association of 
Broadcasters or the broadcast industry? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Mr. Speaker, I wonder if Hon. Members will accept the proposition that I do not 
know what real estate that the J.A.C. Struthers firm buys, owns or otherwise deals with, nor do I know 
whether they were indebted to the broadcasters, eight months in arrears or eight weeks in arrears or eight 
days in arrears, on December 31, 1974. I have no evidence that they were in any arrears at that time. We 
received no communication following that date from the broadcasters and I see no reason whatever why 
I should examine the affairs of a private citizen, whether or not he purchases property, where he got the 
money simply because Members opposite wish, by a series of innuendoes, to suggest that there was a 
degree of impropriety which they have singularly failed to find any evidence to support. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: By way of supplementary, is the Premier aware that J.A.C. Struthers Advertising Agency, 
one of the two with whom the Government opposite has done business of over a million dollars, has not 
filed its annual return to the companies' office for the year 1975, has not paid its annual licence fee to 
carry on business in the province of Saskatchewan for the year of 1975 and technically cannot carry on 
business in the Province of Saskatchewan this year? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: The Premier is not aware of that. The Premier is aware of the fact that he practised 
law and on a number of occasions regrettably was late in filings which were due, as I recall on March 
1st and today is April 1st. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: January 1st. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Pardon! January 1. You mean they haven't renewed their annual licence. Is it their 
annual licence or their Form L you're complaining about? 
 
MR. LANE: Annual licence. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Well, that's right, all right the annual licence is due prior to that. I can see that point. 
But I have no knowledge of this, nor should I be in any way expected to have knowledge of this. If the 
Hon. Member feels that a gross impropriety has taken place, I wish he would announce it as I'm sure 
there are a considerable number of companies in this province who are or may have been in arrears in 
filing. I hope that he's not suggesting that the Government check the record every January 2 and decline 
to have business dealings with any who don't or have not filed. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1352 
 

FAMILY INCOME PLAN ADVERTISEMENT 
 
MR. GUY: (Athabasca) Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Is the House prepared to permit more questions? 
 
MR. GUY: I'm going to give the Premier a rest, I'm going to direct a question to the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs because I'm sure that as the Minister of Consumer Affairs he must be aware that the 
Canadian Advisory Board puts out a manual of general guidelines for advertising and there's a code, and 
I'm just going to be very brief, there are just two statements I want to read here: 
 

Testimonials and endorsements should represent the honest present opinion of a competent endorser 
and it is assumed that in the absence of a statement of the contrary that a testimonial represents that the 
endorser is a current user of the product and that the endorsement reflects a genuine viewpoint of 
experience. 

 
I'm sure the Minister is aware of that. My question is: in the recent television ads on the Family Income 
Plan the woman appearing in the ad, Mrs. Hanna, suggests she has a husband, that she has children 
eligible for the Family Income Plan, that her family qualifies for assistance under the Plan and are in fact 
receiving financial benefits. All of this is completely false and the ad does not provide the viewer with a 
statement informing us of that as set out in the code. Will the Consumer Affairs advise the Department 
of Social Services to cease the running of the ad so that the Government of Saskatchewan will at least be 
upholding the minimum standard of advertising ethics that is expected of the private sector? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI: (Humboldt) Mr. Speaker, the code that the Member refers to is a 
voluntary code of the advertising industry. We have nothing to do with that particular code. It is up to 
them to enforce it as they will. The points that the Member mentions about the advertising of the 
Department of Social Services, I don't know whether they apply under that code in that it specifically 
refers to, if I can remember correctly, to the use of personalities such as athletes and people with notable 
names. 
 
MR. GUY: A supplementary question. I wonder if the Minister would look into it because it's a 
guideline that's based on the Better Business Bureau Code of Advertising that's been accepted by all 
areas of the media. It's been accepted on some of the speeches the Minister has made and will he look 
into it and if he finds that it applies to this ad, will he ask the Government to cease from any further 
placing of the ad on television? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: I certainly will be discussing this with the Minister of Social Services and 
checking to see whether the 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1353 
 

comments that the Member makes have any pertinence to the situation. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 - CONDEMN THE PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTER OF 
HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION. 

 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse) moved, seconded by Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) That this Assembly 
condemn the performance of the Minister of Highways and Transportation for the deterioration of the 
highway system and his lack of concern for providing efficient and safe highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments regarding this Resolution. I don't think that a lengthy 
speech is required not lengthy details as to the conditions of the highway system in Saskatchewan as the 
highways speak for themselves, and I'm sure each and every Member opposite is aware of the 
deterioration of our provincial highway system in this province. 
 
It's with a great deal of regret that a resolution of this nature is necessary in a province such as 
Saskatchewan. One has only to look at the condition of our highway system and in turn the 
Government's 1975 construction program to realize that something definitely is wrong in this province. 
 
As I mentioned in my earlier remarks, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe the provincial highway system, in the 
history of this province, has ever deteriorated more than what it has during the past four years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: Everywhere that you travel, everywhere that you travel in this great province the results 
are the same; poor maintenance and slow construction. The past three years and this 1975 Budget have 
definitely proved that point. The NDP hold our provincial highway system in a very, very low priority. 
 
It was an unbelievable program which the Minister of Highways presented about a week and a half ago. 
In that program he listed the highways which he hoped some work would be conducted on this year, and 
yet he had a footnote to that highway program in which he stated that he doubted very much whether 
that highway program would be completed in 1975. One must ask, why will that highway program not 
be completed. It's not because of the lack of funds although I think when you go back to the basic root of 
our problem, I think that is the initial cause. The cause is that we do not have any contractors left in this 
province who are capable and able to perform that work. It is our understanding as well, that this 
province has received no bids on contracts from contractors in Alberta nor from contractors in Manitoba 
because in those two provinces the governments, one happens to be NDP, the other Conservative, hold 
highways at a very high priority in their province. According to this year's budget it means that there 
will be 30 per cent fewer highways constructed, 30 per cent less work done in this province than was 
done in 1971. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1354 
 

Again we must ask ourselves why, what is the cause? I think we have to say, and there is no doubt that, 
in effect there are 30 per cent fewer contractors in this province today than there were in 1971. What 
happened to those contractors? Why are they no longer in Saskatchewan? Why are they no longer 
bidding for the jobs to do the work on our provincial highways? Basically it can be answered, first, by 
the attitude of the Minister of Highways in that during the 1971 campaign he stated on numerous 
occasions that if they become the government, they would definitely not spend as much money on 
provincial highways as what the previous Liberal Government did and that's one political promise that 
they are certainly carrying out. Each and every successive year our highway budgets have not taken into 
account even the cost of inflation so that, in effect, each and every year we were building fewer miles of 
highway than what were being built in 1971. 
 
Again we just have to go back to 1963, the last full year of the then CCF-NDP government. The NDP 
highway construction budget at that time was only a meagre $13.8 million and that's not very much. It 
took the Liberal government just a matter of three years to increase that budget to $42 million. 
Highways in this province, Mr. Speaker, were built that all people of Saskatchewan were proud of and 
that is not the case today. It was a record of building long lasting quality highways, a record by a 
government that put a high priority on superior maintenance of these highways. Again let me say that 
highways were built that the people of Saskatchewan were proud of. Highways again, which put a strong 
emphasis on traffic safety and superior maintenance. 
 
The Member for Hanley mentions - have you been on highway 14 lately? No, I haven't been on highway 
14, and the fact that he's mentioned it must certainly prove that that highway must be in pretty poor 
shape. Now why is it in pretty poor shape? I don't know whether a Liberal Government built that 
highway or not. It could be that they did and I hope it was a Liberal Government that built Highway No. 
14. But you have been the government for four years and you have not maintained that highway. You 
have had four years to keep that highway in top notch shape and you haven't done it, that's why it's in 
such rotten shape today and that's the trouble with 90 per cent of our highways in our province today. 
You people have completely ignored, completely ignored adequate maintenance of our provincial 
highway system. 
 
All you have to do if you want to look at highways, is look at the one from Shellbrook to Big River. It's 
getting to the stage now where it's impossible to drive on that highway. What's the Minister of Highways 
doing in that regard? Again, I say he is doing nothing. Our highways are deteriorating. 
 
I mentioned the other day, highway No. 19, a highway that certainly should have some work done on it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: How much wheat is hauled on it? 
 
MR. WIEBE: Regardless of how much wheat is hauled on it, so there is a lot of wheat hauled on it, let 
wheat be hauled on it. It's a provincial highway and because it's a provincial highway anybody can use 
that highway. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1355 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: . . . whether it's a farmer, school bus, or a person on a bicycle. It's a provincial highway 
and because it's a provincial highway, it should be maintained and kept up to the standards so that 
everyone can enjoy driving on that highway in a safe and comfortable manner. And this is another 
reason for I this Resolution, Mr. Member from Woodrow or for wherever it is, Notukeu-Willow Bunch. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: You won't be there long. 
 
MR. WIEBE: So there are some grain trucks that happen to be using that highway, so there happen to 
be school buses. It happens to be in the provincial highway system. Now if there is a certain amount of 
traffic on that highway and that highway not withstand that type of traffic, certainly any government in 
it's right mind would ensure that that highway be in such a condition that it could bear that kind of 
traffic. Here again, a prime example why this Resolution is necessary and why it s important to improve 
the standards and the maintenance of our provincial highway system. 
 
Again, let's talk about highways. I didn't want to get into this but the Members opposite seem to feel that 
their highways are in fantastic condition in this province. Yet, let's look at highway No. 1, our major 
highway. This is the highway that the majority of our tourists use. This is a provincial highway which 
they gauge, I think, the criterion as to what the rest of the highways in Saskatchewan are. No. 1 highway 
from Swift Current to Rush Lake, what kind of shape is that in? The Department of Highways played 
around with it a bit two years ago, they burnt off the top of it and they decided eventually we're going to 
fix that up. I've never seen a highway as rough as that one. Let's look at highway No. 1 between Moose 
Jaw and Regina. You're bouncing along like an old Bennett buggy along that particular stretch of 
highway, again no work being done. 
 
Let's look at the stretch between Herbert and Valjean. You know it's taken this Government four years to 
construct 33 miles of highway and they are still not finished and I predict, Mr. Speaker, the NDP will 
not complete it this year, it will take a Liberal Government, after June to make sure that I that stretch of 
highway is completed. These are just a few examples, Mr. Speaker 
 
Another area of concern are a few pictures which I have. I don't want to table them, because I'd like to 
send them back to the person who sent them to me. If someone wishes to have a look at them he can. 
But one picture deals with a bridge that's being constructed across the North Saskatchewan River 
between Sonningdale and Maymont on highway 376. This picture was taken in the fall of 1974. First of 
all we must ask ourselves why is this particular bridge being built at Maymont. I understand that there is 
another bridge being built, a little bit further on down the North Saskatchewan River and yet from the 
traffic count on the ferries that cross at these two points, the traffic count is much greater at the ferry 
that's going to be built, hopefully this year, than the bridge that was constructed last year. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1356 
 

Why was a ferry crossing given priority with a lower crossing rate than the other one? Could it be that 
the lower ferry crossing area just happened to be in the Minister of Highways' constituency? It happens 
to be in the constituency that is represented by Mr. Kramer and Mr. Kramer happens to be the Minister 
of Highways. But one nice thing about this picture and about the bridge at Maymont is that the people in 
that area are calling it Kramer's ailing bridge. Now why are they calling it Kramer's ailing bridge? The 
major reason is that part of the criticism which the Minister of Highways stated about a bridge that was 
being built, I believe in Mr. Comer's constituency awhile back at Nipawin, he said that the then Minister 
of Highways didn't know how to build bridges because it was going to fall apart, the people weren't 
going to be able to drive on it, they were having problems with the type of soil, it was a poor area to 
build a bridge. Well, that bridge is in operation, they are driving over it and it hasn't fallen down. That 
same type of soil condition is evident at Kramer's ailing bridge now at Maymont. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's rather strange that the Minister of Highways who knows so much about bridge 
construction, who is prepared and willing and able to criticize a previous Minister of Highways for 
building a bridge in a wrong location, all of a sudden uses his superior knowledge in bridge construction 
to build a bridge in another location that happens to be in his own constituency, that's even in worse 
shape than the one that he was criticizing. Maymont ground conditions are much inferior to ground 
conditions at Nipawin. I wonder if any traffic will ever cross that particular bridge at Maymont. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example of the Government's inactivity in our highway programs is shown by the 
attitude or the priority which this Government and the Minister of Highways placed on our grid road 
system in Saskatchewan. We are fortunate in this province to have 125,000 miles of roads, more than 
any other province in the Dominion of Canada. Yet 113,000 miles of those roads fall under the 
responsibility of the local ratepayers in the various rural municipalities throughout Saskatchewan. We 
have taken into the highway system a smaller percentage of roads than any other province in Canada and 
yet Saskatchewan has the good fortune of being very flat, it is much cheaper to construct a mile of 
highway in Saskatchewan than in any other province. Yet we have taken on to ourselves, as our 
responsibility as a Provincial Government, fewer miles in proportion than any other province in Canada. 
 
We should be, instead of taking 200 or 300 miles a year into our highway system, implementing a 
program to increase that mileage to at least 1,800 to 2,000 miles a year of grid road. That should be an 
objective for the provincial highway system. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Ask SARM about that. 
 
MR. WIEBE: Yes, let's ask the SARM about that and I'm sure that if you asked any municipality in this 
province and offered to take one of their major grid roads into the highway system they would gladly do 
it' they wouldn't hesitate one moment. If you can name one municipality that would not gladly give their 
grid road, over to the Department of Highways, I'll say you're wrong. There is not a municipal council in 
this province that will not go along with any suggestion that their grid roads be 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1357 
 

taken into the provincial highway system. Okay, name some municipalities, name some municipalities 
that don't want a grid road taken into the highway system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in order not to delay proceedings I believe that the situation of the highway system 
in Saskatchewan is quite evident to each and every one of us. I'm sure that I'm going to have an 
opportunity to make further comments on this particular Resolution because I'm sure that someone on 
that side of the House feels an amendment coming on and I'm sure that they are going to introduce an 
amendment that's going to give all the praise, honor and glory to the Minister of Highways for the 
wonderful job which he is not doing in this province. 
 
I look forward at that point to speaking again on the amendment and at this time, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
move this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY: (Hanley) I would like to say a few words in regard to this Resolution and the 
amendment, and I would like to point out certain things to the Hon. Member who just sat down. 
 
First of all let me say that as far as I'm concerned I have just as good a reading of the highway pulse of 
the people of Saskatchewan as that Hon. Member, and in no way can he convince Members in this 
House that our highway program is not equal or better than the highway program of the Liberals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: But I just want to be a little more specific, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a few 
stretches of road. One concerns highway No. 14. Now, I can recall when the Liberal regime was in 
power, they spent a lot of time on that particular highway, the Yellowhead route. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: They just staked it. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: Oh, yes; well, they went through the stakings I think since 1964. But I want to tell 
you I had occasion to speak to some of the men who were working on that job, and as far as they were 
concerned, it was a big laugh because they were really taking the Liberal Government. It seems that 
whenever it came to roads, and there's a good reason for that, I think most Members are aware the sky 
was the limit, but they never got value for the money they spent. 
 
Now in regard to highway 14, let me tell you what kind of a road the Liberals built. Why, it was so good 
that just a few years ago in around the Elstow and the Colonsay area, the people couldn't even drive on 
the thing. The had to drive on the shoulders of it, because when you drove on it, you got seasick, there 
were so many bumps in the thing. Let me also tell youth is Government, I believe a year or two ago, had 
to put some hard surface cover on there to patch up the bumps and the waves that were put in that 
highway when you fellows formed the last government. 
 
I also want to mention another specific one and that's the 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1358 
 

stub highway from highway No. 14 at Elstow to Allan. Now to accommodate the big potash company 
which operates in that vicinity, the Liberals allowed them to make a detour of about, I would imagine, 
two miles, and they didn't even have the decency to make sure that when that company built that road 
around the slag heap in the area, they didn't even have the decency to see that the people of 
Saskatchewan would get full value for their money because the company was responsible for that 
terrible detour. They did a terrible job, and when the Liberal inspectors came out, they said, "That's fine 
with us." 
 
I also want to mention highway 11, running from Saskatoon to Regina. I remember travelling on that 
highway when the Liberals were in power. It's a wonder I got out of it without having been involved in 
an accident because they piddled around on that road for years and years and years. It came out to an 
average of four miles per Liberal year. That's what they did on highway 11 in and around the Dundurn 
area. When our Government was elected, 33 miles were done within the space of just a few years. 
 
That's progress for you. I don't think I'll get into any more specifics, Mr. Speaker, but I just want to say 
that I have some other information which I want to bring to the attention of this House at a later date, 
and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 20 - MEDIA CENTRE 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone) moved, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse): 
 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that the 
Media Centre of the Executive Council be immediately eliminated, due to its partisan political 
operations and biased news reporting in the guise of legislative news. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I think that this Resolution today takes on same very added significance when we 
consider the events of the last few days and the Struthers affair and the misuse of public funds by the 
NDP in attempting to get re-elected. Mr. Speaker, I should like to suggest this afternoon that before we 
consider the aspect of the exclusive Media Centre perhaps we should consider in a package, all the 
things that have been done by the NDP with public funds to attempt to assure their re-election. I suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that had this happened in Ottawa with a responsible press media that they would have been 
driven right out of the House of Commons with the actions they have taken on and done in these four 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you an example. Let me start with Service Printing. I would suggest to you that 
had the Federal Government or any national political party in any other province in Canada attempted to 
channel public funds to a firm like Service Printing Company, their own public corporation, that, Mr. 
Speaker, it would have had a dramatic impact upon the public moral consideration of that political party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year if you can believe the public accounts from government departments, $51,000 
was channelled 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1359 
 

into Service Printing. This does not count Crown corporations. I might suggest perhaps it was $70,000. 
Mr. Speaker, when you consider that that is more than 50 per cent of the total allocated budget given to 
any political party in Saskatchewan to fight an election against that Government by their own Election 
Expenses Act it takes on an added importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's enumerate a few other examples. Let's take advertising in their own political 
newspaper through government funds. Mr. Speaker, I picked up the Saskatchewan Commonwealth, the 
latest edition and I find that there are five government ads in this one newspaper. One from the 
Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, one from the SAIL, the Saskatchewan Aides to Independent 
Living, Mr. Speaker, one from AWARE, that's three, one from SaskTel, that's four, one almost full page 
from the Public Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, that's five in the latest edition of the Commonwealth, 
two months prior to an election campaign. 
 
Mr. Sneaker, I also turned around and then phoned the Leader-Post to ask what it costs for a half page ad 
and the last one on the Public Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, in the Commonwealth is almost a 
complete page. I'm not going to suggest that perhaps the Commonwealth charges quite as much as the 
Leader-Post but I'm not sure. One-half a page ad in the Leader Post costs $992; one-quarter page ad in 
the Leader-Post costs approximately $500. Mr. Speaker, those ads are in various sizes and dimensions, 
but I suggest that the man who sits in the public gallery, the Speaker's Gallery and takes notes for the 
Commonwealth and the entire staff costs of that newspaper, to write it, to produce it and put it down and 
publish it and circulate it in the Province of Saskatchewan is paid by the tax payers of Saskatchewan 
through government ads in that newspaper. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: Let's look at the third thing, Mr. Speaker, they turn around and they establish their 
own government advertising agency, J.A.C. Struthers. Now I don't think I'll go through all the 
resurrection, but I ask the people of Saskatchewan to be aware of what has happened to Mr. Struthers 
advertising agency in the last four years. For example, he went broke, he started up in 1971. At that 
time, Mr. Speaker, he received $80,372 in the first year the NDP were the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The second year 1972-73, according to public accounts, they received $308,640. Last 
year, Mr. Speaker, 1973-74 they received $626,611 and this year from what we can gather it's over a 
million dollars. I'm going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have 15 per cent of a million dollars for 
doing absolutely nothing. It was rather interesting to hear the Premier's defence of the advertising 
agency. 
 
First of all they took hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers' money, gave it to Struthers 
Advertising Agency not for services provided by Struthers or by services provided by the Saskatchewan 
News Media but, Mr. Speaker, they took this million dollars and all they were was a broker. They didn't 
provide any services. All their task and function was to take that from the government and facilitate the 
payment to the media. This was their sole function, to facilitate the payment to the media. In return for 
the placement of those ads, they got something like 10 to 15 per cent as a brokerage 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1360 
 

fee. That was not for services. There's absolutely no excuse To suggest that the government which turns 
over a million dollars of government money not, Mr. Speaker, for services provided by Struthers is a 
rather strange attitude for the Premier of Saskatchewan to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of that there have been serious accusations that the work was done not by Struthers, 
that the production was done by the Government Information Services in various departments and that 
in reality there was double billing. The second thing we find that they fail to pay the debts with the 
money that they were the broker for to the media and have the utilization of those funds and have to be 
bailed out by the Premier and the Attorney General. That's number three, Mr. Speaker. Number four, 
they are building a team of political organizers within the Government's civil service at the taxpayers' 
expense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had two questions in the last couple ! of weeks; one relates to Brian Coulter. Brian 
Coulter, as you know, Mr. Speaker, had just returned from Alberta, he was given a little vacation after 
his very arduous task of attempting to elect Grant Notley. Mr. Coulter is the same man who was in Nova 
Scotia, the same man who sat in here and was campaigning in the Lakeview by-election. 
 
On top of that a second question was asked about Mr. Clare Powell, who is already now on a leave of 
absence and already now preparing the NDP election campaign. Now one of the interesting things that 
came out of the statements of Mr. Glen Knight was that there is an advertising committee of the NDP 
within the city of Regina and three people are on it, Mr. Powell, Cam Cooper and Bob Reid, the latter a 
very strange one, the Queen's Printer. And I wonder about Mr. Brockelbank. Here is a man who works 
in the department that allocates printing to the various printing firms in Saskatchewan, including Service 
Printing and here this man is actively involved in the preparation of the NDP election campaign. There 
are three more civil servants, Mr. Speaker, in fact we have a list and the only people on that advertising 
committee are NDP civil servants. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, here, for example, I have a very interesting list of people. For example, 
Murray Koski, defeated NDP candidate in 1967 participating on panels at their annual convention. 
Gerald MacDonald, Department of Education, defeated NDP candidate, 1971. Roy Borrowman, special 
advisor to the Premier, NDP convention balloting chairman. Sharon Simmonds, NDP convention panel 
secretary, executive assistant to the Minister of Agriculture. David Minor, Commissioner of the Land 
Bank, former NDP provincial vice-president. All participating, Mr. Speaker, at the NDP annual 
convention. The entire NDP political structure, Mr. Speaker, I can go, for example, Barbara Turnbull, 
Crimes Compensation Board, NDP constituency executive, Saskatoon. Labour Standards, Harry Apps, 
NDP federal candidate, Prince Albert. Ed Wallace, Electoral Officer, executive assistant to Eiling 
Kramer. You can go on, Mr. Shillington, special assistant to Mr. Romanow no longer there - NDP 
defeated candidate, Moosomin. We could go on and on. Practically the entire NDP political machine in 
Saskatchewan is fostered, nurtured, supported and organized by civil servants at the expense of the 
public taxpayers' money in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1361 
 

Mr. Speaker, here I have in my hand a clipping from not necessarily refuted to be a right wing 
newspaper. It is called the Carillon and the editorial calls it, "The Incestuous NDP", talking about civil 
servants participating in the NDP organization and its entire structure, Mr. Speaker. I could go, Mr. 
Speaker, and talk about other things but I want to yet on to some of the other things. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Tell us about the Resolution. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: I am corning to the Resolution. Mr. Speaker, the next one, spending millions of 
dollars in Government advertising, millions, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell the public what is going on in 
advertising in Saskatchewan. Here, Mr. Speaker, we have some public accounts. In the advertising for 
the Department of Agriculture I want you to listen and this is just with Mr. Struthers, and Dunskys is not 
included. It doesn't include Crown corporations. In 1971-72 my friend the Minister of Agriculture 
placed $2,123 with Mr. Struthers. In 1972-73 $5,200. In 1973-74, $34,000. A jump from $2,000 to 
$34,000 in three years with Mr. Struthers and that isn't counting this year, Mr. Speaker, where you and I 
know what is going on with Government advertising. 
 
Let me take another one, Executive Council. 
 
MR. MESSER: Tell them about the program. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: I am going to come to one of the programs. Executive Council in 1971 Mr. 
Speaker, $1,691, now that is kind of a modest figure. In 1972-73, $55,000. In 1973-74, $67,683. From 
$1,691 to $67,683 in one government department. Let me take another one, Public Health, and you 
know Walter, he sure likes the Commonwealth. I know where his ads are coming from, there are three 
of them in here. Public Health in 1971 spent $7,591 with Mr. Struthers. This year, Mr. Speaker, two 
years later, $87,931. 
 
Let's look at the Public Service Commission and this one is kind of understandable. They have hired so 
many civil servants in Saskatchewan they really need to get into this Government advertising. In 
1971-72, $6,720; $17,000 in 1972-73; $30,000 in 1973-74. 
 
Let's look at Social Services, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk about this one. Just two years ago in 1971-727 
they spent none; last year, 1973-74 they spent $54,805 and that doesn't take in this Family Income 
program, Mr. Speaker. Do you know what this Family Income Program costs? The Family Income 
Program, according to the Minister of Social Services had 58 or 60 ads in excess of $50,000 just for 
placement. Production costs, according to the Minister or at least my colleagues, I was not here, 
indicated that that was almost as much. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: I think the Member should get to the Resolution. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: Mr. Speaker, I am getting to the Resolution and I am going to relate it all. Don't 
worry, Mr. Speaker, it is very 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1362 
 

important. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! I am suggesting to the Hon. Member that debates that took place in this House 
at this same Session on a different occasion cannot be quoted in this debate and I think the Hon. Member 
is quoting debates from other occasions in this Session. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: Mr. Speaker, you are absolutely right, but what I am trying to say is that the 
Family Income ads cost over $120,000. One ad, most of it politics, and do you know how much the 
Attorney General is giving to the Saskatchewan Liberal Party and the Progressive Conservative Party to 
go out and fight this election, $125,000. That is for all the advertising, all the Leader's tours, all the 
mailing services, the setting up of the central campaign headquarters. And one ad for the Family Income 
Program is costing more than they allow for the Saskatchewan Liberal Party and the Progressive 
Conservative Party to spend in their whole election campaign. Mr. Speaker, this is a real crime. 
 
Next, they set up a teletype service and I was in Melfort, there last Thursday, up in Mr. Messer, the 
Minister of Agriculture's country. Jack the Ripper I was going to say, Mr. Speaker. I got up there and I 
happened to be talking to the radio station and I got in on some of the teletype service story. And the 
reams of government information and propaganda pouring out of that and he said we don't have the staff 
or the services to really edit this and so they start using it indiscriminately, Mr. Speaker. I don't know 
how many thousands of dollars that cost. 
 
I want to talk about the Information Officers. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, for example in 1971, in the 
Information Services with the Executive Council there were seven employees and the total cost was 
$143,000. In 1975, there are 12 employees and the cost is $286,000, just doubled, and, Mr. Speaker, the 
funny part of it is that in every other Government Department there are also civil servants being placed 
just like Mr. Glen Knight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go on to another. Serious accusations, number eight, have been made about Cabinet 
Ministers using government equipment, government facilities, civil servants on government time to 
prepare and edit political propaganda for the NDP. That is number eight. Now, Mr. Speaker, page Glen 
Knight. They try to say, Mr. Speaker, this is not done on Government time. Can you imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, executive assistants, civil servants, leaves of absence, advertising committees with the 
equipment and everything and then suggesting this is not being done on government time. And yet Mr. 
Knight says it was done on government time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, number nine, appointment of NDP supporters into every position of authority and 
responsibility in the Province of Saskatchewan. We had a very interesting brief presented to us the other 
day. It was from the Human Rights Association and they indicated to us that there had been more than 
800 appointments in the last three years to government boards and committees and surveys and such - 
800 people, Mr. Speaker. The Human Rights Association is going to send us that brief and send us the 
information. Because it is going 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1363 
 

to be rather interesting to find out exactly what the cost of those 800 people are. Number two, the thing 
that really concerns the Human Rights Association is that there was only one token representative from 
all the minorities in Saskatchewan and that was a token one that was just given, but the majority of them 
were NDP political supporters. 
 
Now, let me come, Mr. Speaker, to the real meat of this Resolution and that is, to talk about the 
exclusive Media Centre. This, Mr. Speaker, we can call point number 10. Well now, Mr. Speaker, what 
is the exclusive Media Centre and how does it work? Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, it is supposed to 
operate from within the Legislature. This Legislature I always had the understanding belonged to all the 
Members and I find, for example, that the blues (Orders of the Day) are being handed to the NDP from 
this Legislature which really bothers me too because I think I am a part of this Legislature and we 
should determine how the funds are spent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how does it work? First of all the NDP turn around and hire a group of civil servants 
and put them on salary. That is number one. Their exclusive responsibility in this exclusive Media 
Centre downstairs, is to look after the personal political advertising under the disguise of news of the 
NDP backbenchers. Not all the Members of the Legislature, just the NDP backbenchers. They certainly 
do need it, just the NDP backbenchers. Number three, Mr. Speaker, they have use of government 
facilities. The equipment, the room downstairs, everything else, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the NDP 
backbenchers to project supposed news from this Legislature on behalf of the NDP candidates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time you go out in the hall I remember, I haven't run into them this year because I 
don't recognize them yet, but last year every time you walked out in the hall you would see these fellows 
with a microphone standing there with a backbencher from Gravelbourg and a backbencher from 
Saskatoon, all over, getting interviewed, and about things that not necessarily had any indication of their 
responsibility or their contribution within the Legislature itself. And their job, Mr. Speaker, this 
exclusive media is to funnel back to Swift Current, to tell the people in Maple Creek that the Member 
for Maple Creek is doing an adequate job in the Legislature even if he only speaks once for five minutes 
in the whole session of the Legislature. To stand up and turn around and transmit back to Gravelbourg 
that the Member for Gravelbourg is making an important contribution to Saskatchewan even if he only 
speaks once in the whole session. Mr. Speaker, it is under the disguise of legislative news which is the 
most hideous thing about it. Mr. Speaker, it is flooding the media and all I can suggest that this is one of 
a total package of how the NDP are using government funds or taxpayers' money and with one specific 
objective in mind to bring about the re-election of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could go on, we could talk about the Minister of Agriculture sending out leaflet after 
leaflet and letter after letter, talking about the Federal Government and everybody else and no relation to 
provincial policies or agricultural policies. We could go on and talk about all kinds of incidents and 
examples where the NDP are using the taxpayers' money in this province for one purpose and that is to 
ensure their re-election. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1364 
 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure and I want to say to the Members opposite, I 
hope that none of you will try to stand on your feet and try to amend this Resolution because it is a very 
simple one. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that all of you will examine your consciences because you know when 
they talk about Service Printing, if the people of Saskatchewan could see you snicker and giggle and 
laugh because you are pulling the wool over their eyes, you wouldn't be re-elected. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
now move this Resolution No. 20. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to speak too long with respect 
to this Resolution. Come to think of it the Member for Milestone didn't speak too long with respect to 
this Resolution either. He spoke on every other topic other than the Resolution which is before us with 
respect to the matter of the Media Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is sorely tempting for a Government Member who is in opposition to 
the Opposition Party to rebut the comments made by the Member for Milestone and the Liberals about 
patronage, about Liberal advertising and about expenditures on advertising, about ministerial directives, 
about advertising, about ministerial interference in advertising policies and sums of money which have 
been spent. 
 
I think perhaps there will be a more appropriate time to do that. The point that concerns me is when the 
Members opposite, totally bankrupt of any ideas or policy alternatives to the people of Saskatchewan, 
seize on what purports to be an issue in their minds and try to make it up into a major issue. I think that 
all this points out to the people of Saskatchewan is the bankruptcy of the Liberal Party. To have the 
Liberal Party, one of their major spokesmen in the Hon. Member for Milestone, for 15 or 20 minutes 
talking about the Commonwealth, how irritated he is about the Commonwealth, how upset he is about 
the policies and the reporting and the job done by the Commonwealth, only pinpoints the bankruptcy of 
the Member for Milestone and the Liberal Party in this particular area and in the entire area. To have 
them repeat at length, ad nauseam, repetitiously again how the business of Struthers and the business of 
advertising, is not only repetitive and boring but it's contrary to fact. 
 
I could, as I say, talk about, perhaps as a rebuttal, expenditure of Liberal advertising. Just to give you 
one year which I have completed a little survey on, 1969 to 1970, $834,474.51, without a cent being 
attributed to Crown corporations and we are not even getting to the election year, Mr. Speaker, which 
was 1971. I could get into the question of advertising firms, for example in Ottawa, where according to 
the chairman of the Treasury Board, 11 Federal Government departments and agencies of the Liberal 
Government hand out more than $20 million worth of advertising last year alone to, without tender, 
advertising agencies directly associated with the Liberal election campaign last summer. 
 
I don't think that is the type of situation that the people of Saskatchewan expect of us as 
parliamentarians. They don't expect from the Member for Milestone or the Leader of the Opposition, or 
what up to now has been the major alternative political party, to get up and try and make an issue out of 
a 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1365 
 

puff of air that has been manufactured, a puff of air manufactured mainly in the figments of imagination 
of the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) and the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone). Now, maybe I am 
wrong. Maybe the people of Saskatchewan do expect that this is the way the Liberal Party should be 
functioning, but I want to tell the Members opposite that for me to rebut on this particular occasion, the 
particular recitation of 800 appointments and whatever happens to be with their appointments, with what 
they did, with the fact that they had every defeated Liberal federal candidate almost around on the job. 
"Oh, nonsense," the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) says. Just take a look at the list. There's 
an Order for Return that is being amended about federal candidates, both NDP and Liberal, and you'll 
have the answer down on that fairly shortly and just take a look at that list. But what function does that 
serve? What function does that serve to you? What function does that serve to me? What function does 
that serve to the people of Saskatchewan? Now what the Member opposite does, he gets the entire 
speech and he makes this type of recitation and uses arguments of this nature. 
 
Take for example, the teletype situation, the teletype thing, the TWX teletype thing. The Hon. Members 
says that Information Services has a TWX. I'll bet you right now that if you were elected, God forbid, in 
the next election you wouldn't do one thing to change the TWX operation and you condemn it now. You 
wouldn't, nor should you. You wouldn't amend the TWX because that is what's needed on Information 
Services. I don't expect the news media to pick up a TWX teletype and use it like John Babbitt. They 
don't. They use what they want to use and they will do their own covering and reporting. But there are 
many agencies that find the items that are there of benefit and I say that a government that reports its 
activities to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan is a good government by and large. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I say to the Member, when he raises an issue such as the Media Centre he is a mile 
off base. He is a mile off base on what the electorate want. The electorate of this province is not going to 
elect or defeat you on whether or not there is a media centre operating, or whether or not there is a 
J.A.C. Struthers, or a Dunsky or a McLaren's advertising agency which does work for you or does work 
for us. They aren't going to pick or choose you on that basis. They are going to do it on what you stand 
for and I'll tell you that in four years the Liberal Party have not told the people of Saskatchewan where 
they stand on any major policy issue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Oh, yes, sure, you can shrug it off as a political statement and that's fine. You know 
we all do politicking and we all do speaking in the country but I can tell you that you ask any person in 
the Province of Saskatchewan what the Liberal position is, what they would do for example in any given 
area, agriculture, and nobody in Saskatchewan can tell you what they are going to do. Nothing. They 
know more about what the Conservative alternative is than they know about the Liberal alternative. 
Why? Because the Liberals when they are in the Legislature have resolutions like this and try to alarm 
the 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1366 
 

people of Saskatchewan that the Government of Saskatchewan is appointing people who are 
sympathetic with the policies of the Government to major programs of the Government. Now whom do 
you think we should be appointing to the Hog Marketing Commission, the Member for Morse (Mr. 
Wiebe)? Whom do you think we should be appointing to the Land Bank Commission? Whom do you 
think should be representing the Land Bank Commission with respect to the public of Saskatchewan, a 
member of the Liberal Party who is out to destroy it. Well, they think that the people of Saskatchewan 
are so naive, or so gullible as to think that this is an issue. Well, as far as I am concerned from a very 
crass, narrow, political point of view, keep it up because the electorate is going to turn you off. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: I remember one thing about the Liberals, from 1944 to 1964, which was said about 
them. They were so good in Opposition that people decided to leave them in Opposition and that is 
exactly what is going to happen now. You people don't give alternatives and you don't act like an 
alternative and why would you when you introduce motions of this nature, when you introduce these 
shenanigans that have been going on for the last two days. Now, furthermore, you are not only that but 
you are 100 per cent off base on the Media Centre. Media Centre, Mr. Speaker, is set up under the 
provision of funds to maintain a caucus office, provided in 1974-75, provided to the Liberals, provided 
to us. The Media Centre is paid for by caucus members out of that caucus office on our side and we 
don't tell you how to run your caucus and we don't expect you to tell us how to run our caucus. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Absolutely no Executive Council funds are being expended for the purpose, 
absolutely no funds are being expended for it, the personnel that are employed are directly responsible to 
the NDP caucus out of the funds voted for by the Legislature in this regard. Oh, no, but not the Member 
for Milestone, not him, but not only the Member for Milestone because I don't want to be personal too 
much, it is symptomatic of the Liberal caucus. If they can get a characteristic or a fact and bend it 
somehow to try and make it out in the worst way possible, they'll do it. So that is what he does. He 
doesn't mention that to the people of Saskatchewan about the Media Centre, oh, no, not him. He talks 
about it being interviewed and he drags in all the appointments. He drags in all the advertising agencies. 
He drags in all of these things without any type of commitment to the truth whatsoever. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Now, I don't know the Liberal Party opposite. They can continue, obviously, 
because someone will get up right away and they will say in the course of the debate, oh, well, the 
Attorney General, doesn't want to talk about J.A.C. Struthers advertising all operations. You bet I want 
to talk about it and I am going to talk about it and I am going to talk about it a lot. I am going to talk a 
lot about government advertising, and government memos when the appropriate time comes up. Yes, 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1367 
 

they will be coming up on Estimate; and I'll have the opportunity. And I am definitely going to talk 
about it and I invite the Members opposite to talk about it. I want to tell the Members opposite, if this is 
all they have in going into this election, is this type of an issue, they should be ashamed of themselves, 
absolutely ashamed of themselves. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: The Member for Lakeview can laugh at it. He can smile at the whole operation 
saying that it is not true. The Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) you know can do the same 
thing. Any one of these persons can take the position that somehow this is an issue but, Mr. Speaker, I 
don't think anybody in Saskatchewan is fooled one iota about the degree of advertising and civil servants 
campaigning from the period 1964 to 1971. No one is mistaken about that. We all know that. We can all 
go through lists and names of civil servants if that is the way we want the level of politics to be in 
Saskatchewan. If that is the situation, the Members opposite say that is the position the Government of 
Saskatchewan should be taking, well, I don't agree with them. I don't agree with them whatsoever. I say 
the people of Saskatchewan when they talk about a Media Centre, say that an NDP caucus has got the 
right to organize its affairs the way it wants to organize. That is what is being done with the Media 
Centre. We don't tell you Liberal people how to run your caucus. You can organize it any way you want. 
If you want to set up a media centre out of your caucus allotment, set it up and good luck to you. You 
may even need the help of a media centre in some of your ridings but don't tell us if we, because of our 
caucus grant, set up a media centre that somehow that is improper or that we ought not to be doing this, 
because we are not going to buy that and no one in the Province of Saskatchewan is going to buy that. 
 
Now, we will choose how it is to be done and if a media centre is the approach to be taken nobody can 
fault us on that operation. None whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Now, all that I can say again to the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Mention election expenses. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: The Member says, mention election expenses. Right, I believe in the principle of 
election expenses. Obviously the Member doesn't. I believe in the principle of election expenses. I 
believe in the principle of having ceilings on election expenses. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order! I believe the debate on election expenses should be at another time, on another 
occasion. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this. I agree with your ruling. The Member for 
Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) alluded in his speech to the fact that election expenses or that the Attorney 
General was somehow putting a ceiling on election expenses and I want to tell the Member that if he 
wants to put it in those terms, yes, I will take that responsibility because I believe in responsible 
electioneering. I think we can all improve that way as political parties. I think the revelation of campaign 
funds is an absolute positive step. I think the 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1368 
 

decision of elections not on the basis of what party has got the most to spend on advertising but those on 
the issues is the way to do it. We have already put an amendment in The Election Act which curtails 
Government spending during the election period. 
 
MR. MALONE: Big deal! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Big deal! It is a big deal! In 1971, you people didn't have such a thing and spent 
thousands of dollars on advertising Crown corporations. That may not be a big deal to you now that you 
are in Opposition but it is a big deal to the people of Saskatchewan because it has proven . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear, 
 
MR. ROMANOW: Yes, sir, a big deal. Hundreds of advertisements being run and you say, big deal It 
should be a big deal. You should be ashamed of yourself. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the operation with 
respect to this business of the Media Centre and the business of election expenses is absolutely related to 
this. I say, Mr. Speaker, that quite clearly the Members opposite do not understand how the Media 
Centre operates otherwise this motion I am sure, they being good parliamentarians, would not have 
surfaced in this manner. Otherwise, I am sure, being the good parliamentarian that he is, the Member for 
Milestone wouldn't be giving the type of speech which I think he does, because he didn't understand 
how our Media Centre functions, I think that they need to have some time to consider what I think is our 
basic proposition of how we run our caucus with our funds is our right. We have heard what you had to 
say for 30 minutes, through your deputy leader and you will have another opportunity at a later date. 
 
MR. STEUART: Why don't you . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: So, I say, Mr. Speaker, with those few words that I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 21 - LONG-RANGE PROGRAM FOR GRID ROADS 
 
MR. H.E. COUPLAND (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse): 
 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
immediately implement a long-range program to bring major grid roads into the highway system of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, after listening to the discussion on Resolution No. 14 regarding highways, I 
wonder if I should move this Resolution. Highways in this province have been allowed to deteriorate in 
the last three years to a point where a lot of our grid roads are better than a lot of the highways. Take No. 
3 highway from the Saskatchewan River to the meridian, you can't call it a highway any more. But I will 
anyway because I am sure there will be a new government sometime later this year and I am sure that 
they will do a lot better job in the 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1369 
 

building of highways. 
 
Before I move the Resolution, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words regarding grid roads. As we all 
know there have been some grid roads taken into the highway system throughout the province. I feel that 
it has been done on a piecemeal basis and I feel that it is time that the Government implemented a 
program on a long-range basis to take into the highway system those major grid roads that carry a large 
portion of traffic other than local traffic. Where a municipality or Local Improvement District has such a 
road the cost of upkeep on the local government for maintaining and upkeep on these roads becomes a 
heavy burden. We had one such road in my constituency, No. 304, where it was carrying a lot of tanker 
trucks which were coming in from the West. That LID was just having a terrible time just having to cope 
with not only keeping up the highway during the summer but with the snow removal during the winter, 
and the local people were expected to keep the snow off and so on and it became quite a burden. I am 
happy to say that that one was taken into the highway system under our government, and that took a big 
load off those local taxpayers. Now I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that there are a lot more cases throughout 
the province where these grid roads are carrying a lot of traffic other than local traffic and should come 
under the highway system as bad as it is right now, so that all the taxpayers of the province share the 
burden for these types of grid roads. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. L. LARSON: (Pelly) Mr. Speaker, I only want to offer a comment or two on this Resolution. I 
note that the Member for Meadow Lake didn't sound very enthusiastic about the comments that he 
made. I note that he really isn't aware of the number of miles that have been taken into the highway 
system by this government. I note that he really wasn't very anxious to come out very forcefully or 
strongly on whether or not this is a good program. Just for his information I want to say that there have 
been 1,023 miles of grid roads taken into the highway system by this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LARSON: I want to say that the pressure is not for further takeovers. The RMs are beginning to 
worry and get concerned about the number of miles that have been absorbed into the highway system. 
 
Now I want to say to the Member for Meadow Lake that you can't have it both ways. You can't keep 
taking these grid roads into the highway system and allowing autonomy for the municipalities. Every 
time a grid road is taken over by the government you are taking some autonomy away from the 
municipalities and these municipal men are concerned about this and really aren't that anxious to see it 
continue. 
 
Now, in view of the fact that he didn't make very many comments I am going to let him off rather easy 
but I am going to move an amendment. I am going to move, seconded by the Member for Kinistino (Mr. 
Thibault): 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1370 
 

That all the words after 'Assembly' in the first line be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

Commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the additions of 1,023 miles to the highway system 
since 1971 and further commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the establishment of a Super 
Grid Commission under the chairmanship of Mr. Everett Murphy to bring forward recommendations 
for an oil grid system for the province in co-operation with the municipalities and the SARM. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 25 - LEGISLATION TO OUTLINE INDEMNITIES AND EXPENSES FOR 

EIGHTEENTH LEGISLATURE 
 
MR. D.F. MacDONALD (Moose Jaw North) moved, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation, at this Fifth 
Session, Seventeenth Legislature, that will outline indemnities and expenses which will be paid to 
Members of the Legislative Assembly during the Eighteenth Legislature in Saskatchewan. 

 
He said Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this motion which appears under item 10 is a very timely motion, 
something I feel very strongly about. I hope that it will receive the support all Members of the House. I 
hope in turn that the Cabinet will take action on the recommendation in this motion and implement the 
recommendations. It is my opinion that the credibility of politicians is today at an all time low. 
Politicians aren't respected nor are they believed. This is not a new syndrome on the part of the public, it 
is a continuing feeling of distrust of the public towards politicians, however this feeling has been 
intensified in the recent past. I think the eyes of the public were opened by the spectacle of Watergate in 
the United States. Canadians don't feel that dishonesty and misuse of power ends at the border, not by 
any means. They have seen evidence of it from every government in Canada. There are numerous 
current examples, I don't need to recite them here. We have examples in this province, we have them in 
Alberta, we have them in British Columbia, we have them in Ontario and Quebec, right across the 
country. 
 
I think a couple of personal experiences are good examples to me of how low the esteem is in which 
politicians are held. I remember a couple of years ago when my mother-in-law was visiting me from 
Toronto, we were watching on television the Watergate proceedings. My mother-in-law proceeded to 
condemn Mr. Nixon and the United States politicians in general, and I asked her, do you think that 
politicians in Ontario are any different, she said, of course they are not any different' they are crooked in 
Ontario, they are crooked in the United States, they are crooked all over, they are all crooked. She said 
this without excepting me, who was sitting right in front of her. This was her general belief. Since I have 
announced that I will 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1371 
 

not be seeking re-election, I have had countless numbers of people remark to me that they don't blame 
me for getting out of politics, that is the term they use, getting out of such a dirty mean business as 
politics and government. That sentiment has been expressed to me by a majority of people. I believe it 
represents the feeling that the public does have towards politicians and government. 
 
I think the spectacle that recently has undermined the confidence of the public is the spectacle that took 
place in the House of Commons last Christmas concerning the raising of the indemnities of the Members 
of Parliament. The Canadian public was outraged and I think quite properly so. I am not exactly sure 
why the public chose that occasion to show their frustration and why that particular event should 
become such a spectacle. The procedure that was used in Ottawa at Christmas time, was not a new 
procedure. The same procedures have occurred before in Ottawa and has occurred in every province 
across Canada. It is the only procedure by which indemnities are set. 
 
There didn't seem to be any public outrage in Saskatchewan three years ago when we raised our salaries 
or indemnities and expenses by over 50 per cent. I am not sure how large the increase was that we voted 
for ourselves three years ago. We had included in it fringe benefits and expenses that we had not 
previously had. But certainly in real value our raise well exceeded 50 per cent. There didn't seem to be a 
public outrage in British Columbia when they raised their indemnities 400 per cent. They did this by 
cleverly manoeuvring double sessions and so on. There didn't seem to be a public outrage when the 
Nova Scotia Legislature raised their salaries by 92 per cent last November 27th. I suspect that the 
Ottawa spectacle last Christmas occurred and caused an outrage because of three or four reasons. 
 
First of all I suppose it hit all parts of Canada at the same time and at a time when people were 
concerned about inflation more than at other times in our history. The second reason I think was that the 
Press decided to make it an issue. I think the third reason that the Members of Parliament in Ottawa 
weren't smart enough to hide part of their increases like British Columbia and Saskatchewan did. Either 
they weren't smart enough or they were trying to be too honest. I think the fourth reason is that Ed 
Broadbent, the leader of the NDP saw a chance for some political advantage and he was willing to break 
the traditional backroom agreement. 
 
The method of arriving at salaries is by arriving at a backroom agreement. After the agreement is made, 
the meeting is held in the 'john' and so on, the Treasury Bench finally offers a proposal. If they get the 
assurance, if the Premier and Treasury Bench get the assurances of support and the promises that only a 
nominal opposition will be voiced, then, as we did in 1972, the Premier will bring in a Bill and that 
method avoids any embarrassment to a Premier or the Prime Minister and their governments. This 
method has been quite successful until Mr. Broadbent decided that his politics and political gain could 
be enhanced even though it meant breaking this word, the word of his party that was given in the 
backroom agreement. No matter what caused the spectacle that happened, I think it is clear that the 
Canadian people want a new method of establishing indemnities for elected politicians. In the past we 
have tried 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1372 
 

to hide behind committees and commissions which we establish to recommend indemnities and pensions 
for MLAs. In fact, it is on those occasions it is often desirable to have a recommendation and then bring 
in a Bill which outlines indemnities which are a little below what is recommended. This method shows 
great restraint and responsibility on the part of the politicians when that happens. 
 
We may very well have suggestions in this debate that before we should establish levels of indemnities 
at this Session we should have a commission or a committee that would report to this Assembly. I 
suggest that this is unnecessary. We have had a report to this Legislature, it was made three years ago. If 
it was valid then it is just as valid today. I also feel that when we raised our indemnities three years ago, 
we largely ignored the report anyway. The basic use of that report was to justify our own positions. We 
picked and chose what we wanted from it anyway. 
 
A committee report also tends to be rather useless because it tends to report back what the MLAs feed 
into it, as happened in 1972. What other source of information does the committee or commission have 
to base their findings on? They only have what the MLAs put into it. How else can they judge what the 
indemnities should be? 
 
I don't think that anyone or any committee is qualified to say what is the proper level of indemnity. 
There is no real or honest basis on which to judge what is the proper level. Indemnity levels are purely 
arbitrary. I doubt if elected members in any province have an easier or harder job than those members 
from other provinces. And yet indemnities are different in every province. As an example, Prince 
Edward Island, $6,000; Manitoba? $9,600; Saskatchewan - I don't know what it is - it is $12,500? 
$13,500 - it is hard to say; New Brunswick, $10,500; Newfoundland, $12,000; Alberta, $13,500; Nova 
Scotia, $14,200; Ontario, $22,500; Quebec, $22,740; the grand daddy of them all is British Columbia, 
$24,000. They know how to do it up right in British Columbia. 
 
There is no indication that the politician who works at being an elected politician in Prince Edward 
Island for $6,000 has any easier job to do than the politician in British Columbia who makes $24,000 or 
four times as much. There is no justification for either figure. They are completely arbitrary figures. 
 
I also suggest that if you tried to relate indemnities to the efforts or work load of an MLA and what he 
puts into position as an elected politician, this again is impossible. MLAs put forth different efforts, they 
put forth efforts in different ways. I am sure we will agree that some elected politicians in this Assembly 
do very little, by our definition. 
 
By my definition I might feel that some do very little or do a poorer job, I might also decide that others 
do an exhaustive job. Work at it eighteen hours a day, by my definition they are working very hard. So 
which Members should the level of indemnity relate to, the one who works very hard or the one who 
works very little. And by whose definition should we decide who is working hard and who is working 
little. Who is working effectively and who is working ineffectively. Indemnities are not salaries and they 
should never be salaries. It was in fact disappointing in Ottawa when they were discussing 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1373 
 

it at Christmas to hear Members of Parliament speak of the long hours that they put in working as an 
elected politician. Maybe they worked 60 or 70 hours a week, and then they divide this into their weekly 
pay based on their indemnity and come up and say I am only making $3.42 an hour, that is not enough. 
They are looking at it entirely as a salary. That is wrong, they are not salaries. 
 
I agree that indemnities should allow that not too big a hardship is suffered by a politician, any 
politician, but when indemnities are viewed as a better way of making a living than some other 
occupation, then I say that this creates a class of professional politicians. Professional politicians find 
their first and foremost priority to be getting re-elected. And that priority often lends itself to corruption 
of work and action indeed. 
 
A politician must have as a first priority, serving of the community, not serving of himself or herself or 
his interests. It may very well be that for the privilege of serving, a person must be willing to make some 
kind of a sacrifice and all of us will have to make different kinds of sacrifices. 
 
It will also be suggested that this seventeenth Legislature cannot regulate the eighteenth Legislature. 
And that legislation setting indemnities now would not be binding on the eighteenth Legislature. I agree 
it would not be binding. The next Legislature could change it, if they felt so inclined. However, I would 
suggest that it would be with great peril that any political party would change an indemnity after an 
election that had been set to cover the period which they were elected for. Only under some 
extraordinary circumstances would they dare to change that kind of legislation. The only fair way that I 
know of, is to set out indemnities ahead of that period to be served. Prospective Members to this 
Assembly would then know exactly what they were getting into. They would know exactly, like the 
contractor who bids a job that takes two or three years to complete. That contractor contracts to perform 
a job for a certain amount of money that he knows ahead of time and not change it as time goes on. 
Politicians would know just like a teacher who contracts to work for a stipulated sum of money for the 
coming year. Similarly, a politician could seek elected office knowing exactly what would be the 
financial rewards or hardships. Politicians and governments think that winning an election is a mandate 
for a lot of things but I think it is clear that election to office does not give a mandate to raise their own 
indemnities. The Canadian public has made it clear that it doesn't give politicians a mandate of this kind. 
The public doesn't give us as elected politicians the right to put our hands into the cookie jar. Credibility 
of politicians as I said before is at an all time low. If there is any remedy for this it must come from 
politicians. I hope that this Resolution might be a start. 
 
I so move this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK: (Minister of Government Services) Mr. Speaker, I should just like to 
say a few words on this particular Resolution. I think the thoughts expressed in the Resolution have 
some merit. I also agree with the Member 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1374 
 

that this has always been a troublesome issue with parliamentarians for any number of reasons. 
 
I would have thought that the Members opposite would have a more enthusiastic advocate for the case 
than the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw who is not planning on running in the next election. I comment 
that this enthusiasm or lack thereof was amply demonstrated when his comparisons attempted to show 
that there was some logical comparison between the Province of Saskatchewan and the Province of 
Ontario. We all know that the Province of Saskatchewan's Legislature sits for a brief period relative to 
the Province of Ontario which sits up to seven, eight and nine months per year. Consequently there is 
bound to be a difference in the amount of remuneration that is paid to the MLAs, 
 
The Hon. Member's enthusiasm was lacking also in knowing the facts in regard to his case. It is 
unfortunate that he doesn't know what the remuneration is for MLAs in the Province of Saskatchewan 
and yet he attempts to make comparisons with other provinces. 
 
The Member drags in irrelevant material in support of this Resolution that has some merit. He suggests 
to the Members of this Chamber that there was some devious compact arrived at in the backrooms in 
Ottawa with regard to increases for Members of Parliament and that this backroom compact was 
destroyed because the New Democratic Party wanted to gain political advantage by not agreeing with 
the covetous ideas of the Liberal and Conservative Members in Ottawa. Now I think it's sheer 
speculation on behalf of the Member opposite and has no relevancy to the argument that we see before 
us in the Resolution. 
 
I do want to say that we in Saskatchewan and CCF and New Democratic Party governments I believe 
initiated the idea of having a committee outside of the Legislature discuss this subject, receive 
submissions and give a report to the Legislature. This Legislative body would then make their choices 
on the basis of the submissions of that outside independent committee. 
 
The Member opposite insults the committees that have been in existence in the past. He is suggesting 
that those committees are just tools of this Chamber and I don't think that's true. I don't subscribe to the 
idea that any committees outside and independent of this Chamber is a tool of this Chamber to get the 
Members of this Chamber an increase in their indemnity. 
 
The Member opposite supports this by saying we did what we wanted anyway. I suggest to the Member 
opposite that the decision that was handed down by that committee from outside of this Chamber was in 
their wisdom the proper decision. Had we taken more than that committee has recommended then the 
Member's comments would have been relevant, that we didn't pay any attention to the committee 
anyway. The Members of this Legislature, for all their own reasons, obviously took less than the public 
committee recommended that they take. I object to the Members' any Member of this Chamber saying 
that the Committee that was selected, at different times under different governments, was a tool of this 
Chamber and was used as such. I really can't support that suggestion as put forward at this time. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1375 
 

The question that arises here, Mr. Speaker, is what doe; the public want? I think the public of 
Saskatchewan or of any other province, or of Canada for that matter, are prepared to pay for good 
service by their representatives 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BROCKELBANK: From time to time their faith in their representatives is shaken for any number 
of reasons, some of which the Member opposite mentioned. I think it's a legitimate fact that their faith is 
shaken from time to time. We've seen it happen over and over again. But that's part of the democratic 
system. People have a chance to elect their representatives, they have a chance to watch them in action 
and then they have a chance to make a decision on whether those representatives have adequately 
represented them, have earned their money for the four years put in on their behalf, or whatever period 
of time it was. 
 
For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I think the Resolution does have some merit. I would like further time to 
consider the Resolution and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore 
Park) for Return No. 14 showing: 
 

The total number of private business firms presently operating in premises which are provincially 
owned or leased; and the names, addresses and types of business operated in each case. 

 
MR. BROCKELBANK: Mr. Speaker, when I last spoke on this Motion I suggested that I would have 
an amendment. I do have the amendment now. I think that it clarifies the Motion slightly and will 
provide all of the information that the Member requested. The amendment herein offered is 
self-explanatory. I do now move the amendment, seconded by my seatmate, Hon. G. MacMurchy 
(Minister of Education) as follows: 
 

Delete all the words after the word 'showing' where it first appears and substitute the following 
therefor: 

 
The names, addresses and types of businesses operating in buildings owned or leased by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1376 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 – FINANCIAL ACCOUNT OF INTERCONTINENTAL PACKERS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Wetherald 
(Cannington): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to provide a full annual accounting to this 
Assembly of all financial aspects of its investment in Intercontinental Packers Limited. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Thorson: 
 

That all the words after the word 'Assembly' in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 

 
Recommend that the equity investments of the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation be 
reviewed by the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations during the course of considering 
the latest annual report of the said Corporation. 

 
MR. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) Mr. Speaker, if I could speak on the amendment it says what we 
suspected when the amendment was moved, we were in Crown Corporations, the SEDCO annual report 
was being . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: I believe the Hon. Member has already spoken on the amendment. This was brought 
down on the 8th of March, moved by the Member for Cannington. An amendment was moved by the 
Minister for Industry and Commerce and the Hon. Member for Athabasca then followed the Member at 
that time, so he has already spoken. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, speaking on behalf of the Member who 
had already spoken. What he wanted to tell the House, I understand, was that we did take this up in the 
Crown Corporations Committee and they refused to give us the information. I'm sure that the point that 
the Member wanted to make is that this is typical of the Government opposite. They say, ask questions. 
If you ask questions, they amend them. They say, ask for information. If you ask for information, they 
say go to the Crown Corporations. You go to the Crown Corporations, they say this isn't the right place. 
You come back into the House, they say go to the Crown Corporations. Never has there been a more 
devious government in the history of this province. I know exactly what you're doing to say. This is 
proof positive of the type of government they are and I think the amendment should be defeated and the 
original motion passed and this Corporation forced to expose to the light of publicity their very bad 
mishandling of public funds immediately. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1377 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 10 - INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Dyck (Saskatoon City 
Park): 
 

That this Assembly adopt the principles incorporated in the International Women's Year as set out by 
the United Nations and urges the Government of Saskatchewan to continue taking actions to improve 
the status of women in this province. 

 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY: (Hanley) Mr. Speaker, I feel I must speak on this Resolution in order to draw 
your attention, not so much to what has been accomplished but rather, to what must be done in the very 
near future. 
 
But first of all, I should like to make a few remarks relative to what the previous speaker said on this 
particular motion. Now it seems to me that he started out by politicking, by trying to paint the picture of 
the Federal Liberal Government insofar as things pertaining to women are concerned, as being so lily 
white. I just want to remind the House that the picture isn't quite as lily white as the previous speaker 
tried to point out. I mention, for example, the case of Judy LaMarsh who recently had the rug pulled out 
from under her by the Federal Liberal Government, I believe for . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: Well, they were able to do it, and I believe for no reason, Mr. Speaker, other than 
she had the decency to contribute to the best of her ability insofar as Cabinet was concerned. I believe 
that Cabinet of that day just couldn't take it, and word went out from their Leader at that time to get to 
Judy LaMarsh, and we all know what happened to her. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: I also want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, something in relation to what 
the previous speaker said, and I think he mentioned five women senators. Well, I want to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I believe the Prime Minister probably asked hundreds of women to sit in the Senate. But I 
firmly believe that most women couldn't be bothered with sitting in this glorious do-nothing, 
rubber-stamp institution. I feel that most of the women of Canada feel their talents can be put to better 
use in other areas than in stamping things that the House of Commons has decided on beforehand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I should like publicly to commend the many women and women's groups in 
Canada and Saskatchewan who are doing splendid work in a variety of ways; work relative to striving 
for equal rights for women; work relative to assisting the disadvantaged; and work relative to helping to 
make this a better province in which to live. Mr. Speaker, we have many such women and women's 
groups, and it is their prodding of the conscience of Saskatchewan and Canada that we must be guided 
by if the work that has to be done, is to be done. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1378 
 

Mr. Speaker there is no doubt that society in general, particularly in the past, has played down the role of 
women. As a teacher of numerous classes, I have always been annoyed at the almost complete lack of 
recognition of women in our text books: to be more specific, our history books have helped in promoting 
the dominance of men in the past. In fact, were one to walk into most any school library today, one 
would probably find that this indirect promotion of male dominance is still going on. With this in mind, 
Mr. Speaker, I say I believe that it is in our schools that drastic changes must be made – changes that 
will result in a new image of the role of women being presented to school children. To me, Mr. Speaker, 
this is the most vital change needed - a change in developing young attitudes that will eventually have 
beneficial results for society in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with the various men we have in such professions as medicine, dentistry 
and engineering, just to name a few, but sometimes I wonder why mostly all of them are men. Surely 
those who are in a position to screen applicants who wish to enrol in colleges offering such training 
would be well advised to allow more women to enrol. 
 
Surely the women of Canada would be just as capable in these professions as the women of certain other 
nations where the number of women approximates the number of men, or, in some cases, is even higher 
Mr. Speaker, I urge these male dominated admitting bodies to re-examine the admission criteria which 
they now use. Could not more weight be given to such things as compassion and human understanding - 
things in which women certainly are equal to or superior to men? 
 
Another area on which I should like to make a few comments is property rights as they affect women. I 
believe the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan has already made certain recommendations. 
While there are some who claim these recommendations do not go far enough, in that past input of 
women into the accumulation of family property and assets, is not given due consideration, these 
recommendations are a basis from which legislation can be considered to assist, to some degree, in 
rectifying the intolerable situation which has existed and still does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Federal Law Reform Commission is involved in studying the field of 
women's property rights with the intention of presenting certain recommendations, also. At any rate, it is 
my hope that in the very near future, we will see more federal and provincial legislation geared to 
rectifying the intolerable situation of women in regard to property rights. And here I would hope that 
such future legislation, federal and provincial, would complement each other. As I see it, Mr. Speaker, 
the way the situation now stands, women often find themselves in a sort of limbo of inaction due to 
interjurisdictional squabbling or grey areas where no one knows for sure who should act, or areas where 
one jurisdiction has power to legislate but no real power to enforce that legislation, or related court 
orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the net result of this situation is that very often women are denied rights which all of us 
agree they are entitled to. As well, very often, the only ones who really benefit are the lawyers involved. 
 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1379 
 

Mr. Speaker, another point I should like to raise pertains to day care. Now I'll be the first to admit that 
this government's record is good in this area. But, I also want to point out that more federal and 
provincial consideration should be given to those women who would want to take advantage of this 
programme prior to when catastrophe strikes the family unit. Far too often in the past, women had to 
wait for the catastrophe actually to occur before they could take advantage of day care and upgrading 
courses. Mr. Speaker, such a situation is not conducive to maintaining socially and economically healthy 
family units. I believe expanded day care facilities and freer access of women to upgrading courses will 
greatly assist in the avoidance of many family breakdowns when catastrophe does strike. 
 
Another area I want briefly to touch on concerns the discrimination of women in regard to the Canada 
Pension Plan. Why has the Federal Government seen fit to exclude homemakers from the plan? Is not 
the work they do deserving of consideration? Mr. Speaker, I am aware of many organizations, which 
speak for millions of Canadian women of all political stripes, asking over the past number of years that 
the Federal Government take action in this area, action which will eliminate the discrimination which 
now exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation throughout all of Canada in regard to support payments made to women in 
marriage breakdowns, is a mess. I believe every Member in this House is aware of situations arising out 
of marriage breakdowns where it is almost impossible for a woman to collect what is morally and 
legally due to her, and, very often to her children. Mr. Speaker, the root of this problem lies in the fact 
that what is really needed is not a hodge-podge of interprovincial agreements, but rather legislation at 
the federal level to cover every nook and cranny of Canada. The situation as it now stands almost invites 
those who would wish to escape their legal financial obligations to table hop from one province to 
another. 
 
And then, almost as if to add insult to injury, I believe that in all provinces, when marriage breakdowns 
do occur, the onus is on the woman to prove that she has tried to collect support payments via the courts 
before she can apply for social assistance. Mr. Speaker, at the very time when she is beset by a host of 
problems, and at the very time when she should be given special consideration, she is expected to 
involve herself in legal procedure and financial expenditure before she can apply for assistance. But here 
I have to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Saskatchewan Department of Social 
Services has been quite understanding. It recognizes the plight of these women and has been willing to 
interpret regulations in such a manner as to assist these women in every way possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other areas where there is no doubt the cards are stacked against women. 
 
For example, consider the recent case where a number of women, about to take Manpower training, 
found that the benefits they were to be paid would be less than if they were males. Or, consider, the fact 
that even though there may be equal pay legislation for women throughout Canada, there is no real 
legislation directed at equal opportunity for women. Now, the logical outcome of this lack of equal 
opportunity for women is that the 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1380 
 

equal pay legislation can be easily circumvented without any laws having been broken. Or, Mr. Speaker, 
consider recent reliable statistics which show clearly that women have a much greater chance of 
becoming economically poor than men, particularly in single or single parent situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know full well that much can be accomplished via legislation in improving the status of 
women, but I am also aware that in many areas, only the common sense and good judgement of citizens 
can effect an improvement. To this end I urge all citizens and our various institutions to rid ourselves of 
all feudalistic notions and attitudes relative to women. And if this can come about relatively quickly, I 
think all can be assured that Canada will become a better nation for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention, as I stated previously, to give a resume of what this Government has 
done in regard to improving the status of women in Saskatchewan. Nor is it my intention to go into 
detail concerning the noble principles incorporated in the International Women's Year as set out by the 
United Nations. 
 
I feel the women of Canada, and particularly of Saskatchewan, are quite capable of making themselves 
vocal as to whether or not any particular jurisdiction's record is good or bad. I feel they are quite capable 
of drawing attention to areas that need improvement, and this they have done. What we need now, Mr. 
Speaker, is action. I hope it will come soon. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER: (Minister of Labour) Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on this 
Resolution because the principles involved touch very directly upon a number of the programs with 
which my Department is concerned. 
 
The United Nations has declared 1975 International Women's Year and believe the time has certainly 
come to promote equality between men and women and to recognize the importance of women's 
increasing contributions in all areas of life. The purpose of this International Women's Year is to focus 
attention on improving the status of women and to promote an awareness of the changing role of women 
in society. In some respects, the role of women in Canadian society has been changing at a much faster 
rate than some sectors of our community have been able to comprehend. In the last ten years, for 
example, well over one million women have entered the labor force in Canada. Their participation rate - 
that is the number of persons in the work force expressed as a percentage of the population - has been 
rising steadily in every working age group except for those women over 55 years of age and here the 
rate has remained the same over the past few years. At the present time, nearly 40 per cent of all the 
women in Canada over 14 years of age work outside the home. 
 
In my position as Minister of Labour during the past three and one-half years it has been my task to see 
that programs are developed which promote the well-being of working people in Saskatchewan. I am 
speaking of about some 360,000 people 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1381 
 

and one in every three of these people is a woman. So you can see that I have a considerable interest in a 
resolution such as the one we are considering today. 
 
In the course of developing appropriate solutions to the many problems in the labor field, I have been 
confronted over and over again with evidence that women in the world of work as well as in all other 
areas, are often subject to discrimination. Discrimination in the areas of equal pay and of equal 
opportunity. This denial of equal status takes many different forms and reflects some pretty deep-rooted 
attitudes. 
 
For example, I see that in the working world, women on the average, earn less than men. In 1970 the 
women who worked earned about an average of 46 per cent of the average income of males. Yet, for the 
most part, we like to believe that our boys and girls are receiving an equal chance at education and an 
equal chance at trades training. Obviously then there are attitudes involved which stream the girls into 
certain kinds of occupations and not into others. Often these jobs are not especially well paid and they 
do not contain much potential for advancement. 
 
I am quite aware that attitudes cannot be legislated but nevertheless, having recognized that the problem 
exists this Government has taken a number of constructive steps which, by themselves, will not solve all 
of these problems hut I believe they will go a long way towards creating the conditions where change 
will be recognized as a right and a good thing for everyone 
 
Back in 1964, the NDP established the Women's Bureau as a vehicle for adjusting at least some of the 
inequities particularly with respect to equal pay for work of a similar nature. Well, that year the working 
women of this province, Mr. Speaker, fell upon hard times as the saying goes, along with many of the 
rest of us. The Bureau during the next number of years was forced to carry on as best it could without 
adequate resources and without clearly defined functions, until 1971 when the sun broke through again. 
Since that time we have seen to it that the Women's Bureau administers specific equal pay legislation 
and it has investigators to ensure compliance with the very practical provisions of the equal pay 
legislation. Previously a woman was required to file a formal, detailed complaint with the Director of 
Labour Standards. Now, any district office can receive complaints either written or oral. Since 1973, 
restitution of nearly $42,000 has been made to 206 women and one man. I think that indicates some 
proof that the program is working. 
 
The Women's Bureau is also responsible for monitoring this province's maternity leave provisions - 
which incidentally are the best in Canada. Women in Saskatchewan are entitled to 18 weeks maternity 
leave so that they no longer have to quit their jobs to bear a child. Upon her return a woman is 
guaranteed a position similar to the one which she left. The Women's Bureau also plays an extremely 
important educational role in providing guidance to students planning careers as well as to older women 
who may be re-entering the work force after a prolonged absence. 
 
It is my view that these have been very practical contributions toward improving the status of women in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. There have been many, many more steps taken 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1382 
 

during the past three and one-half years, a good many of them enshrined in legislation. You may hear 
some talk of 'tokenism' from some quarters these days but let me say to the credit of this Government, 
that legislation here is far from tokenism where the rights of individuals are concerned, whether they be 
male or female. 
 
Allow me then to list some of the legislative changes introduced since 1971 to improve the status of 
women in this province. These are in addition to the changes in the Labour Standards Act, changes 
which I have already described. 
 
The Fair Employment Practices Act and The Fair Accommodation Practices Act were amended to 
prohibit sex discrimination. The Jury Act has been amended so that men and women have an equal right 
and an equal obligation to serve on jury duty. The Workers' Compensation Act was passed under which 
benefits for males and females are the same. An amendment to the Married Women's Property Act was 
introduced last fall as an interim measure while awaiting the recommendations of the Law Reform 
Commission for a more sweeping revision of marital property law. 
 
In 1973 we appointed a task force to look closely at the recommendations of the Federal Royal 
Commission Report on the Status of Women and how those recommendations applied to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. A number of the legislative changes I have outlined were partly as a 
result of that study. In that same year, 1973, the Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the Status of 
Women was established to ensure continuing improvement in the whole area of women's rights. 
 
We have commissioned a study on the need for a family court and introduced a Bill in line with the 
recommendations of the author of that report. A day care program has been developed within the 
Department of Social Services which includes subsidies where parents require them. A Family Planning 
Advisory Committee was established in 1974. I have already mentioned the work of the Law Reform 
Commission. 
 
In the Department of Labour a review of all facets of The Labour Standards Act is virtually complete. 
One purpose of the review, Mr. Speaker, is to determine which Acts contain protective measure clauses 
which may be discriminatory. All of these things I think, represent positive action to achieve equal 
opportunities for women in all walks of life. In addition, we have made available special grants in 
recognition of International Women's Year and the current budget includes funds to increase those 
grants - further positive action I suggest. 
 
As the employer of over 13,000 public servants in this province, the Government has a further 
responsibility to ensure that discrimination does not occur within the ranks of its own civil service. In 
this respect we have tried to be vigilant. For example, we have approved amendments to the Group Life 
Insurance Plan for Saskatchewan civil servants to equate benefits for male and female employees. We 
have increased the proportion of women appointed to boards and commissions to 209 in 1974, compared 
with a figure of 141 in 1973. 
 
Several senior civil service appointments have gone to women since 1971 also, Mr. Speaker. For 
example in 1972 the first woman deputy minister in Saskatchewan was named. In 1973, a woman 
became assistant clerk of the Legislative Assembly. 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1383 
 

In 1974, another first, Mr. Speaker, when a woman was named Legislative Counsel for the Government. 
 
We in this Government have made a commitment to the women of this province to acknowledge the 
importance of women's increasing contribution in all areas of life and to do everything possible to end 
discrimination against the feminine half of our population. This is precisely then what International 
Women's Year is all about; and I have no hesitation in supporting this Resolution. When all of us accept 
and support the changing attitudes concerning women's roles in society, Saskatchewan will benefit as a 
whole. We cannot afford to ignore the contributions of the past and the potential contribution which 
women will make through their greater participation in the economic, social and cultural development of 
this country. 
 
It is with a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I add my voice in support of the Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 - ELIMINATION OF SECTION 8 OF THE CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
ACT. 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. Grant (Regina 
Whitmore Park): 
 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that Section 
8 of the Consumer Affairs Act be eliminated, due to its provision of excessive discretionary power to 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: 

 
That all the words after the word 'Assembly' be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 
Commend the Government of Saskatchewan for establishing a Department of Consumer Affairs to 
look after the interests and concerns of the consumer and recommend that consideration be given to 
replacing Section 8 of the Department of Consumer Affairs Act by comprehensive Fair Trades 
Practices legislation to create sanctions against and prohibit undesirable business practices. 

 
MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Speaker, I hope that this amendment is defeated, 
I don't suppose that it will be because it was introduced by a Member of the Government, by a minister 
which is rather amazing when you read the Resolution and then read the amendment. I should like to see 
this House pass the original Resolution. The original Resolution calls upon the Government to amend 
Section 8 of the Consumer Affairs Act and take out the powers that they have given to the Minister to 
close down any business in the Province of Saskatchewan for five days without reference to the courts at 
his own whim based on his own opinion. This is far too much power to give to any one individual. It 
stands and has stood ever since it was passed as a threat hanging over the 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1384 
 

business community of this province. It is typical of the power grab or the power that this Government 
has taken unto itself, especially to the Cabinet Ministers. And again it is an example of the continuous 
harassment and the war on business that has been engaged in by the NDP ever since they came to power. 
The amazing thing about this amendment is that it was introduced by the Minister who is in charge of 
The Consumer Affairs Act. By the Minister who has been given this almost unprecedented power by the 
NDP Government. It is an admission that they went too far. It is not good enough for the Premier or the 
Minister or the Attorney General to stand up and say but you can't point to any example where we have 
actually closed anyone up, and we need this kind of power. The fact that it is on the Books, the fact that 
it is there, hangs over the head of every businessman and sets a bad climate, a climate for business 
investment that is bad enough already in this province without this kind of restrictive power-hungry 
legislation. 
 
Then we have the sight of the Minister himself coming in and offering an amendment. In effect agreeing 
that it is taking too much power and in effect agreeing that Section 8 should be amended because that is 
exactly what the amendment says. It agrees to amend Section 8. What does it offer to replace it with? 
Something to do with fair trade practice. Now what does this mean? For the Minister to come in and if 
he wanted to amend this and he has some idea what fair trade practices mean, why didn't he do what he 
should have done and introduce an amendment to this House, which he has the power to do, and say, we 
have looked this portion of the Act over, have looked this Section of the Act over and we realize that it 
is unworkable and we realize that it was badly thought out and that it was passed in haste so we'll 
change it. We will change it by introducing the following amendment and tell us what fair trade practice 
means. 
 
As a matter of fact it is an American phrase. I don't know what it means, I don't think the Minister 
knows what it means and I think that he has got a responsibility before we vote can this Resolution to 
explain to the House exactly what he is proposing. I have yet to see in any Legislature in this country, 
including the Federal Government, legislation spelling out what the Minister has suggested in this 
amendment. So, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of anything concrete or detailed by the Minister telling this 
House what he means, I hope that the House will defeat the amendment. I hope that they will pass this 
Resolution, in fact I think the Minister himself should vote for it, then the Government will do what this 
Resolution asks, take a new look at this Act, take out the powers it has given to the Minister, recognize 
the powers are too great, too sweeping and too wide and I think actually they may very well be 
unimportant. 
 
The Minister is coming in now and I don't know whether he has passed out or has any information to 
make available to the House about this particular amendment he has proposed to this Resolution but I 
hoped that he would. I am sorry he wasn't here when I spoke earlier. Mr. Minister, what I am saying is 
that you, as the responsible Minister for this Act, have admitted by introducing this amendment that the 
portion of Section 8 is unworkable and should never have been brought in, in the first place. So if you 
want to change it now you have the power to change it, bring in the amendment, explain to us what you 
mean. You didn't explain it when you spoke, what do you mean by fair trade practices? How would you 
spell that out in legislation? How would you spell it out in regulations pertaining to the 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1385 
 

legislation and how would you enforce it? What does it mean? So if the Minister is prepared to do this 
and unless he is prepared to do this, then I think the amendment is an admission that the Act is badly 
written, the powers are too wide, too sweeping. It's an admission of failure on behalf of the Government 
and it doesn't spell out what he offers as an alternative, so I would oppose the amendment which means 
absolutely nothing and support the Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 18 - GOVERNMENT ADVERTISING 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): 
 

That this Assembly recommend for the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that it 
immediately cease the granting of contracts or provision of government advertising for any firm or 
publication owned by a political party. 

 
The question was put on Resolution No. 18 and it was negatived on the following recorded division: 
 
YEAS Messieurs – 12 
 
Steuart Grant Wiebe 
Coupland MacDonald(Milestone) MacDonald (Moose Jaw North) 
Loken Gardner Guy 
Weatherald Boldt Malone 
 
NAYS Messieurs – 33 
 
Blakeney MacMurchy Faris 
Dyck Pepper Owens 
Meakes Michayluk Mostoway 
Smishek Byers Gross 
Romanow Thorson Feduniak 
Messer Kwasnica Comer 
Snyder Carlson Hanson 
Kramer Engel Oliver 
Thibault Robbins Feschuk 
Baker Tchorzewski Kaeding 
Brockelbank Matsalla Flasch 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

FINAL REPORT OF SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON HIGHWAY TRAFFIC & SAFETY 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Melfort-Kinistino) moved, seconded by Mr. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park) that 
the Final Report of the Special Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety be now concurred in. 
 
He said: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, at 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1386 
 

the outset I wart to say that the statements that I make are my own and not necessarily that of the 
Committee. I will not cover the entire Report as other Members will also be speaking on this subject and 
by the time that I close I believe that it will have been well covered. It was a great team job and I want to 
keep it that way. 
 
I also appreciate the fact that the work at all times was kept out of the realm of party politics. Mr. 
Speaker, the contentious areas appear to be the speed limits and seat belts which will have a short time 
effect, therefore, I strongly urge the Government to press the educators in our society to join the crusade 
for traffic safety. The fuel crisis in the United States and the 55 miles an hour speed limit proved beyond 
a shadow of a doubt that reducing speed limits would save at least 11 per cent of the lives that are lost. 
Eleven per cent is attributed exactly to the lowering of speed limits. 
 
The use of seat belts in Australia, by their legislation, has reduced the death rate there by approximately 
25 per cent. A coroner's jury that appeared before the Committee in North Battleford has said to the 
Committee that seven out of 13 lives that were lost would have been saved if they had used their seat 
belts in accidents that he attended. At the International Conference in Toronto one expert said, it was 
also discovered that 20 per cent of the accident victims would have lived if they had received first aid by 
competent people who were knowledgeable in the use and practice of first aid. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that first aid must be taught from kindergarten to Grade 12. That's what is being done in some of 
the countries including New Zealand. I think the first person who comes on the scene of an accident is a 
very important person, therefore, if everybody had a course in first aid he would be able to save lives 
when he is called upon to do so. 
 
If we are to reduce deaths on our highways we are going to have to put into practice some of the 
programs that are recommended in the Committee Report. Australia had about a two year education 
period before passing the seat belt law. We must also consider how ready the public is before passing 
our law. Since I tabled the Report in this House I have received three negative answers and the rest were 
positive on practically all recommendations. 
 
I also want to read a letter to this House that I received from one of the people who listened to the Hot 
Line, I spent two hours on under fire. The letter comes from an L.C. McFadden, 130 – 110th St., 
Saskatoon, March 24, 1975: 
 

Dear Art: 
 
Congratulations on your Hot Line performance this morning. I wanted to call in but I could not make 
it. I wanted to comment on two points brought out. 
 
1. Cost of the Traffic Safety Committee. 
 
2. Objection to a limitation of speed limits. 
 
(a) If your Committee saves just one life it has justified its existence. Money can be replaced, a life 
cannot. How much money is spent to locate one downed plane. For example, Bob Gauchie of Fort 
Smith lost for 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1387 
 

59 days. 
 
(b) You may know what I am going to relate. Some years ago Red Book Magazine decided to test 
traffic safety. Two identical cars certified mechanically O.K. in New York were to drive to San 
Francisco. Driver A was to obey all speed limits and traffic regulations, drive not more than ten hours 
a day, book 8 hours of rest and sleep each night. Driver B had no restrictions placed upon him. He was 
free to get to San Francisco as fast and quickly as possible. 
 
Result: 
 
Both drivers arrived at the check point within an hour of each other. Driver A was relaxed, fresh and 
free from tension. His car was still mechanically O.K. Driver B was tired and tense. He had to have 
some repairs to his car, plus a lighter purse as a result of fines. More power to you and your 
Committee. 
 
(Signed) Mac. 

 
That's the end of the quote. 
 
At the International Conference in Toronto in 1974 the best information available was that two out of 
every 100 drunks on the road are apprehended. One out of every 7,000 speeding infractions is caught. 
Even if we double our police force, what effect would it have? The force must be equipped with more 
up-to-date equipment to be effective. 
 
Speaking about courts, I want to say that when we were down to the International Conference in 
Toronto, three members of the Committee plus one member from the research staff, myself, Mr. Whelan 
and Mr. Meakes and Mr. Zenon Topuschak, research assistant, travelled to Toronto to attend the sixth 
annual International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety in September of 1974. While in 
Toronto, these members arranged to visit the North York traffic court recently set up in that section of 
Toronto. The Committee's tour was very ably guided by Mr. Howard Morton, Director of the project and 
Mr. Bill Fletcher, an analyst with the court. The visit was very informative and the members were 
extended every courtesy by those involved in the traffic court project. 
 
The Committee's recommendation regarding the setting up of separate traffic courts in Saskatchewan 
incorporates many of the principles and aims of the North York Traffic Court. Mr. Speaker, I personally 
visited a similar court in Cook County, Illinois. There again the court was geared to educating the 
offender rather than punishing. 
 
We also attended the Phoenix project in Phoenix, Arizona and there again the DWI (Driving While 
Intoxicated) is dealt with by the educational approach rather than by hitting his pocket. 
 
What we have today on the surface appears to be more as a means of collecting money for the 
government and does nothing to improve the driver, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, I believe they're 
even making matters worse. The traffic courts must be an educational process and must be definitely 
taken 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1388 
 

out of the courts such as trying to try rape cases in the same court as the fellow that went through a stop 
sign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure if we asked every driver in the province if he would be willing to spend a few 
hours, a few minutes to help traffic safety every year - many of them don't realize how little time they 
save - I'm sure most of them would be willing to take a few hours more throughout the summer. On a 25 
mile trip the difference between 60 miles an hour and 55 miles an hour would mean two minutes. Two 
minutes to be a safe driver. I have a few other calculations made here. On a hundred miles it would take 
an hour and 48 minutes at 55 miles an hour. At 60 miles an hour it would take an hour and 40 minutes, 
you would save eight minutes. Mr. Speaker, if you went 65 miles an hour you save 16 minutes. Is it 
worth the time? I know one of the callers on the Hot Line said he travelled from Lanigan to Saskatoon 
and said he observed the 55 miles an hour. He said: "I enjoyed it, I saved gasoline," and it was for 
gasoline alone, the resource that we cannot replace. He said: ''I saw parts of Saskatchewan that I never 
saw before." It has been clearly proven that the faster you drive the narrower your vision gets. If you get 
the speed high enough all you get is blacktop and anything that gets in the way which you may hit. You 
slow down a little bit and you see the big picture as explained in one of the pamphlets put out by 
Saskatchewan Transportation. 
 
I know that Sask Power has done a good job in educating their drivers and they are an example in this 
province. There's no reason why all the rest of the people couldn't learn to do the same thing. 
 
I also want to offer special thanks today to the news media, newspapers, radio and television. Without 
their help, I'm sure that our project would be a failure. 
 
We've recommended traffic safety for 1976 but it should be prepared by programs in 1975. Some of the 
year 1975 should be used to get the program well on its way so that we can have communities and towns 
and villages co-operating with whatever government there will be at that day, making the program a 
success. 
 
The educators in our society hold the key to this problem and therefore we should encourage them to do 
something about it. I'm going to tell you that in this province we're so far behind in traffic safety that we 
are like the slow horse on the race track. He is one whole turn behind and running to beat 60 thinking 
he's ahead. I think we had better realize that that's where we are and anybody who has been on the 
Committee and attended the conference in Toronto fully realizes it. 
 
In closing I want to say that in all problems to do with people there are no easy answers. The problem 
must be tackled on all fronts. It is essential that the drivers be well informed and have an awareness of 
their moral responsibility in matters of traffic safety. Drivers must learn to police themselves if we are to 
succeed in reducing the number of deaths on our roads. In 1974, 318 people were killed in 
Saskatchewan in traffic accidents. The Committee believes that the great loss to society resulting in 
traffic accidents can no longer be tolerated and that measures recommended in the Report will 
significantly improve the present situation. 



 
April 1, 1975 

 

1389 
 

I want to take this opportunity to record my gratitude for the diligence shown by all members and the 
staff of this Committee. It was a pleasure to work with members who took their responsibility earnestly 
and worked together well in the spirit of true parliamentarians. 
 
 I will have more to say in closing the debate, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to move that this Final 
Report of the Special Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety be now concurred in. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.B. GRANT: (Regina Whitmore Park) Mr. Speaker, I welcome that applause from both sides of 
the House. It will probably be the last I'll get from either side. I think when the interim report was tabled 
in the House from this Committee that there was a pretty full and explicit discussion of the 
recommendations of what we had in mind and the final Report which the chairman has tabled and which 
he has moved and I have seconded the adoption of, follows very closely that interim report, finalizes 
some sections of it and unfortunately, leaves a few things left unsolved for future consideration. When 
one looks at those items for further study, (a) they're not too numerous, (b) they are not of top priority in 
comparison to some others. 
 
On the occasion when I spoke previously I expressed some question as to just how concerned the public 
are about the fatalities on our highways. I don't think this is necessarily due to any callousness on the 
part of the public. I think it is possibly because of the day and age that we live in where communication 
is so instantaneous ad things are so relative that the loss of one or two lives every day on our highways 
looks pretty minimum when you compare it to the casualties that are occurring either through man's 
inhumanity to man or through catastrophes caused by nature. Even though there is an apparent lack of a 
general overall public concern, nevertheless, I think it behoves Members of the House, as legislators to 
be concerned about it and do something about it. 
 
One of the things that really concerns me throughout the study that we have made over the last year or 
so was the apparent inability of law enforcement officers, the judiciary and we, ourselves, as legislators 
to cope with some of the problems that we have. I refer particularly to the individual who insists on 
drinking to excess and driving and to the individual who flaunts the law when he has lost his licence to 
drive and drives in spite of that loss and I would hope that when this Report is finally dealt with that the 
Government in power will have the wisdom and the initiative to see that the recommendations are 
carried out to the best of their ability, particularly with the provision of funds, sufficient funds to enable 
a new court system to be established, more law enforcement officers and certainly a stepped up 
educational program. 
 
I think it speaks well of the concern of the legislators, that with all the recommendations that we finally 
came up with the Hon. Member for Athabasca and myself were the only ones who had reservations and 
they only pertain to one particular area. I'm sure that each member of the Committee has some 



 
April 1, 1975 
 

1390 
 

reservations about recommendation on seat belts but Mr. Guy and I felt strongly enough about it to 
insert a reservation in the Report. I'm a great advocate of the use of seat belts myself, and I think they 
are good. I'm very critical of the variety of seat belts that we have. The fact that they haven't been 
designed for any degree of comfort or ease of applying and this is one of the reasons why I signed the 
reservation. The other one is that the use of seat belts is not universal There are no seat belts provided 
for trains or buses, particularly school buses. When you think of the casualties that have occurred with 
the use of school buses, possibly that's an area we should start in before we start in private vehicles. The 
other reservation, of course, related to the difficulty of enforcing it and to some degree, the infringement 
on private, of an individual's right to either avail himself of these provisions or equipment provided for 
his safety or in his wisdom, deciding not no use them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't think it's necessary to dwell at great length, I noticed the chairman kept his remarks 
fairly brief and I intend to do likewise. I think I missed during the last 10 or 12 years a worthwhile 
experience in that I was never on a committee of this type until this one and as a result I think I have a 
better appreciation of some of the Members opposite then I would have if I hadn't served on the 
Committee. I think I was fortunate in being chosen to sit on this particular Committee because it was 
less political than some of the other ones in the past and possibly the experience of other members on 
the committee work wasn't as satisfying as I found this one. I think we listened to as many people as any 
committee could have listened to in this area. I don't think any one or any group was denied an 
opportunity to speak to us and I'm sure that we all benefited from the delegations and individuals who 
appeared before it. Naturally it reached the point where a lot of them were repetitious because 
practically every possible angle of highway safety was touched on after you had listened to a few 
delegations, much the same as this House after three or four Members have spoken. There is really 
nothing new, just the old points being rehashed and dressed a little bit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know other members of the Committee would like an opportunity to speak to the 
Report but at this time I should like to ask leave to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o'clock p.m. 
 


