




















































Hansard: April 14, 1975


 

1535 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

38th Day 

 

Monday, April 14, 1975. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me today to introduce to you and the 

Assembly a group of 62 students attending Division III School at Rosetown. They are seated in the east 

gallery and are accompanied by four of their teachers, Mrs. Wicket, Miss Klassen, Mr. Huck and Mr. 

Brumwell. I know the Assembly will join with me in extending a welcome to this group, wishing them 

an enjoyable stay with us this afternoon and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to introduce to you 

and through you to the Members of this House approximately 18 students from the Morse High School. 

I understand they are Grade Twelve students. They came in earlier this morning. Their trip was 

cancelled last week because of the severe weather. I am very pleased to see them here today and I look 

forward to meeting with them at 3:30. I understand they are accompanied as well by their Grade Twelve 

teacher, Mr. Carl Radbrooke. I might point out to the Legislature that since Mr. Radbrooke has been 

teaching at Morse he has managed to take a class of students to the Legislature each and every year. I 

look forward to meeting with them at 3:30. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. Owens (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with Mr. Loken, Member for Rosetown in 

welcoming the group from Rosetown. I also hope that they have an enjoyable day in the Assembly and a 

safe journey back to their homes. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

introduce to you, Sir, and to all the Members of the House, 90 I believe, Grade Eight students from St. 

Mary’s School. Their teachers are Mr. Ferner, Mr. Gervais, and Mr. Hicke, I hope I have pronounced 

those names correctly. 

 

They are in the west gallery and I will be meeting with them about 3:15. St. Mary’s School is just off 

20th Street. It is one of the oldest and best schools in the City of Saskatoon. I hope that the students have 

a good and informative visit here and a safe journey back home to Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1536 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

WILL SGIO ESTABLISH ANOTHER RESEARCH CENTRE 
 

Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like 

to direct a question to the Attorney General. With the establishment of the research centre for SGIO, I 

believe it was pretty well understood that there would only be one such research centre and it would be 

located in Regina. And it would not become just another auto body repair shop. 

 

Would the Minister tell us if the Government is planning on opening another research centre in 

Saskatoon in the premises either now or formerly occupied by Doc Landa’s Body Shop? 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — No, SGIO to my knowledge has no such plans to open up 

another experimental research centre at this time anywhere other than the one that is open here in 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Grant: — I presume the Minister would know if there were such plans since he is so closely 

tied-in. Would the Minister advise us whether he has seen that specific instructions are given to the 

Claims Service Centre, that only special repair cases are referred to the Research Centre. As he knows, 

there are complaints regularly from the auto repair industry that a little bit more than research work is 

being carried on. I think in Crown corporations’ discussions he assured us that it was not the desire of 

the Government to have this become an auto body repair shop. Have instructions been passed on to the 

Claims Service Centres? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I can only repeat what I believe I indicated to Members in Crown corporations when 

I was asked a similar question. That under normal circumstances the prime function of the Research 

Centre is to do that, namely research. References by adjusters or other people in SGIO to the Centre are 

only made when specifically asked by a customer or when in the case of a specialized research project, 

such as the chromed bumpers, whatever you call them, I think they call it chromatizing the new 

bumpers. So far as I understand, that is the standard procedure. John Green advises me that that is the 

position with respect to all SGIO people and I certainly know of nothing that would alter that in the next 

little while. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be sure I have a clear understanding on the first question. The 

Government is not planning to buy Doc Landa’s Repair Shop. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I give you as clear and as full an answer as I can. I know of no move by SGIO, 

certainly none by the Cabinet, because Cabinet would not be involved in this. It would be an SGIO 

meeting, and I know of nothing by SGIO to purchase the Doc Landa’s Auto Body Shop in Saskatoon. It 

is conceivable that there may be some informal discussions at an officials level, but I even doubt that 

because I think I would be advised of it. Standing here I can’t see that and I can assure the Member that 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1537 

 

there is no plan to purchase Doc Landa’s in Saskatoon. 

 

HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 
 

Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, if I might address a question to the 

Attorney General, I have received a number of telegrams which are concerned about the problems of 

discrimination in housing with respect to the Human Rights Commission. I understand that the Minister 

is planning to meet with this delegation at 2:45 p.m. Could the Minister advise the House what position 

he will take at that time in communicating with these groups? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer that because I don’t know what position they will take. I 

want to hear them and I will give responses as best I can and in any event the Bill is on the Order Paper 

for a debate by all Members and at that time I will be tendering the views of myself and the 

Government. 

 

Mr. Richards: — Clearly the supplementary question, I was trying to ferret out the Minister’s 

intentions without making any specific reference to the Bill in order to stay absolutely within the rules of 

this House as specified by the Speaker and one will note that in my initial question I made not the 

slightest mention of any piece of legislation which might be before the House. I think it might be 

appropriate if the Minister did state and I am certainly asking in my supplementary for his position about 

a certain piece of legislation which would seriously result in an increased potential for discrimination. I 

understand that 40 per cent of the housing cases alleging racial discrimination which came before the 

Commission would be affected by the amendment in the legislation. Could the Minister not have 

something more definite to state as to whether his Government intends to proceed with this obviously 

obnoxious piece of legislation? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously my position and that of the Government is together on 

this. The Bill is before the Members of the House and at present subject to any representations or any 

other consideration of the matter. It’s my intention to proceed with the legislation as it is before the 

Members of the House in due course. 

 

SECRET AND CONFIDENTIAL REPORTS SENT TO CROP INSURANCE BOARD 
 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question of the Minister of 

Agriculture. I wonder if the Minister is aware that secret and confidential reports are being sent in to the 

Crop Insurance Board about crop insurance claimants. In view of the concern of confidential files of 

people, I wonder if the Minister is aware of this. I wonder if he would comment on it. 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of any secret or 

confidential reports being sent to the Crop Insurance personnel. I would be happy to have the Member 

convey to me by whom these reports are being compiled and forwarded to the Crop Insurance 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1538 

 

Board. This is the first I have heard of any confidential or secret information. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I will provide a copy to the Minister. They are from the Crop Insurance Board and 

they are being sent in by their agents. They are asking such question as this; what is the insured’s 

attitude and understanding of the crop insurance program. Questions such as this that are obviously not 

related to his claim, but is confidential information. The farmer doesn’t get a chance to see this, he 

doesn’t have a chance to sign it but they are being sent in and kept on file regarding the farmer. I have a 

copy of the report here, the reporting form that is being used. I just wonder if the Minister would check 

into this and if this is the case, if he would see that this type of thing doesn’t go on. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to have the Member table the documents so I can pursue 

the matter further. 

 

SASKATCHEWAN POLICE COLLEGE 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 

address . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have had three questions, is the House prepared to take another one? 

 

Mr. Malone: . . . another question to the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker. It is in connection with the 

Saskatchewan Police College in an article that appeared in this morning’s Leader-Post. According to this 

article, and I am quoting from one of the professors, he indicates that the marks of the students, that is 

the policemen attending this College are very poor. To quote from the Leader-Post he says: 

 

In all my university career, I have never had so many with such bad marks. 

 

The article goes further to say that the students are judged on their attitude, deportment and ability to 

work with others at the College. My question to the Attorney general is: do the students not have to 

attain a certain academic standard, that is in marks, before they are given the pass from the College? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I believe that the question the Hon. Member directs my attention to really relates to 

one class only, and that is as I understand it, a psychology class at the University of Regina. This is 

really an experimental aspect of the Police College inasmuch as we only introduced it last year for the 

first time and this year for the second time, in an attempt to get the students some exposure to university 

attitudes and university classes and of course, to a particularly important subject matter, psychology. It 

was not felt by the officials and the administrators of the College that they should be in the ordinary 

class fail situation as it relates to the psychology class. I think that the comments made by the particular 

professor, while I haven’t seen them in detail, may be a bit too harsh, keeping in mind what this was 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1539 

 

intended to do. As far as I can see, the students are a very excellent crop of graduates, graduating at the 

end of this week and will do an excellent job in the field. I hope I have answered the question of the 

Hon. Member. 

 

Mr. Malone: — By way of supplementary then. I assume the students don’t have to attain a certain 

mark to be passed from the College. May I suggest to the Attorney General it would seem to be rather 

useless to have them attending the College if there is no intention to mark their efforts while they are 

there. I realize it is still at the experimental nature, but is it the intention of your Department at a later 

date to require the students that attend this College to attain a certain mark before they are given a 

diploma or certificate, whatever they get when they are finished? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Let me just make this clear. Again the marking relates to the psychology class only. 

My understanding is that there is a grading. There is a standard that has to be applied with respect to the 

rest of the Police College training. In the end result as you will appreciate, all the recruits sort of are the 

ultimate responsibility of the individual local police forces. What happens is that if the recruit does not 

meet the minimum standards, or the minimum qualifications or the minimum sort of criteria, this is 

notified, it is notified to the respective police authority and action is taken. So it is not to be assumed that 

there is no marking and no standard. Yes, indeed there is. There just doesn’t happen to be one in this 

psychology one. And may I say before I close off, that in addition to all the other remarks that I made, I 

think the other part of the report was that there were some students who were indeed very, very excellent 

in that psychology course. As I say, I sure wouldn’t want to see the Press or anybody jump on remarks 

which I think are out of context on the overall total program. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W. Robbins (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend 

The Public Service Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: For the information of Members, I wish at this time to outline some of the features of the Bill to 

amend The Public Service Superannuation Act. There are four basic amendments in the Bill. 

 

1. The addition of labour service employees under The Public Service Superannuation Act. 

 

2. A new Section 62B will enable a contributor under The Public Service Superannuation Act. to 

continue to be a contributor where he ceases to be an employee in a hospital operated by the province to 

become an employee of a Board of Governors appointed to operate that hospital. 

 

In other words it is simply to continue the superannuation coverage for those persons such as the Souris 

Valley Hospital which would come under this particular item in The Public Service Superannuation Act. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1540 

 

3. The addition of a new Section 62C that will permit an overage employee, a person who is 55 years of 

age or over of an institution acquired by the province to become a contributor under The Public Service 

Superannuation Act notwithstanding the fact that he is overage at the time he becomes an employee of 

the province. 

 

This deals specifically, I believe with the Qu’Appelle Sanatorium as one example that comes to mind. 

 

4. A further Section 64A that will allow a person employed in the Office of the Government Caucus or 

the Office of the Caucus of the Official Opposition by notice in writing to the Board to elect to 

contribute and receive benefits under The Public Service Superannuation Act as if he were an employee 

within the full meaning of this Act. 

 

The Public Service Act authorizes the Chairman of the Public Service Commission to designate any 

position or class of positions as part of a group to be known as the Labor Service. 

 

The size of the Labor Service staff varies with the season of the year from an estimated high of some 

5,000 employees to an estimated low of perhaps 2,000 employees. Most of these employees are found in 

the Department of Highways and the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. A number of 

the employees work for 12 months in a year. Some of the employees perform duties similar to, if not 

identical to, duties performed by other persons in the classified Public Service. 

 

Labor Service employees do not contribute to The Public Service Superannuation Act. However, certain 

Labor Service employees up to this time have contributed to the Labor Service Employees’ Retirement 

Plan established by a regulation made under regulation making authority provided by Section 8 of The 

Public Service Act. This Plan is administered by The Public Service Superannuation Board. 

 

Section 9 of the regulations requires every person who becomes an employee on or after February 1, 

1971 commencing one year after the date of his appointment to make contributions in respect of wages 

received by him. The rate of contribution is computed at five per cent of the wages earned. 

 

Regulations provide that every employee who is retired under the provisions of these regulations shall 

be paid in a lump sum his total contributions with accrued interest, together with an amount equal to the 

said contributions and interest by the Treasury of the province. 

 

The Labor Service Employees are represented by the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Association. At the request of the union, the Government has agreed to bring all the Labor Service 

employees under The Public Service Superannuation Act. These Labor Service employees will, 

therefore, no longer be entitled to benefits under the Labor Service Employees’ Retirement Plan 

regulations but on the coming into force of this amendment, will become entitled to the benefits 

provided under The Public Service Superannuation Act. This of course will then cover all employees in 

the Public Service. 

 

One of the Sections in this particular Bill which are being changed will permit hospital employees to 

continue to be contributors under The Public Service Superannuation Act. This 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1541 

 

Section is similar to 62A which came into force on April 1, 1968, with respect to the employees of the 

Wascana Hospital. In both cases, the new employer is required to make a contribution equal to the 

amount of contribution made by the employee. 

 

This new Section is required at this time to provide for the employees of the Weyburn Hospital who 

became employees in the Souris Valley Extendicare Hospital as of January 1, 1975. 

 

It is also expected that the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council will designate the Qu’Appelle Sanatorium to 

be an institution for the purposes of this section thereby permitting three overage employees to become 

contributors under The Public Service Superannuation Act effective April 1, 1971, the date they 

commenced employment with the province. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, summarizes the amendments to The Public Service Superannuation Act. I move 

second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, just a word or two. We have been waiting for some time 

for the Minister to move second reading of this Bill to hear his explanation. It appears that these four 

principles that are involved in this particular piece of legislation is in the best interest of the people who 

are concerned. However, we should like to take a little more time to go over the Minister’s remarks, so I 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Robbins (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill, Bill 57 deals with the Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act. Before proceeding to give some detailed information and examination of the Bill I wish 

to make a few comments, perhaps to better acquaint the Members of the Assembly with the proposals 

placed before them with respect to these superannuation matters. There are five superannuation acts: 

The Liquor Board Superannuation Act; Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act; Public 

Service Superannuation Act; Saskatchewan Power Corporation Superannuation Act and the Workmen’s 

Compensation Board Superannuation Act. In addition there is a sixth superannuation Act, termed the 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

This latter Act has been used as a vehicle for amending each of the five other Acts which are essentially 

similar. In other words, I think perhaps most of the Members are aware of the fact that the 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act is used as a means of amending the five other Acts 

because of their similarity. This prevents, of course, the necessity of bringing in amendments to each of 

the individual Acts before the House. 

 

The Bill being submitted for your consideration today, a Bill to amend the Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act is designed to amend each of the five superannuation Acts previously 

referred to. Generally speaking those five Acts are similar in content although there are some 

differences. The differences need not concern us today. Each of the superannuation Acts provide a 

superannuation allowance upon retirement 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1542 

 

 through the use of a formula. The formula is years of service to a maximum of 35 years computed at 

1/50 or two per cent times the average yearly salary of the employee and that is computed with respect 

to the six consecutive years of highest salary. In other words it’s a formula type pension, a pension 

allowance, not an earned pension. 

 

In its application to a person who works continuously in the government service, each of the five Acts is 

simple in its application and really quite easy to understand. The problems in establishing and 

administering a suitable superannuation plan arise mainly in respect to those persons who may be 

generally categorized as special cases. Included in the group of special cases are those persons who 

entered the service of the government during the latter part of their working lifetime. 

 

A large portion of the provisions of each of the five superannuation Acts is devoted to these special 

cases. These special cases, Mr. Speaker, give rise to many special rules. In many cases the reasons for 

making the special rules are not readily apparent. Some of the amendments being proposed today are 

designed to overcome the prejudicial effects upon certain employees of statutory provisions enacted to 

deal with these special cases. An example of this is the proposed new Section 5B to which I will refer in 

greater detail in a moment or two. This new Section will enable an employee to pick up continuous 

periods of one year or more in provincial employment and to have these periods included as continuous 

with his present employment. A further example of an amendment designed to overcome the prejudicial 

effects of a previous statutory provision is a proposed new Section 6A. This Section will provide refunds 

of contributions to certain employees who as a result of exercising an option made available to them 

have made contributions in excess of those required. Now this gets a bit complicated but I hoe to be able 

to explain this to the Members perhaps by using a specific example without naming the individual, of 

course. 

 

A third example is to be found in Section 5 of the Bill which provides for the enactment of a new 

Section 8B which prohibits the board from failing to grant an allowance or suspend or discontinue an 

allowance on the grounds that the applicant or the recipient is unworthy of it. Fortunately the power of a 

superannuation board to fail to grant an allowance or suspend or discontinue an allowance has been 

exercised only on very rare occasions. To my knowledge this power has not been exercised for many, 

many years. 

 

I propose to refer to each section of the Bill and to outline the intent of the proposed amendments. 

 

Section 2 of the Bill will add a new section, 5B to the Act. The purpose of this amendment is to permit 

an employee to include any continuous period of one year or more in provincial employment as part of 

his service for the purpose of computing an allowance upon reaching retirement. It will be noted that an 

employee is required to refund any benefit received from his previous employment and also to pay 

certain sums as interest. 

 

I direct your attention to sub-section 6 of the proposed new section 5B. This sub-section allows any beak 

in service 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1543 

 

to be bridged and provides that prior service and present service may be regarded as continuous for the 

purposes of the Act. I will cite one or two examples to illustrate this and I think this is very important to 

the individual concerned. The several benefits provided under the Act are granted on the basis of a 

required period of continuous service. The proposed amendment will provide significant advantages to a 

number of employees who have had broken periods of service, in some cases, extending over 30 years. 

Certain of these employees will now be eligible to retire having completed 35 years continuous service 

without incurring a reduction in their superannuation allowance because of the fact that they failed to 

meet a certain requirement for continuous service. For example: one employee worked for a period of 17 

years. He left the service of the public service of Saskatchewan for six years and since his return has 

completed a further 18 years. Because these two periods of service totalling 35 years, cannot be regarded 

as continuous at the present time, he is unable to retire under the rules which permits early retirement 

after 35 years service without a reduction in the allowance payable. Further, if he were to retire before 

attaining the age of 65 and elected deferred superannuation allowance which is now payable at age 60, 

his allowance would be reduced because he does not have a period of twenty years of continuous 

service, having the two periods of 17 years and 18 years broken by the six years when he was not in 

service. The reduction would be in the order of six per cent to that individual. I point out to the Members 

that he would have 35 years of public service exactly the same as an individual who had started and 

worked continuously for 35 years. 

 

This amendment will also circumvent the prejudicial results of special provisions that required an 

employee to pick up prior service within a specific period of time. I will cite an example. One clause 

requires that within one year of a permanent appointment or within one year of reappointment, or within 

one year of the coming into force of a particular section an individual may elect to pick up service. 

There are also special provisions that prohibit an employee from picking up a period of prior 

employment if his reappointment was more than six years after the last day of the previous employment. 

In other words what has really happened in terms of the pension Acts is that we have got amendments 

piled upon amendments until it has become such a hodge-podge, that hardly anyone can really decipher 

what is involved. We are hopeful that some of these amendments will at least clear out some of that 

underbrush and give individuals a much better chance really to understand the implications of the Act 

and therefore, be in a better position to select whether or not they wish to retire, whether it is early 

retirement or normal retirement. 

 

The proposed amendment will eliminate this hardship by providing that an employee may pick up any 

continuous period of one year or more in provincial employment at any time prior to the first day of his 

last month of employment. 

 

That is not as easy as it sounds because if the individual elects only a month before he actually retires he 

is going to have to pay the contributions that will have been payable down through the period of time he 

has been employed and he is going to have to pay interest on that amount on a compounding basis 

annually. However, he will not be prevented from having the probability of doing what he may choose 

to do at that particular time up to one month prior to his actual retirement. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1544 

 

A new Section 6A is being added to the Act to provide for the refunds of contributions in certain cases. 

The Section also repeals the statutory provision that granted the option that resulted in the excess 

contributions. 

 

I might say a word or two about this. There are a number of employees, I am not sure where they are 

located, I have located a few of them. Some are at Sask Power, some are at Sask Tel, some are in the 

Public Service. I will just cite one example to illustrate. This individual started to work in pubic service 

at 18 years of age, he had his 35 years of contributions in when he was 53. He could not be retired as he 

was under the earliest possible age of retirement. At that time the restriction on the size of the allowance 

was related to 70 per cent on the basis of a $10,000 a year income or $7,000. Because of this many of 

these people were given the opportunity to continue to make contributions and some of them elected to 

do so. I understand there are 16 of them. These individuals began to make excess contributions. In the 

interim, wage scales rose appreciably and they now find that the contributions that they have made, one 

instance I am aware of for the last 12 years, are absolutely meaningless to them. They bring them no 

further results in terms of pensions whatsoever. In other words using the computation of two per cent 

times 35 years of service computed on the basis of the six best earning years, the individual would have 

a pension, the one I am thinking of, of $8,400 per annum or $700 per month. The fact remains that that 

individual would have had that pension irrespective of the fact that from 1962 on, the last 12 years he 

has made contributions based on his age level to The Public Service Superannuation Act. This sum of 

money refunded to him, not directly, but into a Registered Retirement Savings Plan of his choice will 

permit him to get additional pension by reason of the fact that he made those contributions over that 

period of time. 

 

As a result of substantial increases in salaries in recent years, certain of the employees who exercised the 

option to continue making contributions now find themselves in the position where they would be 

entitled to an annual allowance in excess of $7,000 if they retired immediately. These employees have 

requested a refund of the excess contributions made by them and this statutory amendment is designed 

to provide these employees with a refund of their excess contributions. It will be noted that the section 

also provides for a refund to a superannuated employee who has made excess contributions. As 

previously mentioned, the statutory provision that resulted in these employees having made an excess 

contribution is being repealed to avoid the possibility of excess contributions being made in future years. 

 

I don’t suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is absolutely perfect by any means. I frankly am of the personal 

opinion that individuals should be making contributions, no matter how long they work and that the 

pension should be an earned pension. The Public Service Superannuation Act and these Acts do not 

operate on that basis, they do not operate on the basis of earned pensions, they operate on the basis of 

pension allowances. 

 

A new Section 7F is being added to the Act to provide for further supplementary allowances based on 

years of service of the employee. The further supplementary allowances being provided are: 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1545 

 

(a) To a superannuate — $12 for each year of service; and 

 

(b) To a widow — $6 for each year of service of the employee. 

 

In both cases the maximum service to be included is 35 years. The maximum amount payable is 35 

times 12 or another $420 per annum or $35 per month. The minimum for 10 years service is $120 or $10 

a month. 

 

This is the same formula used last year when the supplementary allowance granted was based on years 

of service except that the rate of service for a superannuate this year is $12 as against $10 last year, and 

the rate of supplementary allowance for a widow for each year of service of the employee is $6 as 

against $5 last year. 

 

As an alternative to granting the allowances based on years of service, we considered indexing to the 

consumer price index. However, when you look at the actual figures, they become rather horrendous in 

this respect, over a very short period of time, if you assume two digit inflation. While there is some 

merit to indexing, I want to point out to Members that on balance we considered the greatest advantage 

to the largest number of retired public servants would be provided by an allowance based on years of 

service. We considered that as a good employer we had a responsibility to give first consideration to the 

needs of those persons who had spent nearly a lifetime in the service of the province and its people. 

Many of these persons retired several years ago and inflation has eroded their pensions appreciably, the 

purchasing value of their allowances granted to them have been appreciably reduced. Under the 

indexing method, the greatest number of dollars would be provided to those retired employees in receipt 

of the larger allowances. Many of these persons have retired in recent years and their allowances are 

based on higher salaries paid in recent years. These are not the persons who are being most adversely 

affected by inflation, and therefore, we did not take that approach. 

 

Under the method of supplementary allowances chosen, the greatest advantage will accrue to those with 

35 years of service or more. Many of these persons have been adversely affected by inflation and it was 

therefore decided to grant the allowance on the basis of years of service rather than to index it to the cost 

of living. 

 

I have a table which I can quote to Members if they wish information with respect to the supplementary 

allowances which have been granted since 1965, by the current administration and the previous 

administration. 

 

It will be seen that in 1965, the allowance granted was $10 annually and $4 annually for widows for 

each year of service. However, I should point out to the Members of this Assembly that the allowance 

was restricted to those who commenced pension prior to April 4, 1951 and only those persons who were 

on allowance at that date, received the additional increment. The average monthly increase was $12 and 

the annual cost was $74,574. The estimated cost for providing allowances at the rate of $12 for 

superannuates and $6 for widows is $447,300 per annum. This is some six times the cost of allowances 

provided in 1965 and more than four times the cost of allowances provided in 1970 when the cost 

totalled $108,513. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1546 

 

Section 8A of the Act deals with postponement of allowances where monies are owing to the Board. It 

will be appreciated that under Section 5A being enacted at this time, an employee has the right to pick 

up prior service and it is probably that the employee may be indebted to the Board at the time of his 

retirement. It is a requirement therefore, that he settle that indebtedness to the Board prior to being in 

receipt of an allowance. 

 

We have found some examples already where there are people indebted to the Board but who are 

currently drawing allowances. This does not seem a reasonable approach. This Section will require any 

indebtedness to be discharged prior to the commencement of an allowance. 

 

At the present time, a superannuation board can refuse to grant an allowance or suspend or discontinue 

an allowance on the grounds that the applicant or recipient is unworthy of it. This power has not been 

exercised in recent years so we see no reason why this clause should be retained. The Government 

considered that no superannuation board should continue to have this kind of power. The proposal is, 

therefore, that a superannuation board be prohibited from failing to grant an allowance or suspending or 

discontinuing an allowance on the grounds that the applicant or recipient is unworthy of it. 

 

Section 8C of the Act deals with an employee who has attained the age of 35 years and who has served 

at least 10 years continuously. This individual may at his option be granted a deferred superannuation 

allowance upon separation from the service. The deferred superannuation allowance may be commenced 

at age 60 if the employee has 15 years service but the allowance is reduced. If the employee has 20 years 

or more of service, the allowance is not reduced. 

 

Under the wording of the present statutory provision, an employee is required to exercise his option 

within one year of separation from the service to be granted a deferred yearly superannuation allowance. 

If he does not exercise the option within one year, he automatically is granted a refund of his 

contributions. This, Mr. Speaker, really struck us as an anomaly in the Act. We want people to retrain 

their pension monies for the purpose intended, for pensions and yet we forced these people to take their 

money out irrespective of the fact that many of them did not want to do so. The proposed amendment 

encourages the employee to take a deferred superannuation allowance by providing that he will be 

deemed to have elected a deferred superannuation allowance if he does not request a refund within four 

months of separation from the service. I wish to point out to the Members of the Assembly that this 

reversal of the option is not prejudicial to the employee as he may at any time elect to take a refund of 

his contribution, although I frankly think that we should encourage people not to do so simply because it 

is imperative that people get pensions for their period of service when they reach pensionable age. 

 

It is considered that the Government as an employer should encourage an employee to take a 

superannuation allowance wherever available, because it is likely to be to his advantage for him to do 

so. Further, unless an employee becomes entitled to the superannuation allowance in respect of each 

period of his employment, whether it is with the Government or elsewhere, he is likely to become a 

charge on the public purse when he reaches 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1547 

 

age 65 and beyond and we have a lot of history to back up that statement. 

 

At the present time an employee who retires from Government service is automatically granted a refund 

whether he wants it or not. In many instances the board has been requested to defer the payment of a 

refund but the board up to this time had no power to delay a refund. Further there are a large number of 

refunds payable each year, last year some 1,800 of them and the board is experiencing considerable 

difficulty in paying out the allowances in less than two months which is required within the Act. It is 

expected that the requirement that an employee request a refund may reduce the substantial number of 

refunds payable each year and thereby assist the board in coping with the process of refunds. It is also 

hoped that it will encourage employees to leave their contributions on deposit in anticipation of 

re-employment with the Government or an eventual pension which would cover that period of 

employment. It will also allow an employee to choose the time of refund for any personal reasons, 

including any advantage which may accrue to him in relation to income tax in the Income Tax Act. 

 

Section 6 of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is worded in such a way that the Superannuation Act prohibit the 

payment of an allowance to a widow if the employee or superannuate married after attaining the age of 

60. 

 

There are cases where the parties have lived together for a number of years (in one case, exceeding 40 

years) but were unable to marry prior to the employee or superannuate attaining his 60th birthday 

because one or both of the parties was a party of a previously contracted and undissolved marriage. This 

situation held true prior to the recent amendments to The Divorce Act which permitted divorce for 

grounds other than adultery of one of the parties. We have a very peculiar situation with respect to an 

individual who worked for 35 years for the Public Service of Saskatchewan, married after age 60 but in 

fact lived with his wife after age 60 for 40 years prior to that. He died a year later and she has no 

pension. This really is irrational in relation to the needs of those people. 

 

It is not possible to give any estimate of the number of case of widows who may become entitled to an 

allowance as a result of this amendment. But it should be noted that the amendment has a retroactive 

effect and it is to be expected that several applications for allowances will be received as a result of the 

amendment. Payment of an allowance in a particular case is to commence on the first day of the month 

following the day an application is received from that particular party. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, covers as briefly as I can the rather complex set of rules and regulations related to the 

five Acts, I move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I think as the Minister has explained it is rather complex 

and after listening to him it is even more complex than when I read the Act, and it is no fault of the 

Minister, it is just one of those things. I suspect that we will be able to question him more intelligently 

during the Committee of the Whole, however, there were a few points that 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1548 

 

came out. I am sure that many of the amendments that are being presented here are welcome, I gather, to 

a rather limited number of superannuates in each case who will benefit from it. But certainly in most of 

these cases I gather that injustices which perhaps have been going on for a great number of years are 

now being rectified and I think that this is rightfully so. We certainly would not have any opposition or 

oppose this in any way. 

 

There is one, I think, major section of the Bill and that is the increase in the allowance and I think that 

here the Minister is open to some criticism because I think we all recognize that in this day and age with 

inflation at the rate that it is that this is a very minimal type of an increase for the superannuates. I think 

it worked out to something like $35 per month. When you consider the effects of inflation over the last 

two or three years and I think particularly when you consider the increased revenues of this Government 

opposite, that surely they could have had a little more compassion for these superannuates than the $12 a 

month that is being suggested in this Bill. They have been able to invest large sums of money in 

companies like Intercon, they have been able to invest large sums of money in going into their own 

potash companies and oil companies and yet they find it difficult — I suggest it was with some measure 

of being old Scrooge — that they were even able to get this $12 out of the Minister of Finance. I think 

this is the weakness of the Bill, the other provisions are housekeeping insofar as they are overcoming 

injustices that were in the Act perhaps for a great number of years. The one area which is affected a 

large number of superannuates and where the Minister could have made a major contribution in making 

their life a little easier he failed to do. The miserly $12 that he is suggesting here in this legislation is not 

in keeping with the increased costs that these people are forced to look at and it is certainly not in 

keeping with the fact that the revenues of the Government have increased substantially over the last 

couple or three years and, therefore, we certainly regret that. 

 

However, I should like to have another look at some of the comments that he made so I beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 61 — An Act to 

amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to rise to move second reading of a Bill to amend The Rural 

Municipality Act, 1972. This Bill comprises mainly housekeeping amendments which provide 

uniformity with The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities informed us that many municipalities are 

experiencing difficulty in obtaining persons to perform services for the municipality, for example, 

mowing the weeds on a road allowance. The Association asks that we provide legislation to permit 

councillors of rural municipalities to perform certain services for the municipality without being 

disqualified as a councillor. This authority was granted to councillors of towns and villages in the 1970 

consolidation of The Urban Municipality Act and we believe it is desirable to provide the same authority 

to rural municipalities. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1549 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Urban Municipality Act calls for disclosure of any conflict of interest by members of a 

district planning commission. This provision applies to only those members of the commission who are 

appointed by the urban municipality and we are proposing an amendment in this Bill to require a similar 

disclosure by the rural members of the commission. 

 

Rural municipalities adopted the practice of establishing polls for their elections in villages and towns 

located within the outer boundaries of the rural municipality or adjacent thereto. This procedure was a 

practical interpretation of the Act and did not create any legal problems until this year. This year, Mr. 

Speaker, the legality of a rural municipality in establishing a polling place outside its boundaries has 

been raised and we have received an opinion from our legal advisors that the Act does not support this 

practice. We are proposing amendments to this Bill that will allow a rural municipality to establish 

polling places either within or without the municipality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most contentious area in the assessment of rural lands is the requirement to assess farm 

buildings where the occupant’s chief source of income is from a source other than from the agricultural 

operation of the land. Frequently many bona fide farmers are forced to accept outside employment to 

supplement their farm income while they are establishing a viable farm unit or during periods of adverse 

farming conditions. If the income from such non-agricultural pursuits exceeds the agricultural income of 

a farmer, the municipal assessor is required to assess the building for taxation purposes. Many 

municipalities overlook the statutory requirements in this respect because the council feels the condition 

may be temporary and they do not wish to impose any further hardships on the farmer. However, the 

non-agricultural income of farmers in some municipalities has exceeded their agricultural income by a 

considerable degree and the municipalities have assessed the farm residence and all the farm buildings. 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that regardless of the chief source of income the buildings used solely in 

connection with the agricultural operation of the land should be exempt from taxation and the 

amendments proposed in this Bill provides for such exemptions. 

 

We have discussed this matter with the executive of the SARM and received concurrence for this 

proposal. Also as a measure of concession to bona fide farmers who are acquiring the greater part of 

their income from non-agricultural pursuits, we are proposing an amendment to this Bill that will 

provide an exemption of the portion of the assessed value of the residence and other non-agricultural 

buildings which is equal to the assessed value of all the land owned by the occupant and used by him for 

agricultural purposes. Mr. Speaker, we believe this proposal will relieve most bona fide farmers from 

any taxation on their residence and it removes the problem facing many municipalities in attempting to 

determine when a farmer’s chief source of income is from other sources because of the fluctuating farm 

income. This amendment will be brought into force by proclamation because some municipalities have 

completed their assessment rolls for 1975 and would not be able to use the provisions for this year. 

 

The executive of the SARM presented a request on behalf of 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1550 

 

the rural municipalities to increase the rate of penalty on arrears of taxes. The municipalities contend 

that an increase is necessary to compare with the rising cost of money. Mr. Speaker, we are proposing 

permissive legislation to allow the municipalities to increase the rate of penalty from seven per cent to 

nine per cent. 

 

The SARM has agreed with the principle of each of these proposed amendments, most of which are in 

response of their requests and I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, we have a few amendments. Again it is further proof that 

the conflict of interest proposals that were introduced in this House as they apply to local government 

were poorly thought out, poorly drafted and obviously a lack of rational thought was put into that matter. 

 

I might also take the opportunity of reminding the Government Members and the general public that 

many of these criticisms were brought to the attention of the House when the Bill was introduced the 

first time in 1972. Now it seems the Opposition is put in a rather frustrating position in these matters 

when we bring legitimate criticisms and fair criticisms to this House and of course they are ignored. I 

think a lot of us are getting a little sick and tired when some obvious situations arise that are not going to 

work, that legislation in certain circumstances in unworkable and legislation is not, in fact, solving the 

problem or a principle applied in blanket fashion is going to create some hardship, some unfairness and 

some unreasonableness. And yet the Government in the last four years has used its 45 to 15 majority and 

failed to take concrete and reasonable suggestions from the Opposition to heart and the upshot is of 

course that they are now forced to come back a second time and use up the time of the House, use up the 

time of the draftsmen, use up the time of the Attorney General’s Department, use up the time, in this 

case of the SARM and SUMA, because of problems that were brought to the Government’s attention 

beforehand. That is not the proper way to draft legislation and I am sure the Minister knows it and I am 

sure the Minister is now paying the price because of the hassle that has arisen over the last few years as 

a result of the approach taken by the Government opposite. 

 

We note to the explanation of the amendment to Clause 6 of the Bill, the amendments to Section 309 of 

The Rural Municipality Act. One of the results, of course, of the proposed amendments is that it will 

certainly help the gentleman farmer. That is that individual who buys a quarter or a half section of land 

to try and get some benefits, either taxwise or otherwise, and, of course, he will now benefit under the 

exemption given to him and we, in the Opposition, certainly oppose that type of legislation. The Bill was 

to exempt certain provisions for farmers, it was supposed to be to the benefit of farmers whose primary 

occupation was farming and, of course, it can very easily happen under this proposed amendment that an 

individual whose main source of income is from non-farming operations will now be entitled to the 

exemptions. Frankly we oppose that approach on rural land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have more comments to make on this particular Bill and I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1551 

 

Mr. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend 

The Controverted Municipal Elections Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker The Controverted Municipal Elections Act provides the authority of procedure by 

which a person can apply to the courts to have an election voided on certain grounds. The usual grounds 

for a person seeking to upset an election are those affecting the qualifications of the person who has 

been elected. In these cases there is no question about the responsibility of the elected person to finance 

his defence. 

 

However, situations have developed, Mr. Speaker, where the validity of an election has been contested 

on the grounds that the election itself was not conducted according to law. Under the present Act the 

defence of any such contest falls on the person who was elected although the cause of the action was not 

because of any disqualification on his part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association made us aware of a resolution passed 

at its recent convention requesting the legislation that would remove or correct this deficiency in the Act 

and we believe the stand adopted by the Association is valid. The proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

will make the municipality a party to the defence of any contest which is started on grounds that the 

election was not conducted according to law and it authorizes the judge of the court to order the 

municipality to reimburse the person elected for the cost of his solicitor, and such other costs as the 

judge approves. We believe this is good and desirable legislation and I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. G. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t object to the proposed amendment. 

 

Perhaps the Minister can clarify when we get into Committee of the Whole as to the matter of a 

controverted election brought on several grounds, one of which is, that it was not contrary to law, and 

that the election is overturned for several reasons, one of which is that it was not according to law, and 

whether he would get his costs based on the total action or whether just on that aspect that it was not his 

fault, if he is unsuccessful, and as I say, we do not object to the principle and hope that the Minister will 

be able to comment on those matters in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D. Cody (Minister of Co-operatives) moved second reading of Bill 62 — An Act to amend The 

House Building Assistance Act, 1974. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill 62 has a very small amendment to The House Building Assistance Act, and 

basically what the amendment does is it allows an individual to take part in a grant in both sections of 

the Act. There is one section for the building of a new house, another section for alterations to a home. 

So that in fact what has happened up until now, is if a person took a grant to alter his home and got 

$100, he then would not qualify for the balance of the $900 should be wish to construct a new home. We 

decided now to change this 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1552 

 

so that if in fact he received at one time a grant for alternations to his home he could now qualify as well 

for the balance up to $1,000, if he were going to construct a new home. I don’t think there is a great deal 

more that one could say to this very slight amendment, and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of Bill 62, an amendment to The House Building Assistance Act. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister didn’t, of course, touch on the major part as to whether or not 

the proposed grant is adequate and, of course, we, in the Opposition feel that it is totally inadequate. 

 

The fact that an individual now may obtain up to $1,000 through either one of the aspects of the Act is, I 

suppose, reasonable. It should have been in the Bill and I think the Minister will admit this. Again, it 

falls short, however, allowing the eligible applicants, under the Act, to keep up with inflation. Building 

costs have increased dramatically, building repair costs and labor costs have increased dramatically and 

the $1,000 allowed right now has become minuscule to say the least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree that a person should be eligible to the total of $1,000 and it shouldn’t depend on 

either aspect, either if it is repair or building. From that point of view we support the legislation in 

principle. 

 

Mr. Cody: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say a great deal, but I just wanted to bring to the attention 

of the House and to the citizens of Saskatchewan that this Act, where the Member may say it has fallen 

short by only having $1,000, it just happens to be a 100 per cent increase since 1971. When we took 

office in 1971 the grants for this program were $500, and I think that raising them from $500 to $800 in 

our first year of office and then from $800 to $1,000 is creditable and certainly I believe that the citizens 

of Saskatchewan also feel that it is creditable. I feel that with this there can be no complaints by the 

Members of the Opposition because they only had half the amount of grant involved at the time they 

were in power versus $1.000 now. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 63 — An Act to amend The 

Election Act, 1971. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, before I move this Bill I think I will need leave of the House. I wonder if I might 

ask leave of the House. It’s The Election Act. I should like to get the second reading speech off and if 

you, the Opposition, wants to adjourn it, we could adjourn it. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I should like to be able to comment. We just got that Bill this morning and we’ve asked 

the Minister in the past why it was the only Bill, the most important, and I’m sorry we can’t give leave. 

We would like to have a good debate on this matter and we would like to have time to read the written 

Bill. 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1553 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very quick with the proposed 

amendment to No. 63. 

 

Section 2 of the Act is amended by providing new definitions of the word ‘candidate’ to hospital or 

sanatorium and words ‘spoiled ballot’. The present definition of candidate has been expanded by the 

addition of a sub-clause (iii) which provides that for the purpose of the election expense provisions of 

the Act a candidate is a person who, prior to the issue of a writ for an election, begins campaigning for 

his election as a Member of the Assembly. This was an obvious loophole in the legislation which had to 

be covered. 

 

The definition of hospital, or sanatorium, has been changed to provide that any public or private 

institution which has more than five beds is a hospital or sanatorium within the meaning of the Act. The 

definition now includes a facility under The Mental Health Act. This is necessary in order that persons 

who are voluntarily in an institution for observation and who are not being detained there will have a 

place at which to vote. At present, persons who are in this category are eligible to be registered as voters 

and to vote under the Act. 

 

The definition of spoiled ballot is being included in the Act. This expression was not defined and a 

definition is necessary, and included. Sub-section (iii) of Section 2 of the Bill is replaced in order to 

update the names of the constituency in respect of which part 2 of the Act applies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the deletion of sub-section (ii) of Section 6 is to eliminate the maximum age of 65 

for a person holding office as the Returning Officer. The amendment to sub-section (ii) of Section 65 

will bring the closing hours of voting in line with the general voting hours. Section 85 is a consequential 

change to the Act. 

 

Throughout the Act, ‘cancelled ballots’ are being changed to be referred to as ‘rejected ballots’. This 

Section is self-explanatory and provides for the voting by mail of persons who are unable, because of 

physical disability, to attend in person to vote at a polling place or an advanced poll on polling day. 

 

The amendment proposed to Section 90 will bring the closing of voting hours in line with the general 

voting hours. 

 

The amendment to Section 92 is the subsequential amendment being provided throughout the Act to 

substitute the word ‘rejected’ for the word ‘cancelled’. 

 

New Section 101(a) is self-explanatory and provides the same procedure for voting by a person who is 

bedridden in a geriatric centre, as a person who is bedridden in a hospital. 

 

The amendments proposed to Sections 106 and 107 and 130 are consequential changes changing 

cancelled ballots to rejected ballots, again, being consistent with the amendment throughout. 

 

Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (i) of Section 201, presently reads as follows: 

 

(a) all expenditures made or liabilities incurred during an election for the purpose of promoting or 

opposing, 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1554 

 

directly or indirectly, a particularly recognized political party or the election of a particular candidate 

or person elected to become a candidate; 

 

(b) all amounts paid or liabilities incurred before an election for literature, posters or other materials or 

devices of an advertising nature used during an election; 

 

(c) the salary or other remuneration paid, or agreed to be paid to a candidate while he is a candidate, 

by his business manager or by a recognized political party. 

 

The new clauses will provide that the expenditures or amounts being paid or incurred under clauses (a) 

and (c) are those which are paid or incurred after the Act comes into force. Whereas, the expenditures 

and liabilities contemplated by clause (b) will be those expenditures for election materials whenever 

made or incurred; for materials used after the clause comes into force. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, clause (c) of sub-section (ii) of Section 201 of the Act, I think, is self-explanatory. 

Presenting this clause reads as follows: 

 

(c) the necessary cost of holding a convention in a constituency for the selection of a candidate, 

including reasonable expenditures of a candidate’s nominative convention, the cost of renting halls, 

the convening of delegates, but not including the cost of any publicity of the convention, and all 

necessary costs of holding the convention shall not exceed $500. 

 

Present clause (e) of sub-section (ii) of Section 201 of the Act reads as follows: 

 

(e) the transportation costs of any person, other than the candidate, paid out of his own money, where 

the person has not received or is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs. 

 

Proposed new clauses (e) and (e-A) are self-explanatory, as a result of the amendments necessary there. 

 

The amendment proposed to sub-section (i) of Section 201(b) is consequential upon the new proposed 

sub-section (i)(a) to this Section of the Act. New sub-section (i)(a) defines when a candidate incurs 

election expenses for the purpose of the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, present sub-section (ii) and (iii) of Section 201(b) are as follows. These are the Sections 

which deal with the maximum allowable expenditures by candidates. Now, roughly, this works out to 

about $6,500 per candidate. The proposed amendment is in substitution of sub-sections (ii) and (iii) and 

it will raise the maximum ceiling for election expense that may be incurred by a candidate to a minimum 

of $10,000, or $1 per voter, for each voter on the voter’s list, for those constituencies which lie south of 

the dividing line set out in Section 14 of the Act, whichever is the greater. With respect to the 

constituencies lying north of the dividing line, the maximum amount of $15,000 reimbursement, or the 

sum obtained when the number of names on the voter’s list for that constituency is multiplied by $2, 

whichever is the greater. In 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1555 

 

effect the ceilings for the south are raised to a minimum of $10,000, to the north to a minimum of 

$15,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment proposed by sub-section (i) of Section 16 of the Bill is to provide that the 

return for the candidate’s expenses shall be submitted within three months after a candidate has been 

declared elected, rather than the present two month requirement. This is obviously needed in order to 

give more time to the candidates to file their returns. 

 

New proposed sub-sections 2(a) and 3(a) are consequential upon Sections 201(e) and 201(g) inclusive. 

In the case where a person makes a contribution in respect of several candidates who have entered into 

an agreement under new 201(e), (this is basically the metro in Regina and Saskatoon operation, but not 

only there, but that’s basically what it is designed to deal with), where an agreement has been entered 

into and that person gives a contribution he may give that contribution to the business manager of one of 

the candidates who is a party to that agreement. The business manager shall include in the return that he 

is the business manager for a particular candidate and he also must state in the return the name of the 

contributor, the amount contributed and the amount allocated by the contributor to each of the 

candidates for whom the contribution is made. This is the metro contribution — one donation to be 

divided equally among all the candidates. He must reveal the name, the address, the amount contributed 

and the amount that is to be paid to each of the candidates in question. 

 

Proposed sub-section (iii)(a) states that where election expenses are paid by the business manager of one 

of the candidates who have entered into an agreement or arrangement under Section 201(e), the business 

manager who makes payment of election expenses shall send copies of the receipt he receives in respect 

of the expense to each of the other business managers of the candidates in respect to whom the payment 

was made. Copies of those receipts when submitted by the business managers of the other candidates 

shall be sufficient for the purposes of Section 3 of the sub-section of the Act. 

 

The amendment to Section 201(d) of the Act will provide that when taking into account the election 

expenses of a candidate for the purposes of calculating reimbursement those election expenses which are 

being disputed by the candidate or his business manager or expenses for which the payment is refused 

by the candidate or his business manager will not be considered. 

 

The amendment proposed by the insertion of new clause (b) of sub-section (i) of Section 201(d) is to 

provide that the Chief Electoral Officer shall forward to the business manager of the candidate or to the 

designate of the business manager the amount of reimbursement to which the candidate is entitled. This 

is obviously the case since we are all running on sort of associations or constituency associations, the 

reimbursement should come back to the business manager, hopefully the representative of that 

association rather than directly to the candidate. 

 

Proposed new sub-section (iii) of 201(d), I think, is self-explanatory. 

 

Sections 201(e) to 201(h), Mr. Speaker, is self-explanatory but important. These are the provisions 

which relate to the metro operation. As I have indicated, these sections allow 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1556 

 

two or more, but not more than ten candidates to agree in writing to share expenses among themselves 

for a regional operation. We know that in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, primarily, but not 

exclusively, thee is a regional arrangement and a pooling of funds, particularly with respect to the 

question of television, radio, newspaper advertising and 201(e) to 201(h) recognize the metro concept in 

the legislation. 

 

Section 202 has been redrawn and I don’t believe is of any real major consequence. 

 

There are some amendments with respect to the form which is required to be filed at the time that a 

recognized political party seeks to become recognized in order to be recognized for expenditures. This is 

set out in Section 202(b), sub-section (ii) at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won’t elaborate on the various points of the metro. I think these can be outlined in more 

detail really, clause by clause where the specific questions can be put. I think we can elaborate on it in 

that regard. 

 

With respect to 202(j), Mr. Speaker, the remaining proposals for amendment to Section 202(j) result as a 

consequence of a candidate or an official agent from being prohibited from receiving contributions or 

making payment of election expenses. Sections 202(l) to 202(n) are, again, basically not major in their 

scope. 

 

The amendments proposed to Sections 26 to 31 of the printed Bill are consequential upon the renaming 

of the constituencies north of the dividing line as set out in Section 14 of The Constituency Boundaries 

Commission Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are all very technical notes by way of the second reading. But basically the principles 

of this Bill, I would describe as being three-fold. The first principle of the Bill is to recognize the mail-in 

ballot for the physically handicapped person, this will be a first for the Province of Saskatchewan to 

allow a mailed-in vote for the physically handicapped. Provision here is basically unchanged from Bill 

22 which was withdrawn earlier. 

 

The second amendment deals with the ceilings for the recognized political party at the provincial level 

and the individual candidates in their individual constituencies. The amendments there will allow a 

provincial party to spend $175,000 rather than $125,000 as is presently set out in the Bill. And for the 

candidates in the south there will be a minimum of $10,000, while for the candidates in the north there 

will be a minimum of $15,000 as an allowable ceiling. It is a minimum because the maximum could be 

higher if there are more voters equalling more than $10,000. So, it’s a minimum expenditure of $10,000 

and perhaps a little higher. 

 

The third feature of this Bill relates to the establishment and the recognition of the metro concept and 

will allow for a mechanism without it being too bureaucratic for the operation of metros and I think this 

can be explained in Committee. 

 

The fourth aspect of the Bill deals with basic, minor housekeeping changes, word changes, 

consequential changes as a 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1557 

 

result of some loopholes in the legislation. It’s basically the same as Bill No. 24. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to say very much more. I think that the Members on all sides know 

each other’s positions in respect to The Election Act. I support this Bill and this amendment because it 

does, I think, seek, albeit with a lot of difficulty and some possible loopholes in it, it does seek to do two 

very necessary electoral reforms. 

 

1. Put a ceiling on expenditures. 

 

2. To compel revelation of sources of campaign funds for all candidates. 

 

And I think if those two provisions of the Bill are indeed accepted and are indeed workable, we’ll have 

made a pretty good step forward in the area of election reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about this Bill 

and then adjourn debate on it because I think it is rather apparent that from the Attorney General’s 

remarks that you’re going to need a squadron of Philadelphia lawyers to try and interpret just what the 

Bill means. I noticed the Attorney General very carefully read from the prepared statement in 

introducing the Bill and I suspect that he doesn’t know what all the implications of the Bill are. I 

certainly don’t and I don’t think probably anybody does. 

 

There are some comments I’d like to make. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General has indicated that 

there is a minimum of $10,000 to be spent in any individual campaign but it’s clear from the notes that 

were handed out with the Bill that this is a maximum of $10,000. I will just read the notes: 

 

Will provide a maximum of election expenses that may be incurred of $10,000 or one dollar per voter 

for each voter whichever is the less. 

 

It is my understanding of it so it the maximum that can be spent is $10,000 . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That’s wrong. I think $10,000 or one dollar per voter, whichever is the greater but 

that’s all. 

 

Mr. Malone: — All right. The next comment I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to the voting 

procedure by handicapped people. When this Bill was originally on the Order Paper I think we made our 

position quite clear that we agreed with this procedure and I don’t think we will be changing our 

position at this time. However, I still would like to make the comment again that I made earlier that 

there should be some provision in the Bill so that agents or representatives of the candidates in an 

election are advised as to who are the people that applied for vote by mail so that if there is a challenge 

of the eligibility of these people to vote, it can be made before the vote is cast. As the Bill presently 

stands I believe there is no way the vote can be challenged if it should 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1558 

 

turn out that the voter is ineligible for one reason, that is not old enough, not a citizen, so on and so 

forth. This not asking for anything that isn’t already there for people who vote at the polls because the 

agents of each candidate have the right to make the challenge at that time. Now, all we are asking for is 

that this same right be extended to people who vote by mail and this, I’m sure, would end any possibility 

of any abuse of this process. However, for reasons known only to the Members opposite, this change 

was not made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’d like to address most of my remarks to the other more important provisions of 

the Bill or more serious provisions, I suppose, as politicians are concerned. I think the amendments as to 

spending limitations are a classic example of the hypocrisy of the Members opposite. You know, you 

remember the speeches made by the Attorney General and Members opposite when they first brought 

this Bill in approximately one year ago. They went on and on about saying how this was certainly 

enough money to be spent in any election campaign, $125,000 was more than any party needed to get 

their platform across, that $6,500 would be more than enough to run any provincial, separate campaign. 

You know, the reason they did that, Mr. Speaker, if they felt that with their millions of dollars they have 

spent on political propaganda through their various departments, with their paid employees who do 

nothing but work on political campaigns as they come up through the country, that if they could gag the 

Opposition just a little more, just a little more, that their position would be secure with the voters if the 

Liberal party and other parties could not get their messages across. And I think they’ve had a surprise. 

They’ve found out that when they’ve gone back to their constituencies and when they’ve gone back to 

their people they find that they are going to have to do some more advertising, and that they’re going to 

have to spend some more if they’re going to get their message across. So the only reason, Mr. Speaker, 

that these amendments, in my view are put forward to this House, is that the NDP feels that they require 

more money to run their political campaign, that the NDP feel that it is advisable for them to spend more 

money and that’s the only reason that these amendments are before you. It has nothing to do with what 

is reasonable, what should be spent on the political campaign, but what they feel should be spent, not 

what the people of Saskatchewan feel should be spent, not what the other political parties feel should be 

spent, but what they feel and that’s the upshot of it. 

 

Now, I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, about some civil servants or so called civil servants who are on 

the payroll of the Government to do nothing other than really campaign politically and I think it may be 

of interest to bring forward to this House the salaries that have been paid to these people. And I’d just 

like to name a couple of them. There’s Mr. Coulter whom we’ve heard a lot about and I always can 

remember last year when Mr. Coulter was off campaigning somewhere, I’m not sure whether it was in 

the Lakeview by-election or Nova Scotia but he’s attached to the Premier’s office and he plays such a 

valuable role in assisting the Premier that when the Premier was asked in this House as to what he did, 

he didn’t know. I can well remember the Leader of the Opposition asking the Premier what Mr. Coulter 

did in his office and the Premier, and you have to give him credit for his honesty, stood up and he said, 

well, I don’t know what he does. I understand he’s in 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1559 

 

my office so I’ll ascertain what he does. He came back a day or so later, the Premier, and said, well I 

found out what Mr. Coulter does in my office and I think his words were that he opens the mail and he 

didn’t go beyond that. I think he changed it to say, no, he doesn’t just open the mail, he handles the mail. 

I suppose he not only opens it but he closes it at night and sends it out as well. We’ve had no further 

details as to what Mr. Coulter does. For this valuable service he was paid, according to the figures that I 

have, a yearly salary of $17,000, or at least that was his rate in October of 1974. You multiply that by 

four and that’s a substantial amount of money, Mr. Speaker, in fact, it’s almost, in fact, it’s more than 

half of what the NDP are going to allow the Liberal party and the other parties in this province to spend 

on their entire campaign in the next election. That’s for one civil servant who does nothing else but 

campaign where NDP parties are involved in elections. That’s one man. 

 

Mr. Burton is another one. Now, Mr. Burton has some other titles, he has special projects which I 

suspect are writing speeches for the backbenchers of the NDP. Mr. Burton is an ex-MP where he, I am 

told, did a good job representing his people, but apparently not good enough for the people in the Regina 

East seat because they defeated him not only once but twice, but he’s still on the payroll. We don’t know 

what he does except we know that he, also, campaigns whenever there’s an election called in Canada 

and he’s paid $26,000 a year, at least as of October, 1974. Between Mr. Burton and Mr. Coulter, I 

believe they receive more money from the Government of Saskatchewan which is really from the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan than the NDP party has allowed the Opposition party or other political 

parties to spend on an entire election campaign. When I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP is trying 

to gag the Opposition, is trying to gag the opposition parties, we suggest to you that that is the case when 

one considers these figures. We can go through all sorts of other people. I see some familiar names, Mr. 

Cam Cooper, Mr. Clare Powell. I’m not quite sure what they do but I do know that they’re on the 

Regina Metro Committee of the NDP and one can only speculate as to how much time they spend on 

that Committee and doing political work and how much time they spend doing work for people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just raised those two points to you because I think they should be brought out and I think 

the people of Saskatchewan should be aware of just how much the NDP spends, how much money of 

the people of Saskatchewan they spend on people who are nothing more than political organizers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, I want to repeat my remarks about the limitation or the disclosure provision on 

political donations. Once again the NDP, in its wisdom, has decided that any donation over $100 must 

be disclosed. I’m not against the disclosure rule, I think it is a very good thing, in fact I find myself with 

some sympathy to the Bill that was brought in by the Member for Saskatoon University as to disclosure 

by political candidates of their holdings, but I say that the $100 limit is too low. I think that even the 

Attorney General would agree, that this disclosure provision is an infringement on basic rights, that is, 

the right to support a political party of your choice in the manner of your choice. $100 in this day and 

age is not very much. I think that there are many people who would be prepared to donate both to the 

party 



 

April 14, 1975. 

 

1560 

 

opposite and to this party and to other parties if they found that they didn’t have to make their names 

public. I think they should have the right to make those donations to both parties and to the Conservative 

party and even to the Member for Saskatoon University but I think that this could easily be solved if the 

limitation of disclosure was raised to $200 or $250. I don’t think there is a politician in the country who 

would feel himself obliged to a supporter if he received a donation of $200. I don’t think that anybody 

sells himself out if they accept a donation of this amount. Now, once again the NDP, in its wisdom, has 

decided that $100 is the limit and that’s all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other things in this Bill that I’m sure need other scrutiny. I’d like to 

consider the remarks of the Attorney General. There are a number of other Members on this side who I 

know want to speak to the Bill at a later date so I would ask leave at this time to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:17 o’clock p.m. 


