
























































Hansard: March 14, 1975


 
 
 

 
807 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

18th Day 
 

Friday, March 14, 1975 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park): — I am very pleased to introduce to you and to this Chamber 27 
Grade Seven students from Wilson School in Saskatoon. They are accompanied here by their teacher, 
Mrs. Robson. I should like to welcome them to this Chamber and I want to apologize to them for not 
being able to meet them before the sitting, but I was detained at a meeting. I understand, however, that 
they were met by my colleague from Saskatoon, the Member for Hanley (Mr. Mostoway). I hope that 
they have an informative and worthwhile afternoon in the Legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to the Members of this House a group of 44 Grade Eight students from Bruno who are here visiting 
the Legislature on this very important day, which is the Budget day for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
The students have toured various places in the city and I am looking forward to seeing them later on in 
the day when they leave the Chamber. 
 
I should like to ask the Members to join with me in extending to the students from Bruno a welcome to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to welcome and to 
introduce to you and through you to the Members of this Assembly a group of Grade Five students who 
are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are from the Lake Alma public school, accompanied by their 
teacher, Mr. Larry Sloan. We are happy that they were able to come on this very important day when our 
Budget is being presented. This to my knowledge is the first time a group of students from Lake Alma 
have had the opportunity of visiting our Legislature. 
 
I am sure I am speaking for all Members, Mr. Speaker, when I express the wish that their visit with us 
this afternoon proves beneficial to them and adds to their knowledge the rules and the regulations and 
procedures governing the Provincial Legislature within their province. I am certain that we all wish them 
a very safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
808 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to introduce a group of 35 Grade Eight 
students from Ituna School. This is a regular custom that the Grade Eight group from Ituna visit the 
Legislature sometime during the sitting of the Legislature. They are under the guidance of their teacher, 
Mr. William Hudema and the bus driver is Mr. Falarchuk. 
 
They have been touring the city this morning and seeing some of the sights. I know they are going to 
enjoy their short stay in the Legislature this afternoon. I had a moment or two to spend with them before 
they entered the House. We wish that they may have a good lesson here today and may they have a good 
journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to extend greetings through you to 
the 35 Grade Eight students from Ituna. As the former chairman of the School Unit Board that was 
involved in the doings in Ituna I know many of these people very well, including the teacher, Mr. 
Hudema, and Mr. Falarchuk. I want to say good luck to them, I wish them well here today and I am sure 
that they will benefit in their Social Studies classes in the events that are going to be taken up here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PAMPHLET — SASKATCHEWAN PROGRESS 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier of the Province. I have in my hand here a pamphlet that is being put out by the New Democratic 
Party, “Saskatchewan Progress”. It has been made very clear in this pamphlet, as it should be, that it is 
not printed or mailed at public expense which we wouldn’t expect to be done by the political party. It 
says it is authorized by the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party, which is as it should be. Then, in this 
box in the back there is a list of all the New Democratic candidates who have been elected. Then it goes 
on to say: 
 

For further information or assistance contact your candidate or some of the numbers below. 
 
Now some of these numbers are the Provincial Ombudsman, the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Premier, when did the Provincial Ombudsman and 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission become the arm of the political party known as the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the pamphlet in front of me, but I am sure 
it is designed to outline the progress made in this province since 1971. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
809 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It further is designed to indicate that there may be people who are aggrieved by their 
government . . . 

 
An Hon. Member: — 70 per cent . . . 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Whether or not that number will be 70 per cent will be determined later this year and 
I think your figures will prove to be wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — But my point is this. If anyone feels aggrieved with his government we ask him to get 
in touch with, yes, his MLA, yes, his candidate, or yes, the Ombudsman, or yes, the Human Rights 
Commission. We published the numbers, we see nothing wrong with publishing those numbers in a 
party pamphlet. The people can call and if there is a grievance they can get it remedied. This may be a 
new thought to the Member for Athabasca but I think it is a good thought, a good idea, and will be 
accepted by the Members of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Of course the Premier never answered the 
question of when the Ombudsman or the Human Rights Commission became an arm of the political 
party, the NDP political party. But I am surprised and I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will be 
surprised when they see that the Premier condones this type of action of asking civil servants . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the question? 
 
Mr. Guy: — I am asking if he believes that it is right to have civil servants, the Provincial Ombudsman 
and the Human Rights Commission being forced to participate in what is clearly the activity, not of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, but of the New Democratic Party? In other words he is taking the civil 
servants and forcing them to become involved in the activities of the New Democratic Party prior to a 
provincial election campaign. I think this is contempt of the political process and I am sure the people of 
Saskatchewan will agree to that. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve got the import of the question. 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Give us a brief answer. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Equally as brief as the question. The Member for Athabasca feels apparently that 
there is something wrong with a political party inviting the public to get in touch with the Human Rights 
Commission or Ombudsman if a citizen feels that he had a grievance. We are not ashamed of that, we 
feel that it is entirely proper. We feel that to publish the number of the Ombudsman is not to involve him 
in party work. I further think that the Member for Athabasca, I am sure unwittingly, casts 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
810 

 

an unfair reflection on both the Human Rights Commission and the Ombudsman to think that any 
answer that either might give to any inquiry by phone would involve them in political activities rather 
than in their proper activities, which heretofore they have carried out with distinction and which I am 
sure they will continue to do in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

REASON FOR DELAY IN DRUG PLAN 
 
Mr. D.F. Macdonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health (Mr. 
Smishek). Yesterday and at various times this morning, for example, on CKCK the Minister of Health 
has indicted that the reason for delay in the drug plan was in most part due to the pharmacists wanting 
more money. I would ask him, is it not true that one of the overwhelming reasons that your plan was 
rejected by the pharmacists is because they unanimously object to the deterrent fee? Are you at this time 
willing to delete this discriminatory deterrent fee from your plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, it is pretty obvious that the Liberals are very 
sensitive about the deterrent fees, they know a lot about this topic. After all they charged the people to 
the extent of $7.5 million per year in deterrent fees on hospital and medical care. We were glad to 
remove them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as the prescription charge is concerned I should like to invite the Member to check 
with the Pharmaceutical Association, prior to making any decisions about the Prescription Drug Plan. 
We invited the Pharmaceutical Association to present their views to us. One of the things that they 
proposed was that any plan that is introduced should have a prescription charge, that the consumer pay 
part or all of the prescription fee. That was the recommendation made to us by the pharmacists. Mr. 
Speaker, we accepted part of that recommendation and we agreed with their negotiating committee and 
with the endorsement of their Council, to have a small prescription charge as an initial start of the 
program. Whether that will be carried on in the future is something to be determined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made no apology for the proposal that we have made to the pharmacists. We are hoping 
that next week when they meet with us they will reconsider their position. If they do the plan will go 
into effect as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — A supplementary question, Mr. Minister of Health, you did not 
answer my question. Is not one of the overwhelming reasons they rejected the plan because they 
rejected, as I understand it, unanimously 300 to 0? As to your statement about deterrent fees, the ones 
that were imposed before, would the Minister not agree that a garlic onion no matter what you call it still 
stinks? 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
811 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, there were four issues they took exception to. I don’t know whether their 
decision was unanimous, I was not at their meetings. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Weren’t you invited? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Maybe they invited the Liberal Party, they did not invite me. I doubt very much 
whether they invited them. I am sure that the pharmacists can speak for themselves. We have some 
differences at the present time but I am expecting that they will be ironed out and I can assure the people 
of Saskatchewan that we will have a prescription drug plan introduced long before another Liberal 
Government is elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADVERTISEMENTS RE LAND BANK 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I wish to direct a 
question to the Premier. According to recent news reports the Premier has taken exception to certain ads 
that have been run by the Liberal Party in connection with the Land Bank operation in Saskatchewan. 
He apparently has complained about these ads saying that they are misleading and that the ads proclaim 
that the tenants of those pieces of property are not allowed to buy the land as of right after five years. 
The Premier has also said in numerous speeches that the Land Bank Act and the Land Bank Lease have 
provisions for tenants as a matter of right to be guaranteed the right to buy that land after five years. I 
should now like to send over to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the Land Bank Act and the Land 
Bank Lease and ask him to show this House and the people of Saskatchewan just where this is 
contained, that is the guarantee for the tenants to buy the land after five years? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Member for Lakeview tendering this legal advice. I 
know that he would, perhaps as I would when I was in private practice, prefer to have a client who is 
likely to pay him more for it. His advice is free and I am sure it is worth every penny of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I have not had an opportunity to review this provision of the Act as the Hon. Member 
will perfectly well know when he sends it to me in this way. I have stated before and state again that the 
policy of the Land Bank Commission is to provide people who lease land from the Land Bank the right 
to buy the land after five years. That is the stated policy of the Land Bank Commission and will continue 
to be the stated policy of the Land Bank Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
812 

 

Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. May I point out firstly that the Premier did not 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Just ask the question, don’t make a statement on it. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question then. Would the Premier then agree with me when I say that 
anyone who says that the Land Bank Act provides as a right that the tenant can buy the land after five 
years is not telling the truth, that he is misrepresenting the provisions of the Land Bank Act and of the 
Land Bank Lease? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would not agree with the Hon. Member. I have not studied this, I 
cannot state emphatically whether or not the Member is correctly stating the law or incorrectly stating 
the law. I say it is a policy of the Land Bank Commission and if the Hon. Members opposite wish me to 
state it again, I will. The policy is that the people who lease from the Land Bank Commission have the 
right to purchase after five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from His Honour, the 
Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Lieutenant-Governor transmits Estimates of Certain Sums Required for the 
service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 1976, the Supplementary Estimates of 
Certain Sums Required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1975, and 
recommends the same to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my seatmate, the Hon. Don Cody: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates be referred to the Committee 
of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present to you and to the Members 
of this House the fourth Budget of this New Democratic Government. 
 
In introducing our first Budget in 1972, Premier Allan Blakeney set out the priorities in our four-year 
program. In 1973, my colleague Elwood Cowley presented chapter two in the orderly achievement of 
that program. Our third Budget which I had the privilege to present last year, emphasized 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
813 

 

development — the balanced development of Saskatchewan and its people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this — our fourth budget — is a budget of fulfillment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In 1971 the New Democratic Party sought the support of the people of Saskatchewan 
to set a new course in this province. Not in generalities nor in high-flown empty phrases. No, Mr. 
Speaker, the course we proposed was set out point by point, commitment by commitment. In an 
unprecedented move, well in advance of the 1971 election, we stated our commitments in the New Deal 
for People. Never before in the history of Canada had any party set out its program as clearly or as 
comprehensively. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — As the Premier said in delivering our first Budget: 
 

Those were our policies when we were out of office and those are our policies now that we are in 
office. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The New Deal charted new directions: to develop our resources and our economy for 
the benefit of Saskatchewan people; to stem the tide of rural depopulation and rejuvenate our farming 
communities; to rebuild our social programs so that every individual might live in dignity and security. 
 
Now, there were skeptics in 1971, Mr. Speaker. A scattered few of them survived to sit on the benches 
opposite. It was pie in the sky, they said; it would bankrupt the province, they said; it could never be 
done, they said. But it has been done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — And, Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan is bankrupt we are enjoying the most prosperous 
‘bankruptcy’ ever heard of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — On the contrary, the health of our economy is the envy of most of North America. 
 
I invite you, Mr. Speaker, and the skeptics opposite, to check off this Government’s commitments as I 
speak today. I called this Budget a budget of fulfilment — fulfilment of the New Deal for People. It is 
more than that. It lays the foundation on which this province can continue to build in the second half of 
this decade. 
 
I have every confidence, Mr. Speaker, that the Budget that I present to you today will gain, not only the 
support of this Assembly, but the overwhelming support of the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
814 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Before presenting our detailed spending proposals, I want to comment on the national 
and provincial economic setting in which this Budget is cast. 
 
It would be an understatement to say that 1974 was a year of uncertainty and economic difficulty for 
Canadians. We faced rising unemployment and record increases in prices. In December of 1974, prices 
were 12.4 per cent higher than the previous year and 22.7 per cent higher than two years ago. The rate of 
increase in prices has shown little sign of slackening. 
 
Unemployment in Canada has remained at unacceptably high levels since 1971. The unemployment 
rate, which had finally fallen below the six per cent mark in early 1973, climbed back to that level late 
last year as the Canadian economy slowed appreciably. Early this year the unemployment rate jumped to 
6.7 per cent, reminding us how quickly an economic downturn can bring hardship to many thousands of 
Canadians. 
 
Real growth in the Canadian economy ceased at the end of the first quarter of 1974, partly as a result of 
the recession that gripped many industrial countries and partly because of what in our view are 
misguided policies of the federal authority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — We do not pretend to have all the answers, but we have urged the Federal Government 
to adopt certain measures to help curb inflation. Many times we have called for decisive action to protect 
the house-building industry from the erratic swing in funds available for mortgages and from high 
interests rates. We have recommended that the Federal Government require private lending institutions 
to earmark a specific amount of their loan funds for the mortgage market. The amount would be 
determined by the volume and type of housing required to meet our needs As part of this policy, 
mortgage funds should be made available to lower and moderate income families at fixed, reasonable 
interest rates, not tied to the rate established by the money market. These recommendations have fallen 
on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have urged the federal authority to bring in an agricultural income stabilization plan that would truly 
serve the interests of Canadian farmers. We hope that this program is finally on its way. We are prepared 
to co-operate fully in seeing that the program becomes successful in stabilizing farm income. It is our 
fear, Mr. Speaker, that any possible benefits from a farm income stabilization plan will be more than 
offset by other federal policies in the agricultural field. 
 
Foremost among these is the policy to turn over the disposal of feed grains to the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange and the private grain trade. To those of us who recall the struggle to achieve orderly 
marketing in the prairies, this is a backward step. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
815 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a step towards chaos, a step deplored by the majority of primary 
producers of this province. Mr. Speaker, the farmer will be the real loser from open market operations. 
 
One could mention other areas where Federal Government action may impair Saskatchewan’s 
development. Rail line abandonment and the threat to remove the Crow’s Nest rates represents a total 
disregard for the needs and interests of western Canada. We are astounded at the Cavalier attitude taken 
by federal ministers responsible for so vital a part of our transportation system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government is committed to work for changes that are in the interest of all of the 
people of this province, rather than those which will benefit the railways and grain companies at the 
expense of farmers and rural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to the economic situation in Saskatchewan during 1974, 
and the likely prospect for us in the year ahead. 
 
Unlike the national economy, Saskatchewan continued to improve its economic performance in 1974. 
Our economic strength can be traced to a healthy expansion in almost all sectors, but particularly in 
agriculture and other primary resource industries. Like other provinces, Saskatchewan has suffered from 
the consequences of uncontrolled price increases. No area of Canada has escaped the impact of inflation. 
 
Solid improvements in farm income have been partly offset by rapid increases in production costs. Wage 
and salary increases have been rapidly eroded by the spiraling cost of living. Those on low and fixed 
incomes have suffered severely. On balance, however, Mr. Speaker, the economy of Saskatchewan 
continues to fare much better than the overall Canadian economy. The Saskatchewan economy in 1974 
matched the rapid pace of the previous year in terms of new jobs created. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, job opportunities are now expanding fast enough that large numbers of young 
people are able to find jobs in this province, rather than leave the province in search of employment 
elsewhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Our population stabilized at 909,000 in 1974 and there is every indication that we 
shall add to this total during the current year. The number of people with jobs increased by 8,000 in 
1974 and our unemployment rate dropped to 2.8 per cent from 3.6 per cent in 1973, the lowest in 
Canada. 
 
I want to point out another breakthrough in 1974. For the first time in many years there was no decline 
in the number of persons employed in agriculture. Through the impact of programs such as FarmStart 
and the Land Bank, our young people are finding rural Saskatchewan a satisfying place in which to earn 
a living and raise their families. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
816 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Cash receipts from farming reached a new high of about $2 billion in 1974, an 
increase of 36 per cent over the previous year. This was primarily due to higher returns for grain in 
response to strong international demand. Over the same period, realized net farm income grew by almost 
50 per cent to reach a level of $1.2 billion. Personal income for 1974 increased by 19 per cent to $4.1 
billion. Farm income accounted for more than 25 per cent of this total. Labor contributed about $1.9 
billion, a 16 per cent increase over 1973. 
 
Saskatchewan again made real progress towards a more balanced and diversified economy. Investment 
in new manufacturing capacity reached $47.9 million, 74 per cent higher than in 1973. People employed 
in manufacturing now number 24,000, a gain of 1,000 over the previous year. 
 
Another bright spot in Saskatchewan was the construction of new housing. While housing starts in other 
provinces were dropping sharply, Saskatchewan achieved 7,684 starts in 1974, an increase over 1973 of 
more than 20 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Retail trade continued its strong upward climb in 1974. Strong primary and secondary 
industrial activity helped increase retail sales by 20 per cent to about $1.76 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are but a few of the figures which illustrate the strong economic position of this 
province. As we move into the new year, I think Saskatchewan people can look to the future with a good 
measure of optimism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — So far we have avoided the major effects of the downturn in the Canadian and world 
economies. We can look to continued strength in all important areas of our own economy. Nevertheless, 
should the decline in the rest of the world continue, Saskatchewan will begin to feel its effects and our 
rate of growth will slow down. Despite this possibility, national and international demand for our food 
and resource products should remain strong. 
 
The farm cash income in 1975 should remain high as farmers benefit from deferred payments and large 
final payments for grain delivered during the 1973-74 crop year, although payments for the 1974 crop 
will certainly be lower. Spending on consumer goods and farm machinery should again be strong in 
1975. 
 
The construction industry, Mr. Speaker, should enjoy another good year. Investment in new plant 
facilities is expected to be 14 per cent higher than in 1974. We expect the total of private and public 
investment to surpass the 1974 figures by approximately $200 million. 
 
Job creation and employment should both be high in 1975. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we expect our rate of 
unemployment to continue to be the lowest in Canada. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
817 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — However, Mr. Speaker, if employment begins to sag as a result of the slowdown 
elsewhere, we are prepared to step up public spending on job-creating activities such as construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we fully expect the Saskatchewan economy to outpace the national economy from almost 
every point of view. Canada as a whole is faced with the task of pulling itself out of a major economic 
slowdown. Saskatchewan, I am certain, will make a positive and significant contribution to that effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, in the Budget presented one year ago, I estimated cash inflows of $901 
million and cash outflows of $898.8 million. Further estimates later approved by this House raised the 
estimate of cash outflows to $914.6 million. 
 
Since that time, inflation has pushed up the cost of those budgetary proposals by approximately $46 
million. We currently estimate expenditures in the 1974-75 fiscal year, ending March 31 next, at $985 
million. 
 
Major additions to the 1974-75 budgetary proposals which you will be asked to approve in the 
supplementary estimates include: payments of $4.3 million to hog producers under the Hog Price 
Stabilization Plan; a further grant of $4 million to FarmStart; a $1 million addition to the Youth 
Employment Services program; additional grants of $2.7 million under The Senior Citizens Home 
Repair Assistance Act to finance projects carried forward from last winter; $2 million in special grants 
to municipalities for snow removal assistance, expenditures under the Farm Cost Reduction Program to 
cushion farmers from higher fuel costs, estimated in the range of $11 or $12 million. 
 
Budgetary revenues are expected to reach $990 million. An additional $45 million in potash revenues 
and higher personal and corporate income tax receipts contributed to the higher cash inflows. As a 
result, the 1974-75 fiscal year will yield a net cash increase of an estimated $5 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The cumulative cash carry-forward at the close of the 1974-75 fiscal year is expected 
to reach $70.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the printed text of my address I have dealt extensively with our capital financial 
proposals. The only point I should like to make at this time is that as a borrower for capital projects, the 
Province of Saskatchewan is in an excellent position. We are confident that our capital financing 
program in 1975 will be successful at interest rates comparable to any province in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 10th, 1972 Premier Allan Blakeney stood in this House to present the first 
Budget of this New Democratic Government. It was a unique budget in that it not only revealed the 
government’s spending proposals for that fiscal year, but it 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
818 

 

also provided a blueprint for the future. 
 
In successive years we have built on the foundation of that first Budget. We have introduced important 
new programs; we have modified and improved and expanded existing programs to serve the people of 
this province. 
 
Economic development has proceeded at an unprecedented rate and our population has shown an 
increase on an annual basis for the first time in several years. We have provided direct financial 
assistance to local governments to help them maintain and improve services to their ratepayers and meet 
rising costs. We have developed new programs to revitalize our rural communities and to enrich the 
lives of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And how has this been accomplished, Mr. Speaker? It has been accomplished through careful and 
responsible financial management. As a result, I am please to announce that for the fourth successive 
year we are presenting a balanced budget and expect a modest increase in our cumulative cash 
carry-forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, for the past three years this Government has focused much of its 
attention on economic development. This is understandable because imaginative programs for people 
cost money. Prudent management requires the establishment of a strong economic base to support these 
programs. But this does not mean that programs for people have been forgotten. 
 
This Government has restored Saskatchewan to its position of leadership in health services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In Education, we have dramatically reduced the share of school costs borne by the 
property tax and at the same time introduced a series of new programs from kindergarten to the 
community colleges. 
 
In Social Services we have attacked the problem and not the people. Improving services while restoring 
hundreds upon hundreds of employable persons to the work force. These things, Mr. Speaker, and many 
others we promised to do in the New Deal for People. Let me review some of the promises fulfilled, Mr. 
Speaker, For our senior citizens, deterrent fees abolished. More level IV beds for chronically ill, about 
400 more. A new senior citizens home repair program. Hundreds of new low housing units in smaller 
centres. 
 
In Health, medicare premiums abolished. A new Dental Care plan for children, the first of its kind in 
North America. A new Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Program. Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 
to provide artificial limbs and other appliances at no cost to the handicapped. Chiropractic services 
included under medicare. 
 
To fulfil our pledge to Education, Mr. Speaker, a new Department of Continuing Education, new 
Community Colleges, funds for kindergartens on a province wide basis, massive increases in school 
grants, a new student bursary program, more summer employment opportunities for students. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
819 

 

In the area of Social Services, Canada’s first Family Income Plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — A plan which provides financial support to low income working families. A new and 
expanded Day Care program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what is our record in housing? A new housing corporation to develop housing 
programs based on the needs of Saskatchewan people. House Building Assistance Grants broadened and 
enriched. New public housing for the elderly, and for lower income groups in both small and larger 
centres. 
 
To protect the consumer, Mr. Speaker, we set up a new Department of Consumer Affairs. An additional 
measure of, among a number of such measures to reduce the impact of inflation, we reduced gasoline 
tax seven cents a gallon and instituted a comparable rebate being paid to farmers on farm fuels. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — To protect the rights of the individual, we set up Saskatchewan’s first Ombudsman. 
We set up a Legal Aid Plan. We set up a Provincial Inquiry Centre to give people access to Government 
Departments and Programs. We also set up an independent Electoral Boundaries Commission to end the 
gerrymander. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — And to guarantee representation by population in this Assembly. 
 
These are a few examples, Mr. Speaker. An examination of the record will show that one after another, 
the pledges made in the 1971 Election Program can be checked off as done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — But this budget contains more, Mr. Speaker. We recognize that our senior citizens 
have special needs and that rising prices have put an unfair burden upon them. We propose to take 
action to improve service and living standards for these persons who have played such an important part 
in the development of our society. We are establishing a Provincial Senior Citizens Council with 
representation from every region of the province. This Council will develop, support and represent local 
organizations concerned with the needs of senior citizens. To make sure that this Council is broadly 
based, some 40 to 50 local Senior Citizens Councils will be established to represent the views at the 
community level. They will develop information, coordination and referral services and provide an 
effective avenue of local representation. This Council’s structure will provide a way for the special 
needs and interest for the senior citizens to be discussed, heard and acted upon. A Senior Citizens 
Branch will be set up by the Department of Social Services. It will work closely with the provincial and 
local councils in planning and coordinating a wide range of programs for senior citizens. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
820 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the coming year we will take a major step to improve the income security of our 
senior citizens. This Government will guarantee every resident of Saskatchewan 65 years of age or over 
an income level of $224 per month for single persons and $425 per month for married couples. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — These levels will be provided through supplements of $20 per month for single 
individuals and $36 for married couples who are receiving full OAS-GIS benefits. The estimated annual 
cost of this program when fully implemented will be over $7 million. 
 
Many of our senior citizens require specialized care. They are specially vulnerable to rising costs and 
many are on fixed incomes. Inflation is impairing their ability to pay for the quality and care they need. 
Therefore the provincial subsidy to private paying residents in special care homes will be substantially 
increased in 1975. My colleague, the Hon. Alex Taylor, will announce the details of this increase later in 
the debate. 
 
Community Social Service grants will be increased to $1,200,000 to expand community programs for 
the elderly such as meals-on-wheels. The Department of Public Health will also introduce a number of 
new programs to assist our senior citizens. In addition to home care, a start will be made on a chiropody 
program to improve the availability of foot care which is often vital for elderly persons. 
 
Senior citizens will also benefit from an expansion of the respiratory disease unit of the University 
Hospital, Saskatoon. This will include new positions and other resources, at a total cost of some 
$170,500. This expansion will help meet a growing need for specialized respiratory care, particularly 
among the elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan will begin its operation in 1975-76 . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — . . . fulfilling another promise in the New Deal for People. The plan will substantially 
reduce the cost of prescription drugs to the consumer and will improve the quality of drugs sold in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s developing children’s dental service will, we believe, become a model for 
North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In 1974-75, it began its first phase, offering preventative, diagnostic and restorative 
services to all six-year-olds enrolled by their parents. In the next fiscal year coverage will be extended to 
include all children aged five to seven. By 1977-78 the Saskatchewan Dental Plan will achieve its goal 
of providing service for all children between three and twelve years of age. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
821 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — This foundation of dental health will benefit children throughout their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true that this program costs money — almost $4.9 million in 1975-76 — and that it 
requires a good sized staff, 342 persons in 1975-76. But we believe that health is one of our most 
precious resources. We know that without a dental plan many of our children simply will not get 
adequate dental care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The Saskatchewan Dental Plan will be of particular help to families with low incomes 
and in rural areas. It will prove that even with our great distances and scattered population, we can 
provide people with first-class health service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the abuse of alcohol is one of the major problems confronting society today. We will 
continue our efforts to combat problems related to alcohol consumption. Additional financial resources 
and personnel will be provided for the Alcoholism Commission. Funds for AWARE — a preventative 
educational program concerning the use and abuse of alcohol — will be increased by about 50 per cent 
because of positive public response to this pioneering program. 
 
The coming fiscal year will also mark the first full year of operation for another program — 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living or SAIL. In the New Deal for People we promised to provide 
wheelchairs and other needed equipment for handicapped persons at a greatly reduced cost. SAIL goes 
far beyond that promise. We recognize and applaud the desire of the handicapped to make a useful and 
satisfying contribution to society. SAIL extends tangible assistance to these persons by providing 
wheelchairs, walkers, artificial limbs, braces and other aids to independent living at no cost to the user. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, modern intensive care facilities are needed to provide specialized care 
for high-risk newborn infants. The neonatal intensive care unit at the University Hospital in Saskatoon 
will become the referral centre for all high-risk newborn infant and their mothers in the northern part of 
the province. We have provided almost $250,000 in this Budget for expansion of that facility. 
 
This Government supports the provision of care in the home and the community wherever possible, 
rather than in institutions. Just as we have supported the establishment of community health and social 
centres, which were developed to replace the hospitals closed by the Liberals, we will now expand home 
care programs in the coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In 1975-76 we will provide funds to establish a 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
822 

 

satellite to the Saskatoon Community Clinic. This new facility in Riversdale will serve a community 
which does not now have ready access to health services. 
 
I wish now, Mr. Speaker, to turn to the field of education. Once again the New Democratic Party has 
demonstrated its commitment to improve educational opportunities for the young people in this 
province. This Budget contains an increase of $26.2 million for operating grants to schools — the largest 
increase in any one year in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Capital grants for school construction have been increased by $2.9 million to $8.35 
million for 1975-76. This increase in funding will help to maintain the current level of school 
construction in spite of escalating costs. 
 
In 1971-72, the last budget of the previous administration, the province’s operating grants provided 
about 47 per cent of total school costs. This Government has continued to pick up an ever larger share. 
In 1975-76, provincial grants will provide 58 per cent of all operating expenditures of school boards in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — When these grants are combined with the reduction in school property taxes 
represented by Property Improvement Grants, the province is contributing nearly 67 per cent of total 
school costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — We are developing a many-sided approach to Consumer Education which will be 
directed towards problems of today and will help to equip our young people to meet the challenge of 
tomorrow. 
 
Recommendations of the Committee for the Education of the Deaf are being implemented at the School 
for the Deaf where a new program of total communication is being enthusiastically received. Resource 
personnel are being provided to assist community-based programs for persons with impaired hearing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1971 we promised to assist in the establishment of regional centres to bring education 
opportunities closer to the people of Saskatchewan. We have fulfilled that promise. Our Community 
College program will be fully operational in 1975-76. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I should now like to turn to the universities. The two-university system, recommended 
by the Commission headed by Mr. Justice Emmett Hall, appears to be working well. The University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina are now fully autonomous bodies each with jurisdiction over 
academic policies, programs and staff. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
823 

 

The new Saskatchewan Universities Commission is currently establishing itself and shows promise of 
fulfilling the important role of allocating resources between the universities and avoiding needless 
duplication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1975-76 operating grants to the universities will total $56 million, an increase of $11.25 
million or 25 per cent over last year. The capital grant will total $6 million. 
 
In 1971 we introduced the Saskatchewan Student Bursary program to provide non-repayable financial 
assistance to university students and students enrolled at the institutes. Each year the funds available 
under this program have been increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce a further increase of $260,000 in assistance under the Student 
Bursary program to more than $2 million. The maximum assistance per student has also been increased 
by $150 to $1,000. We will provide $602,000 to the universities for graduate scholarships – an increase 
of $157,000. The maximum scholarship will now be $4,500 per year, which will help our universities to 
attract top students into graduate programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago we established the Palliser Regional Library which completed the provincial 
regional library system. Since that time we have directed our attention to the improvement of services 
and facilities. We recognize that some municipal and regional library costs bear little direct relation to 
the population base. I am pleased to announce that grants to municipal and regional libraries will be 
made this year on the basis of new formulas that will more closely reflect the needs of these libraries. 
Grants to regional libraries in 1975-76 will amount to more than $1.9 million, an increase of some 
$550,000 over last year. 
 
Grants to municipal libraries, which includes the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, will total $387,000, an 
increase of almost 40 per cent over the preceding year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last full year of Liberal administration the total budget for the Provincial Library was 
less than $850,000, of which $463,000 was allocated to municipal and regional libraries. I invite you and 
this House to compare that budget with this year’s proposal to use more than $2.28 million in grants to 
municipal and regional libraries out of a total budget of $3.19 million for the Provincial Library. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, we are conscious of the need to involve native persons in the 
development of programs and the delivery of services to their own people. In this budget we have 
provided a grant of almost $215,000 to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians to provide probation and 
other correction services to persons living on reserves. Funds have also been provided for native 
educational and cultural activities which will be brought into the three provincial correctional centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately 25 per cent of all children placed in foster homes have physical, mental or 
emotional disabilities. This Budget provides an additional $400,000 for 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
824 

 

payments to foster parents in whose homes these children are placed. 
 
Handicapped workshops and activity centres are important parts of community-based programs for the 
mentally handicapped. Grants to these centres will be increased by $135,000 in the coming year so that 
handicapped workers will receive fair compensation for their labor. 
 
We are also responding, Mr. Speaker, to the need for increased staff training for persons working with 
the mentally retarded. $92,000 will be provided in this Budget to train 24 group activity aides at the 
Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1975-76 we will provide telecommunication aids to handicapped persons at no charge 
other than regular rates. We estimate that approximately 1,100 persons will use these aids, which are 
available through SaskTel, at a first year cost of some $65,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to some of the new programs in the Department of the Attorney General. 
 
The Native Court Worker program will be greatly expanded as the number of court workers is increased 
from 8 to 25. The province will have ten native Justices of the Peace in 1975-76. 
 
Last year we introduced the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Plan to provide essential legal services to persons 
who could not otherwise afford them. Thirteen legal aid clinics will be in operation in 1975-76 at a cost 
of $2.2 million. 
 
To promote high police standards in Saskatchewan, we established a Provincial Police Commission. In 
1975, an administrative staff will be provided to conduct evaluations and programs on a full time basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opportunities for cultural development and recreation are of increasing importance in the 
lifestyles of the people of this province. Our young people are looking for ways to develop and display 
their talents and their skills. 
 
The Department of Culture and Youth last year initiated the Saskatchewan Talent program to provide 
encouragement and recognition for Saskatchewan artists. The program will be expanded this year to 
include a travelling play and a musical tour, both of which will visit smaller centres this summer. 
 
People of every cultural and ethnic origin make a valuable contribution to our province. In 1975 we will 
launch a new multi-cultural grant program aimed at preserving this rich heritage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to introduce the next section of the Budget 
Speech related to the fact that we have regained our position of leadership in social policies and 
programs. This social concern should not be limited simply to the boundaries of our province. On the 
contrary, we believe we have a responsibility to share with others regardless of where they may live. In 
this Budget we will provide $1.25 million in 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
825 

 

matching grants to enable the people of Saskatchewan to take part in programs of international aid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Each dollar contributed to approved development projects undertaken by participating 
groups in the Saskatchewan Council of International Agencies will be matched by the Government of 
this province. The projects in under-developed nations could include training programs for farmers, 
irrigation projects, construction of community schools and training of teachers. Individual contributions 
will be matched dollar for dollar by the Provincial Government. This combined contribution will then be 
matched by the Canadian International Development Agency. The end result will be a $5 million 
contribution to peoples of the developing countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1975 has been officially designated as International Women’s Year. We welcome this 
concerted effort to improve the status of women but I would point out that we did not wait for 
proclamation of a special year before taking action. The Women’s Bureau of the Department of Labour, 
the Office of the Co-ordinator, Status of Women and the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission are 
examples of a positive effort to achieve equal opportunities for women in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, this Budget contains more than $11.25 million to meet the housing needs 
of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Two years ago this Government established the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
These years have been marked by an improvement in the existing program and new ways to provide 
better housing for the people of this province. 
 
The response to the Senior Citizens Home Repair Program is an example of how well our new housing 
programs have been received. In the first two years more than 14,000 grants had been approved. This 
means that one-third of all eligible recipients have received a Home Repair Grant. This year we expect 
to receive a further 11,000 applications and have budgeted more than $4.6 million for this purpose. 
 
This Budget also contains almost $3 million for House Building Assistance Grants. These grants serve a 
dual purpose. Not only do they provide better housing for the people of Saskatchewan, they also 
stimulate the construction industry. We expect to make 3,600 grants in 1975-76, an increase of about 50 
per cent over the preceding year. 
 
The Housing Corporation will continue to work for the present and plan for the future through its Land 
Assembly and Development program. I invite you to examine our record in the field of public housing. 
This Government’s housing program is designed for small as well as for larger centres. In addition to 
more than 1,000 regular projects that will be under construction in 1975-76, 400 special units for rural 
people will be started. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
826 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to economic development. Economic development is not an end in itself. 
This Government seeks development which will strengthen and diversify our economy; produce good 
jobs for our young people; conserve our resources; increase the processing of raw materials we produce; 
support and strengthen Saskatchewan communities; and yield benefits for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I referred earlier to the solid performance of the Saskatchewan economy. Let me review some of the 
things that have happened since 1971. 
 
Take jobs. Our work force increased by 23,000 between January 1971-75. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In 1973, the number of people with jobs increased by 8,000; in 1974 we added another 
8,000. That’s 16,000 new jobs in two years, Mr. Speaker, and by far the largest number of them filled by 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — It is tempting, Mr. Speaker, to compare those figures with the performance with the 
late Liberal administration which labored on a rash promise of 80,000 jobs in four years and brought 
forth a mouse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Only 7,000 in seven long years. However, I will resist that temptation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — There are many new industries in both the private and public sector which give us a 
stronger economic base. Much of the credit for these developments can be taken by the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce, Mr. Kim Thorson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — He will have more to say later in this debate on the subject of our industrial and 
commercial growth. I should like however to say a few words about the Forest Products Industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our friends opposite like pulp mills and there is nothing wrong with pulp mills provided 
they use the resource wisely and protect the environment and yield a fair share of benefits to the people 
of this province. But rather than seek another pulp mill we look for better ways to use our timber 
resource. Under the Crown-owned Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation we have on stream or 
under construction five new enterprises ranging from a plywood plant to modern lumber mills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
827 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Collectively, Mr. Speaker, these five plants will create over 1,000 jobs — about the 
same number as a mill of the size we are familiar with. But they will create those jobs at less than 
one-third the capital investment per job and using half the number of cords of wood per job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, I must point out that the Saskatchewan Forest Products is a 
wholly owned industry right here in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Resources are only one aspect of economic development. We have moved in many 
other areas to support industry, agriculture, business and working people. Let’s look at the record. For 
agriculture, we set up the Land Bank, we introduced FarmStart, we established the Agricultural 
Implements Board to improve the quality of farm implements, we set up the Market Development Fund, 
we established the Hog Marketing Commission and pioneered a Hog Price Stabilization program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have established a new Department to 
bring government services closer to the people being served, provided new employment opportunities 
for residents of the North, we began to transfer responsibility and resources to local government. We 
improved educational opportunities, we have undertaken sewer and water programs, we have made 
substantial improvements in transportation and communication. 
 
For small business, Mr. Speaker, we have set up a Business Assistance Branch in the Department of 
Industry and Commerce, we established eight regional offices staffed with specialists in various aspects 
of business operation, we expanded SEDCO’s role to provide loans to small businesses. 
 
For Labour, Mr. Speaker, we increased the minimum wage to $2.50 an hour, the work week was 
reduced to 40 hours, three weeks annual vacation after one years of service, a Workers’ Advocate 
appointed to ensure better worker protection, a revamped Workers’ Compensation Board and 
substantially increased compensation and pension payments, an Occupational Health and Safety 
Division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — To protect our environment, Mr. Speaker, we have established the Department of the 
Environment. We banned the use of non-returnable bottles and cans, we set up an Environmental 
Advisory Council, we established pollution standards. 
 
To support the family farm and help smaller communities to improve life for the people they serve, we 
have launched a 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
828 

 

number of new programs and changed many more. Things like making it possible for more young 
people to start farming, helping to build new recreational facilities through winter works programs, 
changing the school grant formula to assist small schools, improving access to small communities 
through Operation Open Roads and making main streets dust free through Operation MainStreet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — These, Mr. Speaker, are some of our achievements over the past three and one-half 
years. I should like to turn now to our proposals for economic development in 1975-76. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one can deny the continuing importance of agriculture in the economic future of this 
province. For many years the agricultural industry was concerned almost exclusively with the 
production of grain. As a result, our whole economy suffered with fluctuations in the grain market. 
Because we are convinced that agriculture must be diversified to provide a stable economic base for the 
province, the Minister of Agriculture has introduced new programs such as FarmStart, the Hog Price 
Stabilization Plan and the Cow-Calf Cash Advance program to provide assistance to livestock 
producers. 
 
Since its inception FarmStart has provided assistance to more than 2,000 farmers entering the livestock 
industry. More than half of these are new farmers whose average age is under 24 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In the coming year we expect another 1,000 farmers to take advantage of the program 
and have budgeted roughly $5 million in grants in addition to loans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The Land Bank has purchased nearly 1,200 parcels of land since it began in 1972. The 
Commission has made provision to acquire up to 500 more parcels in the coming year. Over 1,000 
farmers are now leasing land under this program and by 1976 the number will exceed 1,500 at an 
average age under 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In the current year we will have spent more than $13 million on the Hog Price 
Stabilization Plan in order to honor our commitment to the farmers in the hog industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — We introduced the Cow-Calf Cash Advance program to help the cow-calf operator to 
maintain his operation despite the problems caused by low-market prices. We are providing funds in this 
Budget to pay the interest charges on advances of nearly $35 million. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
829 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that construction has started on the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute at Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — That Institute, which is a project jointly supported by Alberta, Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan, will render an invaluable service to farmers by a rigorous testing of agricultural 
machinery. In these estimates we are budgeting $374,000 for capital costs and more than $450,000 for 
operating expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time does not permit me to describe in detail all of the innovative programs that we have 
introduced for the benefit of farmers of Saskatchewan. The Farm Cost Reduction program to cushion the 
impact on increased prices of fuel used for agricultural purposes is one of them. We have a grant 
program to encourage cream producers to convert production to manufactured milk, and there are others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Budget we provide $58 million for the Department of Agriculture, an increase of 
$42 million over the last Liberal effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Saskatchewan has been endowed, Mr. Speaker, with a bountiful resource base. As the 
constitutional owner of that resource base, the province has a responsibility to see that the benefits from 
these resources flow to the people of Saskatchewan. This is true both as taxpayers and users of those 
resources. 
 
Although our resources are bountiful, they are not limitless. Therefore we must strike a balance between 
immediate resource development accompanied by short-term gains and the need to conserve an adequate 
energy and resource base for future generations of Saskatchewan people. This is particularly true of the 
scarce energy resources — oil, natural gas and uranium. 
 
To achieve maximum benefit from these resources, we must be aware of the costs of development. In 
the petroleum and mineral industry we are competing for footloose investment dollars which tend to 
settle wherever the rate of return is the highest. We want to have our resources developed but the cost of 
tax incentives for purely private development in the resource industry is too high. 
 
In the past year we achieved a significant increase in the degree of public involvement in resource 
development. To date the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation has entered into a number of 
voluntary joint ventures — primarily exploring for uranium. Our minerals policy will make sure that the 
Crown has the option of participating in major mineral developments in the future on Crown lands in 
northern Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will thus share directly in both the 
costs and the benefits of those ventures. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
830 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Having acquired a good land position in the province, SaskOil has started its drilling 
program. Public participation and ownership will give the province the ability to regulate, to accelerate 
and expand economic activity without sacrificing the economic benefit of our resources. Some 
preliminary work is necessary before intensive exploration can take place. Work is proceeding on an 
inventory of our coal reserves and their potential uses. 
 
Mr. Guy: — They need some more . . . 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Athabasca should remember a bit of political whimsy 
known as the politician’s prayer: Dear Lord, I thank you for my mind and my mouth; please try to help 
me keep the two connected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In the allocation of coal reserves, priority will be given to supplying Saskatchewan 
needs. In exporting our excess production, preference will be given in those uses and projects that 
provide the greatest economic benefit to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1971 we promised to raise the social and economic standard of the northern half of this 
province. The programs introduced in the past three years represent real progress toward fulfillment of 
that promise. 
 
We will continue our efforts to give northern Saskatchewan a fully developed modern educational 
system. In addition to the La Ronge Community College grant of $250,000, a further $400,000 will be 
provided for the development of Community Colleges at Uranium City, Buffalo Narrows and Creighton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Grants to northern schools will be increased by $1 million to almost $5 million. 
Capital construction of educational facilities will reach nearly $4.25 million in the coming year. 
 
This Budget contains $2.75 million for road and airfield development. Better transportation facilities 
will benefit the people in the North by improving service and reducing costs and will make the area 
accessible for the recreational enjoyment of all the people of this province. 
 
The emphasis on the improvement of public health will be stepped up. Sewer and water facilities will 
soon be in operation at La Loche, Buffalo Narrows and Cumberland House. We will also start 
construction of sewer and water facilities at Green Lake and Ile a la Crosse. $2.3 million will be 
provided for sewer and water development. 
 
Economic development of the North remains a key objective of this Government. Through our program 
of assistance grants, 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
831 

 

more than $1.5 million has been provided for the creation or expansion of northern enterprises. A further 
$500,000 will be provided for this program in the coming year. 
 
I am pleased to announce that one major program for 1974-75 was carried out at a much lower cost in 
the North than was anticipated. Saskatchewan Assistance Plan social payments estimated at $3.5 million 
will reach only $2.2 million in the current fiscal year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, in the coming fiscal year we estimate a further reduction in the amount 
required for that purpose. 
 
Last year we provided $850,000 to the Northern Municipal Council in its first year of operation. As 
evidence of our commitment to extend local government in the North and local autonomy, we have 
budgeted $1.25 million for the Council in 1975-76, an increase of $400,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I should like to say a brief word about the Department of Industry and Commerce. The 
response to the business assistance program of this Department has been excellent. In the coming year 
we will continue to explore new opportunities for development. $900,000 has been budgeted to study 
the development of an integrated steel complex. We will also continue to promote Saskatchewan 
products in other parts of Canada and in foreign markets. 
 
We will establish a new economic development program for the disadvantaged at a cost of nearly $1.2 
million. This program is designed to provide an opportunity for low income or disadvantaged groups to 
enter the mainstream of the province’s economic activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we established the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources to provide 
greater coordination of tourist promotion and the use of our parks. In this Budget we are making further 
advances in tourism and recreation. Funds have been provided in this Budget to continue the 
development of the Moose Jaw Zoo-Park complex. When fully developed, this complex will be a major 
attraction for tourists and Saskatchewan residents. The existing Wild Animal Park will be operated by 
the province and redesigned to fit into the integrated complex. 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Put the last Liberal in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, we will increase our capacity to protect our forests from fires through the 
use of water bombers. More than $2.7 million has been provided for the purchase of aircraft and the 
construction of airstrips. 
 
To complement the forest protection aspect of our resource development policies, we will establish 
satellite nurseries to supply seedlings used in reforestation. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
832 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that the co-operative form of economic organization can play an important role 
in meeting the needs of our society. In this Budget $1.25 million has been provided to enable the 
Department to expand its services to credit unions and co-operatives throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I am pleased to announce the establishment of a new environmental impact assessment 
unit within the Department of the Environment. Each project of any significance will require an 
assessment prior to its construction. This will ensure full consideration of environmental implications 
and public opinion in the decision-making process. 
 
We are providing $100,000 in the estimates for flood plains management. This program will 
substantially reduce flood risk and damage in the future through a series of flood adjustment measures. 
 
In conjunction with the federal authority, we will continue the Qu’Appelle Implementation program. A 
new office has been opened in Fort Qu’Appelle and recruitment of staff is underway. In 1975-76 there 
will be a significant expansion of earlier programs designed to reduce flood risk and damage in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
More than $1 million will be spent in 1975-76 for channel conveyance improvements and major flood 
protection work for Moose Jaw, Lumsden and Regina. In addition, we propose to provide $1 million for 
the purchase of flood-prone agricultural land to reduce potential flood damage. 
 
On the subject of flooding I should like to say a word about the floods in Saskatchewan in 1974. During 
the current year we have paid out approximately $6.7 million in assistance to individuals, farmers, small 
businesses and local governments as a result of last year’s flood. I am proud of the record of this 
Government in the excellent job done by my seatmate, Don Cody, the Minister in charge, in tackling this 
problem quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In tackling this problem quickly and providing help when it was urgently needed. 
However I wish to add, Mr. Speaker, we expect to receive a considerable degree of cost sharing from the 
Federal Government. I should point out that every dollar that has been paid in claims to this date has 
come out of provincial coffers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, transportation is of vital importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is not simply a matter of building roads. It is the kind of roads that you build, the areas and the 
purposes these roads are designed to serve. To develop our natural resources and to keep our economy 
buoyant, we must have good roads and they must be well maintained. If we wish to enrich the quality of 
life in our rural areas and develop our tourist potential, a safe and efficient highway system is a 
necessity. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
833 

 

The capital budget for Highways in 1975-76 will be more than $74.3 million and the total expenditures 
in Highways will reach almost $110 million. Of this amount, $8.2 million will be used to improve our 
highway system in the northern part of the province. $25.5 million is budgeted for maintenance, an 
increase of some 40 per cent over the preceding year. Also included in the capital budget is $800,000 to 
begin construction on a bridge at Maidstone and $1.2 million for the bridge being built at Maymont. 
 
To furnish good all-weather access and transportation for citizens who live in locations not directly 
served by the highway system, we will provide funds to begin the planning and construction of a 
designated system of hard-surfaced grid roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — This primary grid, Mr. Speaker, will complement our highway system and provide an 
integrated road network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an examination of accident statistics in this province is a sobering experience. While a 
large measure of responsibility must inevitably rest with the driver, governments must make every 
possible effort to reduce the number of accidents on our highways. This Budget contains $1.5 million for 
highway accident counter measures — an amount almost double that spent in the current year. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that transportation, or the lack of it, makes it very difficult for the handicapped 
person to enjoy a full and productive life. $555,000 is provided for a new program of transit assistance 
for the handicapped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — We contend, Mr. Speaker, this is a well balanced transportation program. We are 
improving our capital investment in both roads and continuous sound maintenance policy. We are 
opening the northern part of the province with its abundant resources while undertaking major highway 
and rural road improvements in the South. 
 
Last year we introduced a large, new Urban Assistance Package aimed at improving the quality of life 
for the people who live in urban areas. In addition we announced a major increase in grants to rural 
municipalities. These programs have had a substantial impact. They have helped local governments to 
discharge the responsibilities that have traditionally been theirs without infringing on their local 
autonomy. 
 
In 1975-76, $12.85 million will be allocated to programs of urban assistance in addition to the $47 
million already set aside for the Community Capital Fund. 
 
Grants for police services, which absorbed a large part of rapidly rising police costs in the preceding 
year, will be funded at $3.1 million in 1975-76. 
 
An important new development is the designation of the Municipal Water Assistance Board as the 
responsible provincial agency in arranging aid for water and sewer facilities for towns 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
834 

 

and villages. The regulations under which the Board operates are being revised and the grant structure 
enriched; the appropriation will rise from the present level of $250,000 to $850,000 in the coming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the past several years have witnessed spiraling costs in most parts of the economy. In no 
area has the impact of inflation been more obvious than in the construction industry. World price 
increases and labor shortages within the province have raised construction costs by almost one-third in a 
single year. The pressure for new construction has never been greater in Saskatchewan. 
 
To reduce pressure on the construction industry, we will hold government capital construction to about 
the 1974-75 level. In this way we hope to ease the impact of inflation on capital works, both in the 
public and private sectors. 
 
During this period of restraint we will proceed with the planning and design of future capital works 
projects. Included in these plans will be a major new provincial office complex, located in downtown 
Regina — a project of importance in the renewal of the city’s core. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current position of the Federal Government concerning resource taxation is a grave 
threat to all provinces. It is a direct challenge to provincial control and ownership of resources and it is a 
clear breach of the spirit of the March oil agreement. 
 
In the May Budget and again in the Budget last November, the federal authority proposed to disallow 
the deduction of provincial royalties as a business expense in computing corporate income tax. They 
proposed to levy a tax on the royalties paid to provincial governments. This we do not accept. 
 
The federal action is all the more distasteful in the context of the oil agreement. The provinces 
understood that the share of oil revenue going to the two levels of government until June, 1975 had been 
established by that agreement. Mr. Speaker, we intend to oppose this intrusion into our jurisdiction in 
every way we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The federal action has caused uncertainty and hardship for some Saskatchewan 
companies. This we regret. And, despite our rejection of the federal tax measures, we have taken 
significant measures to lessen those hardships. 
 
We have announced royalty changes that will make it possible for the oil industry to operate on a stable 
basis. We have stated that as far as the Saskatchewan corporate income tax is concerned, royalties and 
provincial taxes will remain deductible as a business expense. This measure will apply to all resource 
companies and will be retroactive to May 6, 1974. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Details of this measure will be provided when amendments to The Income Tax Act are 
introduced later in this Session. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
835 

 

Saskatchewan has made these moves in the interests of the resource industries and in the spirit of 
Confederation. 
 
A second part of the oil agreement relates to the equalization formula. Saskatchewan is in a unique 
position. We are the only significant oil producer which is a recipient of equalization. When oil revenues 
go up, our equalization payment goes down. 
 
Because we were already making a substantial contribution by subsidizing Canadian consumers in the 
form of lower oil prices at a cost to us of some $400 million per year, Saskatchewan sought to minimize 
any additional equalization losses. 
 
We understood that if we put our additional oil revenues into the Energy and Resource Development 
Fund we would retain our full entitlement to equalization payments. 
 
In the November Budget, the Federal Government announced that one-third of the additional oil 
revenues above the 1973-74 level would be equalized. Such an action is a specific contravention of our 
understanding of the oil agreement. It means a loss to Saskatchewan of some $35 million this fiscal year. 
 
The Federal Government suggests that there has been a misunderstanding. Even if this is true, a $35 
million equalization loss for Saskatchewan is not consistent with any interpretation of the March oil 
agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, this issue remains unresolved but we hope that a mutually satisfactory 
solution will be found when the first Ministers meet. 
 
In the New Deal for People, we made a firm commitment to reduce property taxes for school purposes 
by an average of 18 mills on homes, farms and small businesses. Through the Property Improvement 
Grant we surpassed this level of assistance in 1974. 
 
We promised to abolish deterrent fees. Within about six weeks of taking office we accomplished that. 
Later we removed medical and hospital premiums for all people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — We honored our pledge to remove the $2 driver’s license surcharge and the $25 
surcharge on package policy insurance for persons under 25 years of age. 
 
In 1971, we made a commitment to remove the education and health tax from all meals. In 1972, this 
Government removed the sales tax from meals costing $2.50 or less. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
inform the Members of this House that effective April 1, the tax on meals will be eliminated entirely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
836 

 

Mr. Robbins: — At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we will fulfill another promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan by removing the education and health tax from books and reading material. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — On January 1, 1972 the Saskatchewan Government re-entered the succession duty and 
gift tax fields. We believe that a tax on wealth transfers is a fair tax. We believe that succession duties 
and gift taxes are a logical part of any progressive tax system. In 1973-74 only six per cent of 
Saskatchewan estates incurred any succession duty and two-thirds of all duties were paid by the top two 
per cent or 100 estates. A number of changes will be introduced to further ensure that our taxes apply 
only to the very wealthiest estates. 
 
The exemption for preferred successors will be increase from $200,000 to $250,000. The $50,000 
special exemption for spouses will be increased to $250,000. This will mean that an estate of $500,000 
can be passed on to a spouse without tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In my Budget Speech last March, I said that an overriding objective in the area of tax 
policy must be taxation according to ability to pay. I want to reaffirm this Government’s commitment to 
this basic principle by making two major announcements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the property tax is not an equitable tax. In the past three years the Property Improvement 
Grant program has been an important means of reducing the burden of the regressive property tax for 
educational purposes while assisting municipalities to maintain adequate revenue levels. 
 
I am pleased to announce that the 1975 Property Improvement Grant will be further increased to an 
amount equivalent to a 22 mill reduction in property taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, the maximum eligible assessment for farms and business will remain at 
$15,000 and $10,000 respectively. For principal residences the maximum eligible assessment will 
increase from $8,000 to $9,100. 
 
The maximum grants for 1975 applicable under the new 22 mill level will be as follows: 
 

(i) for the farmer $330, an increase of $30. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — 
 

(ii) for the business operation $220, an increase of $20. 
 

(iii) for the householder $200, an increase of $40. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
837 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, the maximum grant payable to an individual under any combination of 
these grants will be increased from $300 to $330. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The 1975 Property Improvement Grant program will put back over $40 million into 
the hands of Saskatchewan property taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — As I commented last year, Mr. Speaker, we have been hindered in our efforts to 
develop a more progressive provincial tax system by the continual erosion of our personal income tax 
base by tax changes, such as indexing, which have been instituted by the federal authority. By and large, 
these changes have been unilateral, regressive and costly to this province. 
 
They will reduce Saskatchewan’s personal income tax revenues in 1975 by over $30 million. We would 
have enthusiastically supported those tax changes if the benefits were directed in a more progressive 
fashion. 
 
Last November, the Federal Budget proposed an eight per cent federal tax cut for 1975, with a $200 
minimum and a $750 maximum. Provincial income taxes remain unaffected by this federal tax cut. 
Unfortunately one result of the tax cut is that many taxpayers at the lower end of the income scale 
continue to pay provincial income taxes while having their federal income taxes reduced to zero. This 
situation exists in each of the nine provinces that are party in the Federal-Provincial Tax Collection 
Agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to announce that commencing with the 1975 
taxation year, a provincial income tax cut of $100 will be enacted. This will removed 70,000 
Saskatchewan taxpayers from the provincial income tax roll and will reduce the provincial taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — And will reduce the provincial taxes of each of the remaining 240,000 taxpayers by 
$100 each. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In general, Mr. Speaker, no Saskatchewan taxpayer will be asked to pay provincial 
income taxes for 1975 if no federal income taxes are owing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax cut will eliminate all of the 1975 provincial income taxes for a family of four 
earning less than $6,100 per annum. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
838 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — For this same household with an income of $8,000 per annum provincial income taxes 
will be reduced by 40 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — With an income of $12,000 this tax cut will mean a 17 per cent reduction in provincial 
taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — The $100 tax cut is equivalent to a six point reduction in our 40 per cent provincial 
income tax rate to an average level of 34 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — But, Mr. Speaker, I wish to point out a real difference here. The impact of the tax cut 
that I have announced today is far more progressive than such a tax rate reduction would be. 
 
A family of four with an income of $13,000 or less will receive a greater tax saving from our tax cut 
than from a reduction in the tax rate to 34 per cent. 
 
In fact, the flat $100 tax cut is equivalent to a reduction in the provincial income tax rate from 40 per 
cent to 16 per cent for a family of four earning $7,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — For the same family with an income of $10,000, the $100 tax cut has the same effect 
as a reduction in our rate from 40 per cent to 30 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this progressive income tax reduction will return over $27 million in the next fiscal year to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Adjustments will be made to payroll deductions commencing July 1, 1975. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the printed text of my speech there are some tables which vividly illustrate the impact of 
these tax changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now summarize our revenue structure and fiscal position for 1975-76. 
 
Our revenue forecasts have assumed continued economic growth in the province but at somewhat 
reduced rates because of downturns in both national and international economies. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
839 

 

E & H tax receipts are expected to reach $139 million, an increase of 16 per cent over anticipated 
1974-75 receipts. 
 
Individual income taxes are estimated at $169.7 million including the proposed reduction in provincial 
income tax. Corporate income tax receipts based on a continued deductibility of royalties as an income 
tax expense are estimated at $43,300,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have clearly stated our intention to obtain for the people of this province a fair share of 
the profits from resource production. Under the mineral income tax and royalty surcharge, the additional 
profits from higher oil prices will continue to be directed to the Energy and Resource Development 
Fund. This fund is to be used to develop energy and other resources in Saskatchewan. The amount in the 
fund currently stands at more than $161 million. It is our intention to transfer, if necessary, $35 million 
from the Energy Fund to provide sufficient revenue to offset the cost of the gasoline tax reduction of 
seven cents a gallon and the related Farm Cost Reduction program. In addition, we intend to take the full 
value of the regular Crown royalty into the Consolidated Fund to cover part of our lost equalization 
entitlement resulting from higher oil revenues. Petroleum and natural gas revenues will amount to 
almost $75 million in the next fiscal year. 
 
In response to rapidly rising prices for potash, we introduced the potash reserve tax last year to obtain a 
greater share of the profits for the benefit of the people of this province. In 1975-76, potash revenues 
including the reserve tax are estimated at $118,900,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — In March 1974 the first Ministers agreed that any additional oil revenue set aside in 
special capital funds would be excluded from the calculation of equalization payments. However, the 
Federal Government’s unilateral decision to include one-third of the additional oil revenues in the 
equalization formula has sharply reduced our equalization entitlement. For 1975-76, equalization 
receipts are estimated at approximately $91 million. 
 
Receipts from government enterprises and other funds including the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and 
SaskTel are estimated at a little over $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will summarize our fiscal position for 1975-76. 
 
We anticipate budgetary cash inflows to reach $1,143,700,000. Budgetary expenditures will amount to 
$1,140,600,000, an increase of 15.8 per cent over our revised 1974-75 estimate, leaving an estimated 
cash carry forward at the end of 1975-76, March 31st, 1976, is expected to reach $73.4 million. Mr. 
Speaker, that is our Budget. 
 
I am proud of this Budget because it marks the culmination of our first four-year program – a New Deal 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
840 

 

Mr. Robbins: — The new directions of that program can be highlighted by a few comparisons between 
the 1975-76 estimates and the last budget put before this House by the former government in 1971. 
These comparisons are based on gross expenditures in each case. Saskatchewan’s basic industry — 
agriculture — up 244 per cent over 1971; Health up 54 per cent; operating grants for schools up 77 per 
cent; operating grants to universities up 75 per cent; direct relief to property taxpayers up to 212 per 
cent; and, Mr. Speaker, for grants and cities, towns and villages, including only one-fifth of the five-year 
Community Capital Fund, next year’s estimates are up more than 1,600 per cent over 1971. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, even taking into account the effects of inflation, we’ve come a long way 
since 1971. Mr. Speaker, I must point out that this would not have been possible without a dramatic 
increase in the revenue yield from our resources — up from $34 million in 1971 to over $200 million 
estimated in the coming year and that does not include revenue directed to the Energy and Resource 
Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we promised a fair return to the people of Saskatchewan for their resources. We promised 
and we’ve delivered. To our farmers, urban dwellers and small businessmen, we promised and we have 
delivered. To our senior citizens, to the sick and the handicapped, and to those on low incomes, we 
promised, Mr. Speaker, and we have delivered. To our northern residents, we promised and we’ve 
delivered. To the young, wherever they live and work, we promised better education, bursaries and jobs, 
or a chance to get started in farming. We promised, Mr. Speaker, and we have delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we promised the people of Saskatchewan a New Deal and we delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — I imagine they would like to take the question, 
wouldn’t they, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should like first to say that there has been an insult to the Members of this House on both sides and I 
don’t know why it has happened. Because it happened earlier in this Session when we had the Throne 
Speech. The Throne Speech was not delivered to Members on this side or that side of the House until 
after it was over. The visitors in the gallery have had a copy of this Budget, I presume gotten from 
outside even before the Members on that side or the Members on this side. Now, I am sure it wasn’t 
intentional but it is just another example of the inefficiency and the bungling of that Government 
opposite. 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
841 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget asks us, the Members of this Legislative Assembly, to grant $1.1 billion plus, 
over $1,100 million, to be spent in the next year by that NDP Government of Mr. Blakeney’s, a 
government that has proven by the individual actions of its Ministers and the total actions as a 
government to be the most incompetent, the most bungling, the most inefficient and the most arrogant 
government in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I think it is interesting to look at the cover of this Budget. If you look at the cover of 
last year’s Budget they had on it the picture of someone drilling an oil well. This year, what have they 
got on the cover? They have a field, a vacant field, a farm field. Well, I think this is really the final result 
of Mr. Blakeney’s great Saskatchewan auction. No oil wells, no mills, no mines, no people and that’s 
what is exactly reflected in this Budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Here’s an oil well. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Hold it up with pride because the only way you will find an oil well if the NDP stay in 
power is to look inside of this Budget to find a picture of it. You won’t find one out in the field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a little difficulty taking pictures of oil 
fields. They started SaskOil, they bought some oil fields and rights from other oil companies. They have 
what they call a Step Out program, they stepped out about a foot and a half and they sunk another oil 
well and they got a little bubble. It wasn’t really a gusher, it was kind of a drip. So in order to do what 
you do with an oil well, I don’t know much about oil wells, in fact I know so little I could qualify to be 
the Minister of Mineral Resources in the NDP Government. But I am told when you do get an oil well 
you cap it. But no, no, he was told not to cap it because he had to send to Regina for the Department of 
Information to get a picture of this great oil well. So the men standing around say, “For God’s sake let us 
cap it, we haven’t got much pressure now,” but no, we had to wait to get the picture. Finally the camera 
got there but the little drip had kind of disappeared like this. As a matter of fact it cost them several 
thousand dollars to recover the drilling equipment and several days of lost time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is really a do-nothing Budget. It offers a little bit but nothing of any consequence to 
anyone in this province. As a matter of fact the first time the Members have come to life is when I arose. 
They showed very little life, I thought they would be smiling and giggling and pounding, thinking here 
is our passport to four more years on those comfortable benches, free from the necessity of making an 
honest living and back in politics for another four years. I thought the Ministers would be saying, what a 
wonderful Budget, now we’ve got those government cars for another four years. But no, they sat there 
and on cue they applauded from time to time. I said 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
842 

 

it does a little bit for some people and not much for anyone. 
 
Let’s talk about whom it doesn’t do much of anything for. Let’s talk about the senior citizens. This is the 
most disgraceful action for the senior citizens of this province, the most insulting offer ever made to a 
group of senior citizens since the people threw out six-buck Harris back in Ottawa about 20 years ago. 
They have a new name for Mr. Robbins — 14 buck. What does this Budget say . . . 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — $20 is better than you did. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Oh, no it doesn’t. You ought to read the Budget, Mr. Blakeney. This Budget says, “We 
will give to the senior citizens $224, guaranteed.” Now in April of this year, the Federal Government is 
raising the pension to $210 guaranteed for a single person. In Saskatchewan they are going to be raised 
to $224, an increase of a measly, rotten, stinking $14 a month. I can read the Budget, I know what it 
says, it says, “This Government will guarantee every resident of Saskatchewan 65 or over an income 
level of $224 a month.” Now starting in April every resident of this province, 65 years and over will be 
guaranteed by the Federal Government $210 a month. Now if you are saying that you will add $20, you 
can read that either way, fine, that’s better but it is still not very good. As a matter of fact, let me point 
out that you are going to spend, if you take the most charitable view of what you said, you are going to 
spend $7 million on our senior citizens. The fact is you have spent $13 million on the hogs in this 
province this year. Twice as much, $13 million for the hogs, as you give to the senior citizens. I feel 
sorry for you people when Joe Phelps and the rest of the senior citizens get finished taking the hide off 
you and you’ve got it coming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — The senior citizens asked for a minimum of $350 and you offered them $224. They 
asked for a minimum of $500 a couple and you offered them $425. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wrong again. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — No, I’m not wrong again, you had better read your own Budget. 
 
Now the next step they came to was to the income tax. The income tax reduction of $100. Now as far as 
it goes, that’s fine. But all you’ve done, and let the people of the province recognize this, is to put the 
income tax back to where you found it when we left office. It was 34 per cent and it is back to 34 per 
cent again. As a matter of fact since you came to office and a time when you didn’t really need it, you 
have taken in extra money in income taxes from the working people, the farmers and the business people 
of this province, over $100 million in extra income tax. You are offering them, not this year but next 
year, $27 million. In the five taxes that the people of this province pay — E & H tax, income tax, 
business tax, gasoline tax and other license fees — you have in fact raised the tax on the people of this 
province since you came to office by over 100 per cent, from about $237 million, 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
843 

 

this year it will be almost $500 million. That’s what is in the Budget. 
 
Oh, there are a lot of things in the Budget, there are some things we welcome, but what’s not in the 
Budget? Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in the Budget to talk about taking some positive action to clean up 
the mess that goes on in that Government. The mess that is uncovered by the auditor, the mess in Mr. 
Messer’s Hog Commission where the auditor couldn’t even sign the forms because there was so much 
mismanagement of public funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Brockelbank’s Department, again the auditor had to point out mismanagement of 
funds. In the DNS, we had this a year ago, half a million dollars in shoe boxes; $100,000 overpayment 
just in one office. We find it now is $580,000 overpayment in one office. What happened to the promise 
to clean it up last year? I’m sure we will get a promise to clean it up this year. There is nothing in there 
to say what they will do about the situation with Mr. Thorson, where he paid out a year ago, illegally, 
over $12,000 of taxpayers’ money to Service Printers, a company wholly owned by the NDP. The 
handling of government funds as pointed out by the independent Provincial Auditor must make anyone 
suspicious of the performance of that Government. 
 
Take a look at Mr. Smishek and his new hospital. He stands up and talks about what he has done for the 
sick people. The hospital situation in this city of Regina is a disgrace. He’s got a $20 million hospital 
that has been completed for over two years. Who is over there? Sixteen or 17 people recovering from 
hangnail operations. Mr. Speaker, this is the most expensive first-aid operation anywhere in this nation. 
He says he is going to start a drug plan. Oh, he says, this isn’t a deterrent fee. You know when the 
Liberals charged a little fee to go to the doctor, we wanted to call it the utilization fee, but they said, oh 
no, it is a tax on the sick and the old, and the blind and the halt and the lame. So they become the 
Government, now they put what they would like to call a fee on the druggist, a service fee. Well, by any 
other name it still stinks, it’s a deterrent fee and you know it but again we’ve got a promise that they will 
start that plan. I suggest that the only way that plan will start, Mr. Blakeney, is if you remove the 
Minister in charge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — But the real tragedy of this Budget and the real tragedy of that Government is a golden 
opportunity that’s missed. In this Budget, there is a reaffirmation of the same narrow, short sighted 
stand, that the NDP intend and will continue to take if they stay in office, in the development of our 
resources. I see Mr. Brockelbank sitting in the back, let me say this, ever since this province first became 
a province, successive governments from Walter Scott, down through Liberals, Mr. Anderson as a 
Conservative, Mr. Patterson, Tommy Douglas, Ross Thatcher, Woodrow Lloyd, they have all had one 
thing in common, they did 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
844 

 

their best to have people come in here and help us develop our resources. But we found, successive 
governments, that people were attracted elsewhere to find oil or coal, uranium or minerals. We got our 
share but it was with difficulty. The oil industry first was invited in here, Mr. Brockelbank and Mr. 
Douglas gave them a solemn promise that the Government of the day, the CCF, would keep their word 
and they would never be socialized. And they did keep their word. Mr. Blakeney was a Member of that 
Government. Mr. Douglas kept his word and Mr. Blakeney broke his word and it’s becoming a pattern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — They brought in potash in the early 1950s. Mr. T.C. Douglas invited the Potash 
Company of America to come in here and develop a potash mine and everybody in this province was 
thrilled. At long last we were going to get another prop under our economy, to get off the backs of our 
farmers. Mr. Douglas and Mr. Brockelbank said if you come in here we will give you fair treatment. In 
fact, they gave them a tax deal that went to 1981. They kept their word, but again, Mr. Blakeney broke 
his word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Now let’s see what’s happening. For years we were in a seller’s market. It didn’t matter 
what Government we had, we had trouble enticing people to come in and help us develop our resources. 
Pulp mills — and I should tell some of the older Members the conniptions the old CCF went through to 
get a pulp mill. In 1956 and 1960 they went all over this continent and they offered everything but the 
kitchen sink and perhaps including the kitchen sink to anybody who would come in and develop our 
forest products and put in a pulp mill. They couldn’t get one. We got one from the United States, that is 
there now, the greatest single thing that has ever happened in Prince Albert and district and they haven’t 
changed it one iota. 
 
Something changed in 1972. The world became aware of the shortage of the commodities that we have 
— coal, potash, uranium, timber, sodium sulphate, oil. Suddenly investors were flocking to our door. 
Mr. Blakeney was given an opportunity never presented to any Premier before in the history of this 
province — not to Woodrow Lloyd, or Tommy Douglas, or Ross Thatcher, or anyone else. They said, 
“We’ll come in.” Instead of enticing them, instead of having to give them concessions as we all did, he 
just set his own rules. They needed us more than we needed them. What did he do? He slammed the 
door and turned his back on them. He took a small dog-in-the-manger, narrow view of our resources and 
our people. With the result we have lost over $500 million worth of potash development that would have 
produced thousands of jobs, put a base under our economy, something we have dreamed about since we 
first became a province. He turned his back and drove out the oil industry. Not the Federal Government, 
but Bill 42 in 1973. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
845 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That’s what drove the oil industry out and at a time when we need them and Canadians 
need them the most. 
 
Friends, what happened? The result is that we have lost, or we are in the process of losing, the greatest 
opportunity we’ve ever had. 
 
And they did something else, and it’s typical of that Government. They said, we’ll do it the government 
way. Well, I’ve got no objection of the Government going into business by themselves, or with anyone 
else, if no one else will come in as in the case of the pulp mill. By all means then as Saskatchewan 
people, use whatever we have to use to develop our resources. We didn’t have to do that. There are all 
kinds of people, including Canadians, ready to come in and develop our potash and we can set the 
toughest rules possible. All they want is a fair deal. Not satisfied, Mr. Blakeney said, “We’ll set up the 
Saskatchewan Potash Corporation.” What does he do? Well he sets up a board of directors. Who is on 
the board of directors? They are fine people, at least I think most of them are fine people. He makes 
David Dombowsky the chairman of the board. He’s a fine man — he was my Deputy Minister. He 
knows a great deal about government. What is his experience in business, outside of the fact that he has 
talked to a few businessmen lately — nil. Mind you, compared to the rest of them, he has at least talked 
to some businessmen. I suppose they made him chairman on the theory that in the land of the blind a 
one-eyed man is king. But who did they back him up with? Mr. Don Ching, and what are his 
qualifications to operate a great multibillion dollar potash mining company in a tough world 
competition? But as Mr. Roy Romanow’s partner and a good NDP, and of course he knows totally 
nothing about business so he must be qualified. Then we’ve got John Burton. Now John Burton is really 
qualified. He was defeated twice as an NDP candidate. Every time he is defeated they hire him. He was 
a poison pen speech writer for the backbenchers. They had to get rid of him because they couldn’t 
pronounce the big words he was using. However, what is his experience in business? Next to nil, he 
doesn’t know anything about it. There is Mr. Beatty, Deputy Minister of Finance, from the University. 
Fine man, great man. Doing a fine job I presume trying to keep those fellows straight. He isn’t able to 
make it, but I’m sure he is doing his best, explaining to Mr. Robbins that being a Finance Minister isn’t 
just about being able to recite a whole lot of figures from memory, it’s to know something of what’s 
behind those figures. However, what does he know about business? Nothing. These are the men who are 
going to guide the destiny of that $100 or $130 million potash mine. 
 
Then they started SaskOil. Now they’ve got a real board of directors at SaskOil. Board of directors, 
Hon. Elwood Cowley, chairman, experienced school teacher. Fine, they’ve got to have a Cabinet 
Minister. There’s no complaint about that. Lawrence Bigrash — chairman. They tell me he was a 
geologist and knew something about it so they got rid of him. The one reason is he said, “I’m getting 
$25 a day being on the board, I can make all kinds of money being a consultant” so he quit and now 
they’ve got him as a consultant. He knew something about it and they got rid of him really quick. J. Ron 
Duncan, vice-chairman, international representative of the OCAW. Well now, why would they hire him. 
Well, he’s a union man, no reason why union people shouldn’t be represented. I think one thing, he’s a 
representative of the Oil-Chemical Atomic Workers. They 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
846 

 

said, he’s in oil-chemical, he must know something about oil and they put him on the board of SaskOil. 
Paul Lepp, a lawyer and a very fine fellow. We used to have his partner. One thing I notice about law 
firms, including the Premier’s and the Attorney General’s, you know they have several quivers in their 
bow. They are never stuck. They say, Liberal Government — there’s a Liberal lawyer; Conservative 
Government — there’s a Conservative lawyer; and they put him out. They have a little trouble with 
NDP because most lawyers are too intelligent to be NDP, but they’ve got one — Paul Lepp. Fine fellow, 
but what does he know about oil? Just about as much as Elwood Cowley and I do — nothing. Then they 
put Gord Beatty, what a hard-working fellow. Poor old Gordon, I hope he takes some lessons in oil and 
potash because he is on all the boards of directors. They’ve got Barrett Halderman, secretary. I don’t 
know anything about him, or her, or who. Unfortunately, it may be a bit humourous, but it’s tragic. We 
have more resources in this province than they have in Alberta. We could, if we used common sense and 
fair play and decency, have all the revenue entitled to our people who own the resources, still see this 
development take place. 
 
One of the ironies in this Budget is, this government has the gall to say they are going to do something 
about helping other countries. Right now Premier Blakeney is denying people in India, Bangladesh and 
other starving nations the very potash they need to grow the food they are starving for the want of. And 
that’s a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — If he had started two years ago to encourage the additions to our potash mines that were 
ready to go, we would be putting more potash on the world market to grow more food to feed more 
hungry bellies. Mr. Blakeney said ‘no’. You can’t dig up a spoonful of potash unless I do it, or my 
Deputy Minister or my little gang unless you do it the socialist way. He stopped them in their tracks and 
he stands condemned. And then he has the effrontery to put in this that they are going to give a lousy $1 
million if they can find some people that want to run around sticking their noses in somebody’s business 
in some other country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that we have got in this Budget is more for the Land Bank. They all 
applauded over there and I was happy to see them because they haven’t changed their minds one bit. Mr. 
Blakeney stands up and says ‘You can buy the land’. That was a lie, he knows he tells a lie, it is not true 
and I challenge him now to get up and tell us where the farmer has the option to buy that land. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I don’t think the Leader of the Opposition wants to use that term in the 
House here. If he feels that it’s not according to the facts, that’s his say so, but I wish he would retract 
those words of his to lying. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — He tells things not according to the facts. He tells things that aren’t true. He tells things 
that in any other Chamber but this would warrant even harsher criticism than that and he knows it. If he 
doesn’t know it then he had better get a new lawyer and he had better go and talk to some other law 



 
March 14, 1975 

 
847 

 

firm. In the Land Bank Act and in the regulations on the lease form it clearly says that government or 
commission may sell the land, it’s their option, the farmer or lessor has no option at all. 
 
Not only that — you don’t intend to sell any land. You stand up here and you say as the Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer), it’s a new land tenure system. New — nonsense. They’ve got it behind the 
Iron Curtain and they call it by its right name. “Stink Farming”. Socialism or Communism and that’s 
exactly what you are doing and I tell you the farmers don’t like it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, this Budget adds how many more civil servants? Gordon can’t add them 
up — he’s got a machine here and I guarantee that they have added at least another 500, 600 or 700 new 
civil servants. Last year they added 2,500, the year before 1,000. They boast about the new jobs. I tell 
you they are landed on the taxpayers’ backs working for the Government. I don’t call them civil 
servants. Civil servants are people who have worked there long, many years and are excellent people. 
But most, not all of them, but a great many of these people they have loaded on the backs of the 
taxpayers of this province are in no way civil servants in the proper sense of the word. They are running 
out in politics, they are involved in NDP propaganda. You’ve added at least another 500 or 600 I 
guarantee you, bringing to the total of over 4,000 new people working for this Government and there are 
17,000 people less. This Budget guarantees that the philosophy of the NDP to control, to dictate, to grab 
more land, to grab more power, unfortunately will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have a great deal more to say about this Budget, what it does and what it doesn’t do. 
But I will say one thing that it does not do — it does not give the people of this province any new hope 
that the Government has a new idea. A tired recital of what they’ve done, not one new idea to take 
advantage of the tremendous opportunities offered to this province and its people in 1975 and the years 
ahead. For that reason, I will have a great deal more to say and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:37 o’clock p.m. 
 


