
























































Hansard: December 17, 1975


1233 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

24th Day 
 

Wednesday, December 17, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

WILL LUMBER MARKET BE IMPAIRED BECAUSE OF POTASH NATIONALIZATION 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if 
I could direct a question - I was going to direct it to the Hon. Mr. Messer, but I notice he is not here, the 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman isn’t here, as a matter of fact there aren’t very many Cabinet Ministers here, but I 
shall direct it to the Attorney General. 
 
I have reason to believe, and I can’t disclose my source, but I wonder if the Attorney General could 
confirm that there is a concern in the Saskatchewan lumber industry that the Government’s 
nationalization of the potash industry is likely to impair, and seriously impair our lumber market which 
is largely American? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, and that of 
the Government’s, we’ve not received any such notification of any such concern. Nor to the best of my 
knowledge, again I must confess that I am not as familiar on this on a day-to-day basis as perhaps I 
should be, nor do we perceive of any such difficulty. In any event, if such difficulty were to arise there is 
no indication that it would be as a consequence of any action taken, or about to be taken, in the area of 
potash. 
 
MR. PENNER: — By way of a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I recognize the Attorney General may be 
at a bit of disadvantage here. But I wonder if in view of recent diplomatic concerns expressed in 
Washington and in Ottawa by the departing American Ambassador and the recent change in government 
in British Columbia, has the Attorney General heard or is he aware of any concern from any one in the 
industry that Saskatchewan markets may be impaired because of your proposed action with the potash 
industry? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, I’m not familiar with that. And as far as I know the Government is not 
aware of any such situation. I don’t want to go quite as far as labelling that type of rumor as being 
unfounded, but it would come about as close I suppose to labelling it unfounded as I have by way of 
knowledge. The Premier has indicated to earlier questions and in his answers that it is not a provincial 
government’s business to be involved 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1234 
 

in international relations but certainly I think I can make this comment that very recent statements from 
authorities and officials at a much higher level than myself have indicated that there has been no serious 
impairment of US-Canadian relationships. And certainly not as any direct consequence of anything that 
the Government may or may not be contemplating to do in the potash area. 
 
MR. PENNER: — By way of a second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because I have information that the industry could in fact be in considerable difficulty within a 90-day 
period could I ask whether or not your Government is prepared to make inquiries and forestall any 
possible loss or damage to our lumber industry? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member will appreciate how difficult it is for me or for 
anybody from the Government to respond to that type of question. Because the Hon. Member says that 
he has information that there might be some difficulty. All I can say is that certainly - I stand to be 
corrected on a day-to-day basis - but certainly there has been no such communication of those 
difficulties to the duly elected Government and the appropriate Ministers. If such communications are 
received or if indeed they have been received as a result of the last two or three days or so, the 
Government will give as much attention to trying to overcome that as is possible. With all due respect to 
the Hon. Member, it doesn’t help the Government, the lumber industry or for that mater the House very 
much to act on information which the Hon. Member apparently has, but is not prepared to divulge, and 
which apparently the Government does not have. So to simply answer your question, when and if we get 
that type of a plea, or we thought that type of a difficulty, I am sure that the Ministers of the Crown 
responsible will do all that they can to make sure that no permanent or serious damage occurs. 
 

IS HIGHWAY SPEED LIMIT TO BE REDUCED TO 55. 
 
MR. D. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, is this Government planning to reduce the speed limit 
on Saskatchewan highways to 55 miles per hour? Would the real Minister Responsible for the highways 
please answer this question. 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, any change in the policy of the Government 
with respect to highway speed limits will be announced in due course. It will be announced by the 
Government. May I say in passing that I think there is nothing inappropriate for two or three Ministers 
of the Crown to express opinions on a subject of public importance as long as they do not each of them 
purport to be stating settled government policy. I think the matter of the highway speed limit is a matter 
for appropriate public discussion. I think it is in no sense inappropriate for Ministers of the Crown to 
comment thereon and at least in our Government, Ministers of the Crown occasionally have different 
views. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1235 
 

IS MEMBER FOR REGINA CENTRE TO BE APPOINTED TO MEDIATION BOARD  RE 
RENT CONTROL 

 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I had wanted to direct a question to the 
Minister of Co-operation and Co-operatives (Mr. Shillington) but in his absence I shall direct my 
question either to the Premier or the Attorney General. 
 
I should like to know if the Hon. Member for Regina Centre has, or is going to be appointed to the 
mediation board, involving differences between landlords and tenants? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not quite sure whether I understood the question. Did I understand the Hon. 
Member to ask whether or not the MLA for Regina Centre and the Minister of Co-operation was going 
to be appointed to a board, either the mediation board or rentalsman. The answer to that is, No. 
 

SNOWMOBILE LEGISLATION 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Attorney General. 
 
In light of the confusion and the mounting opposition to the snowmobile legislation, we should like to 
renew our demand to have this legislation withdrawn. Is the Attorney General at this time prepared to 
advise the House and the people of Saskatchewan that that legislation will be withdrawn? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to make that statement today. As I indicated in 
earlier questions directed to me by my learned friend for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) we are taking into 
consideration the representations being made not only by Members opposite but by others. 
 
I would simply want to reiterate again for the Legislature that the withdrawal of the legislation is not 
free of difficulty, mainly because what the purported legislation tries to do is to cut down on what has 
been up to now the traditional responsibility of the farmer, or what might be the traditional responsibility 
of the farmers in the case of a snowmobile trespasser and damage to that snowmobile. To withdraw the 
legislation might very well mean that the farmers of Saskatchewan have an exposed risk, an increased 
risk over and above what they might have had prior to the Vienot versus Kerr Addison case which I had 
mentioned before. What we sought to do was to limit what we thought was negative aspects of that Kerr 
Addison - Vienot case by this amendment and restore the liability of relationships to what they were 
prior to this common law decision. If we withdraw it this could be very difficult. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Attorney General is getting into the debate which is possibly 
reciprocated on the other side of the House. I think the Attorney General had answered the question at 
the beginning but there is a danger that we may get into a debate on the Bill now. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1236 
 

MR. WIEBE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, 
and I am sure the Attorney General is aware, are now supporting our position that the Bill be withdrawn, 
and I would ask that the Attorney General give serious consideration to this and that it be withdrawn 
prior to the Christmas recess to enable many of us who will be going home to our constituencies to 
assure our constituents that the Bill has been withdrawn. And might I as well suggest for the 
consideration of the Attorney General that this Bill be put before the Standing Agricultural Committee 
of this Legislature and we have an opportunity to study that legislation and in turn come back with 
recommendations that are acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan shortly after the New Year. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again, without trying to answer in a debating manner, I believe that 
the first call for a withdrawal came only yesterday from the Members opposite. The position of the SFA 
certainly was formulated before yesterday. I am not sure whether the SFA is following the Liberal party 
or vice a versa, that doesn’t matter particularly, other than the fact that the Government has to consider 
whether or not we want to withdraw legislation which, as I have said the effect of which will be to add 
far greater legal risks on the farmers than they have up to now. If I might say so, I thought there was a 
pretty good story in the Regina Leader-Post a day or so ago, explaining in layman’s language what the 
laws have been and what we seek to do by this amendment. I think if the SFA and other farming people 
get to know and understand that position there may not be such a clarion call in some quarters for the 
withdrawal. So to answer the question, we are considering the question of withdrawal, we are 
considering the question of referring it to a committee and an appropriate announcement will be made in 
due course. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — A second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister then give us the assurance 
today that his announcement as to the withdrawal could be given prior to the Christmas recess. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I can give the assurance that the moment that the Government decides what to 
do with the legislation and all of the consequences on farming people, which I think could hurt a lot of 
the farming people, once we make that decision, we will announce it as soon as possible through the 
Legislature. It may be before the Christmas break. It may not. A lot depends on when the Legislature 
recesses. 
 

GOVERNMENT POLICY RE POTASH HEADQUARTERS IN SASKATOON 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of 
the Day. I realize there have been four questions asked but since there were no supplementaries to two 
of them could I beg the indulgence of the House to ask a brief question? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the Member attempting to ask a supplementary 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1237 
 

question about the speed limit, or about the landlord-tenant question that was placed by the Member? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — It is a separate question, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder if I could beg leave to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am in the hands of the House. We have had four questions. One more. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Premier. During the question period 
yesterday the Attorney General outlined an answer pertaining to government policy, I would ask the 
Premier whether he and the Government of Saskatchewan back that outline of the way government 
reaches a decision as it relates to the head office in Saskatoon of the Potash Corporation and so on. Does 
the Government of Saskatchewan and the Premier stand behind the Attorney General in his answer to 
the question of yesterday? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the answer to that is ‘yes’. We stand behind the answer and 
our interpretation of the answer. We certainly don’t stand behind some of the interpretations of the 
answer given by the Members opposite. So long as I am permitted to give my interpretation of what the 
Attorney General said, indeed I do stand behind it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — By way of supplementary then, Mr. Speaker. I would just read a part of the answer 
of yesterday. In the first answer: 
 

The Government, when it comes to the final decision as to where the PCS headquarters should or 
should not be located, we will obviously have to take a look at all of the factors, one of which is the 
atmosphere of the business community. 

 
And further in the second answer: 
 

It is a factor, and I repeat, something that the Government really has to take into account 
 
And in the third answer: 
 

It is a factor in a variety of factors that the Government must take into account when it ultimately 
decides where the head office of the PCS should be located. 

 
My supplementary question then is: Does the Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan stand 
behind that answer that it will take into account the political involvement of organizations within a 
community before it decides to establish either a head office or a benefit for that community? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That, Mr. Speaker, is the sort of problem. The Member read out what the 
Attorney General had said, i.e. that we will take into account the attitude of the business community. 
The answer to that is, ‘yes’. The Member then says: Will we 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1238 
 

then take into the account the political opposition of the Board of Trade or some organization? The 
answer to that is, ‘no’. I am not prepared to accept the particular interpretation the Member puts on this. 
 
Let me put this proposition. If the Board of Trade of Yorkton comes and says we want you to do 
something, we want you to put the head office of the Power Corporation in Yorkton. Should we ignore 
that representation? I think the answer to that is, we should not ignore the representation. We should 
consider that representation for what it may be worth. Similarly, if the Board of Trade of Yorkton comes 
in and says, either directly or indirectly, that it does not want the head office of the Potash Corporation 
in Yorkton, presumably we should consider that too. They can say either of those yes’s or no’s in 
different ways. 
 
On the point of whether or not we should consider the climate of the business community, it is obviously 
one factor, not an overwhelming factor, but it is clearly one factor. We have employees whom we ask to 
live in the community. If the atmosphere is going to be hostile, it is going to be more difficult to get 
employees to live there. That is a fact of life. 
 
I don’t know whether businessmen in Saskatoon would be hostile to employees of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I don’t know that. But it is a legitimate question to be considered by a 
government. I am not in any sense assessing whether or not they would be. But it is a legitimate question 
to be considered, a factor to be considered among others and to the extent I have indicated, but not the 
question of whether or not somebody is or is not free to put ads in the paper. The Attorney General made 
his position clear on that. So with respect to the precise words of the Attorney General the answer is 
‘yes’. 
 
MR. STEUART: — You should have been a lawyer. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to some of the remarkable interpretations put on those words by 
Members who wish they were lawyers, the answer is, ‘no’. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, by way of a second supplementary. I certainly don’t wish I was a 
lawyer. By way of second supplementary, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier talks about the Board of Trade 
either asking for a head office or against the head office, one can certainly understand that position. But 
does the Premier believe that by suggesting that the Government of Saskatchewan is wrong in a 
particular act that any organization of any community is communicating that it does not want certain 
benefits? For example, if the SFL were to criticize the Government and the SFL’s headquarters were in 
Regina, would the Government take that factor into account deciding that the labor community of that 
particular community was opposed to the establishment of that benefit in the community? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the question casts a fairly wide 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1239 
 

net in itself. I don’t think that the fact that any organization expresses an opinion in opposition to the 
Government’s policy is relevant in itself. I think this doesn’t, this simply shows opposition and that’s 
fair game. This is the sort of society we live in. 
 
If in fact it appears, that the nature of the criticism is such as to put in the minds of some people the idea 
that there would be general hostility to that organization, then of course, the answer is the other way. 
You make your own assessment of the particular style of opposition and whether or not, in your 
judgment, the business community in Saskatoon is reflecting a point of view which you would say that 
they would be hostile to the organization there. 
 
If the answer is yes, then we should obviously take it into account. If the answer is no, we shouldn’t. I 
believe there is perhaps a legitimate area of difference of opinion here, but the Attorney General has 
given his personal view and I take it he’s as entitled to have personal views as are Members opposite. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier would answer a question just by way of 
clarification on this business of head office? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think that Members are trying something new on the Speaker, and it’s called 
clarification. I’ve detected it before and if the Assembly feels they want to have a clarification period I’d 
be quite willing to go along with it. But I may be offending some of the Members in the House who do 
not feel that we need that and they feel it should be done under the supplementaries, which are for the 
purpose of seeking clarification of the answer that is given. I would suggest that if the Members want to 
proceed with a clarification period I am quite in agreement. 
 

DISCRIMINATION AGAINST BACKBENCHERS 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, it’s wonderful to finally be recognized. 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to make a representation to you on behalf of all backbenchers in this Assembly. 
Granted, being in the back benches may indicate the esteem that you’re held within your own party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — However, this afternoon I have attempted to get on my feet on four and I think 
five different occasions and with the exception of the last case a frontbencher has been recognized in 
every single instance, with the exception of once in the middle bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that I’m sure you are not deliberately attempting to discriminate against 
all backbenchers, may I beg leave to ask the Government a question on behalf of . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1240 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — That is a lengthy preamble to asking a question which has not yet been asked and I 
really can’t give you permission to ask the question. I will attempt at all times to get a sprinkling of 
backbenchers and frontbenchers, but occasionally I see frontbenchers who go like this . . . and that 
indicates something to me. I think we should proceed with the next order of business, which is Orders of 
the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

DEATH OF FORMER MEMBER - ALEXANDER D. CONNON 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders 
of the Day, if I may, I’m rising to recognize the passing of a former MLA and a personal friend. Before I 
do, I wonder if I could have permission to comment on a question that was raised by the Member for 
Eastview, Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner)? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Fine. It’s with some sorrow and regret, Mr. Speaker, that I inform the House of the 
passing of the now late Alec Connon, former Member of the Legislature from 1944 to 1948 for the 
Battlefords. 
 
Alec Connon was a Canadian National Railroad conductor for many years. He originated from Scotland 
and pioneered with his family in Manitoba. He married a Brandon girl who was the daughter of pioneers 
that fought in the early days with Woodsworth during the Winnipeg strike. 
 
Alec Connon had a colorful career. He was a very humane person. During the four years that he sat in 
this House, many of the people who sat with him can regale you with stories of his wit and occasional 
practical jokes enlivening the somewhat dull procedure that is part of the House at times. 
 
Alec made notable contributions during the period that he was in the Battlefords. He sponsored two 
particular projects, one, the renovation of what was in 1944 the shambles of what had been Fort 
Battleford. Alec Connon secured at the request of the late Campbell Innis who was a school inspector at 
that time and very, very interested in the artifacts and history of the Battlefords, secured the first grants 
from the Hon. Joe Phelps who was the Minister in charge of historic sites at that time. 
 
The money that was secured at that time was provided for the renovation and the rebuilding of what is 
now the national historic museum at Fort Battleford. This is now a national landmark and a credit to the 
Battlefords and certainly a credit now to the National Government, which took it over from the province 
in the mid-fifties. 
 
Secondly, he sponsored several Acts that had to do with the improvement of trade unions and the first 
Psychiatric Nurses Act for Saskatchewan. Prior to this the psychiatric nurses were not recognized as a 
group and were simply a group of people who were known as mental hospital nurses, guards, etc. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1241 
 

Alec Connon retired from the railroad in 1962 and was appointed labor representative on the 
Workmen’s Compensation Board throughout the early ’60s. He retired to Saskatoon in 1965. I’m sure 
his many friends and acquaintances will be sad to learn that Alec has passed from the scene. 
 
He leaves a wonderful family scattered throughout western Canada. He has been one of Saskatchewan’s 
great pioneers and certainly a great legislator and a great human being. 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that a number of Members would want 
to add a note, a word of tribute on the passing of Alec Connon, whom I knew well and perhaps some 
others knew well. I think it perhaps can be more properly done on a formal condolence motion and with 
the consent of the House I will undertake, along with the Clerk to prepare the appropriate motion and 
bring it in in the next day or two, so that Hon. Members may have an opportunity to express a word of 
tribute. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTION 
 

SITTING OF THE HOUSE 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Snyder (Moose Jaw 
South): 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, commencing Thursday, December 18, 1975, meet at 
10:00 o’clock a.m. each sitting day and there shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock p.m. until 2:30 
o’clock p.m., and that this order shall expire on December 31, 1975. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I would like to, at the conclusion of my brief remarks, move a motion which all 
Members will know seeks to extend the hours of sitting of the Legislature. I do so, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the fact that quite obviously we are here in a situation where there are no committees meeting like 
Crown Corporations committee or Public Accounts committee. No major work of the House is going on 
in the morning, unlike the situation that exists when the House reconvenes in the spring and we have 
Crown Corporations committee and so forth meeting. It seemed to the Government that this was an 
appropriate time to make good use of some of the mornings available to get on with the pressing 
business of the House. It is tendered, the motion, in the hope that we could accommodate not only the 
Government and its work schedule, but also to accommodate the Opposition, who I know will have a 
great deal to say about various matters which are on the Order Paper. This will allow both Government 
and Opposition to have additional innings, to have additional time to submit their respective positions. I 
have the feeling that perhaps this is a personal view that we’ve certainly had a good airing of some of 
the issues, almost to the point where we are repeating each other, but nevertheless that’s the right of all 
Members. I hope that with this motion and with this increased sitting time, we shall be able to, as I say, 
accommodate the plan of the Government work schedule and also to accommodate the Opposition. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) this 
resolution. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1242 
 

MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak briefly to this motion. The 
Attorney General gave every appearance of being very reasonable and plausible in his introduction of 
this motion. He will find us in turn reasonable and plausible in response. We want, probably contrary to 
his expectations, to support his resolution if he in turn will give some recognition to the particular 
problem that it creates for us. 
 
I can’t help but note in the way in which the Attorney General introduced his motion, that he used words 
of much softer note than the words he used in the corridor the other day speaking to the Press about the 
resolution. I’m not going to let it go by without commenting briefly on those words. Because you will 
recall, and we know very well over here, that the Attorney General, when he spoke to the Press about 
introducing this resolution, said that he was doing it to put an end to the Liberals’ delaying tactics in 
respect to the potash bills; he said to put an end to the Liberal filibuster of the bills, to stop the Liberal 
obstruction of the bills, is what he said. 
 
Now, he in that sense, outside the House in the corridor in introducing the motion, pretty freely admitted 
that his intention with this resolution and this motion is to cut the Liberals down in their opposition. If I 
was prone to exaggerate in the way the Attorney General is occasionally prone to exaggerate, I guess I 
would say he is bringing forward this resolution as a guillotine kind of measure on the opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — But, of course, not being given to that kind of exaggeration I won’t make the 
suggestion. 
 
But I will say this. We don’t much care what words the Attorney General or anyone else uses to describe 
what we are doing in respect to these bills. What we are doing is we are fighting and opposing 
legislation that we consider, implicitly and passionately, bad. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We have opposed it vigorously in debate and we will go on opposing it as 
vigorously as we can in the debate that follows. In respect to Bill 2 we have quite a number of speakers 
yet to speak and they will be speaking, I assure you, in very vigorous terms. 
 
I want, as I said, to be reasonable and plausible in the same way the Attorney General was and I said that 
we would be prepared to support you in your resolution if you in turn would be prepared to recognize 
the problem it poses for us and in turn support us in that problem. 
 
The problem is, that as you know we will be sitting, if the resolution goes through, both morning, 
afternoon and evening and sometimes, occasionally late into the night. Now the morning period is taken 
by most Members to make telephone calls, to and from constituents, to make enquiries of government 
departments, to handle their correspondence, to peruse bills, do their research and generally prepare for 
the sitting to come the next 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1243 
 

day. 
 
I say we are quite prepared to sit in the morning. Indeed, we would be prepared to commence morning 
sittings at 9:00 o’clock or even 9:30 in the morning, instead of at 10:00, if in turn you will free us in the 
evenings to do the kind of work that we have been doing in the mornings. 
 
We have been sitting, as you know, from 7:00 to 9:30 and occasionally from 7:00 to 10:00, as we did 
last night, leaving us no time to do the kind of work to which I have alluded to. So if you will support us 
in this concern, and relieve us of sitting in the evenings, we in turn, will be prepared to support your 
motion that we sit in the morning. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move an amendment to the resolution of the Attorney General, seconded by the 
Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone): 
 

That Government Resolution No. 2 be amended by adding in the fourth line thereof after the words 
P.M. that: The Assembly shall adjourn each sitting day at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continues concurrently. 
 
MR. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted a few brief remarks to 
address to this. I think the amendment offered by the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) adds 
very little time in terms of a week, to the amount of sitting of this Chamber. I appreciate some of the 
arguments of the Member opposite. Some of them, it seems to me, do not quite follow - contacting 
government departments and so on. I know most of the civil service work long hours, but most of them 
don’t answer the phone in the evening. However, I can appreciate the workload. I think the Member 
should appreciate that the Government in moving this motion, including the Attorney General who is a 
very busy individual outside this House as well as inside this House, has a very heavy workload and is 
prepared, as I am and as are other members of the Executive Council who have other duties outside the 
House also to fill, to sit morning, afternoon and evening. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of both 
giving the Opposition ample time to state their case on the legislation, but also with a view to advancing 
in terms of days, if not in terms of hours, the debate on these particular items, I will oppose the 
amendment and support the resolution as it originally stood. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, if I could address some very brief 
remarks to the amendment. I didn’t hear the remarks made by my colleague for Regina South (Mr. 
Cameron) but I hope that Members understand that the amendment does in fact allow for some increased 
time, in that we would pick up five mornings and take away three evenings. So there is a net increase in 
the amount of time available for debate, albeit not as much as had been proposed in the original motion. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1244 
 

I think the other point that I wish to make is that the workload that Members of our caucus have, is the 
kind of workload where we have to do a great deal of it on our own. I’m sure that all Members of the 
House realize we don’t have large research staffs, and I’m not saying that critically because the 
Government has, but we do not have large research staff and it means that we are in the Library and 
having to dig out material and we need to have a little bit of time to do that. 
 
I think also, with regard to the point made by the Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) and a statement that 
I read in the Press the other day from the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), that the intent was to allow 
more time for debate on the potash motions because we had asked for it. Please understand that the kind 
of time we have asked for is time in an elongated sense, so that the implications of the bills can be fully 
appreciated, not only by us, but by the public at large. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — And we feel that rather than compressing the time in terms of days, under which this 
debate would continue, that we ought to be stretching it out in terms of months, that time should be 
allowed for people to come to grips with understanding, and that time is becoming important because 
daily there is more and more feedback from people within the province, more and more questions being 
asked, and I submit that that’s the kind of time that we need, and the kind of time that surely the 
Members opposite would not object to, particularly in view of their repeated statements that they 
represent the people of the province, it’s a good deal for the people of the province, and there is no 
reason why we ought not to have this whole matter tabled and dealt with sometime after the New Year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I’m sorry, I will support the amendment, and if it’s approved, I shall support the 
Motion. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative caucus will not be supporting the amendment. We do 
not mind sitting morning, afternoon and evening. We hope that there will be something more productive 
out of the debate, and we will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to get into the debate on 
the resolution and the amendment. 
 
I am, as you know, an MLA representing a rural constituency. I don’t know about other MLAs, but I 
have asked my constituents to contact me with problems when they feel I may be of help. 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1245 
 

Since the opening of this legislation, I have had hundreds of calls from citizens in my area, with 
particular problems and asking me to give assistance. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — You should hear his phone ring. It rings constantly. 
 
MR. NELSON: — That’s a fact. I have asked these people to contact me either by letter and phone, and 
with the mail strike, they seem to have chosen the phone. There isn’t a morning that I am able to answer 
all the calls that have been taken in the Legislature, the afternoon or the evening, let alone answering 
those that are calling in. Possibly, Mr. Speaker, as the fellows chuckle on the other side, it may be 
because there was an NDP Member, or Members representing the area I now represent, and there is 
certainly a big backlog of problems that they did not look after. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — I would certainly invite them to come down and give me a hand on the phone. I 
would appreciate that. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Spend a morning in his office! 
 
MR. NELSON: — I, unlike some of the NDP Members, have continued answering my phone, and I 
have accepted calls. I might say at this time, any of my phone calls are from people expressing concern 
over the uncalled for rush of this Government by ramming through the legislation for the takeover of the 
potash industry. 
 
At this particular time of year, many people on the farm and in the rural areas are not as busy as during 
the farming season and they want their thoughts expressed through their elected representative, their 
MLA. Mr. Speaker, I believe the Government is denying the citizens of Saskatchewan their democratic 
right by keeping Members in this Assembly during the morning hours, when they are busy in their 
offices. I believe this is their exact intention. Not only does the Premier, the Attorney General and the 
Government not want to answer their phones, now they want to deny all the Members on this side of the 
House that right as well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — It is also perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General is using the same tactics 
in this House as he did with the City of Saskatoon. He has told the Board of Trade they do not have the 
right to even think different than this Government and now he is holding the same threat over this 
Assembly. 
 
I can understand why many of the Members opposite do not mind sitting in the mornings, and similarly, 
the Members to my left. They are not in their seats in the present hours we are using. Some Members 
wouldn’t be recognized if they came in that door over there. That seat hasn’t been filled since this 
Assembly started. Those opposite take their responsibilities very lightly. We, in the Liberal caucus 
intend to give good representation to our constituents, and we are doing that in the morning hours. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1246 
 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the Attorney General on behalf of this Government is only attempting to rush the 
potash bills through because he, and the Premier, know people in the province are getting upset, they are 
asking to be heard, he is afraid of having a commission appointed to hear them, and now he wants the 
MLAs in this Assembly so they cannot be contacted by their constituents. He is wrong in the potash 
gamble, he is wrong in this Resolution. I think he is trying to give a Christmas present to those sheep in 
the back benches on the far side. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER (from Government side): — Baa! Baa! 
 
MR. NELSON: — I will support the amendment and if approved, I will support the Motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, when we first saw this Motion on the Order 
Paper we should have known that it would turn into a political discussion and some speeches. We have 
in fact, through my colleague from Estevan (Mr. Larter) stated our position, but upon hearing Members 
on both sides of this House, I must confess frankly, that I’m afraid what is happening is they are taking a 
resolution or a motion before this House, designed to, I would hope, create some productivity in this 
House, and once again they have turned it into a political battle. I should like to assure the Hon. Member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that no group of people have a better record of sitting in this House during 
debate than the Conservative Party has. I would challenge him on that very issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the resolution and the amendment to the resolution. If I read this 
correctly, what is happening here is that the Government and the official Opposition are now taking this 
and using it as a double threat. It’s a double threat. The Government is saying this - look you people, 
you sit here, you sit here during the longest fall session in Saskatchewan’s history, no doubt. They are 
saying to all MLAs, the Government is saying to all MLAs in this House, you sit here until Christmas 
Eve, and if you don’t, then we’ll ram this Bill through anyway. Deny MLAs in this House on both sides, 
the opportunity of this family season of the year to go home and to be with their loved ones. That’s the 
threat. And then we turn around and the Opposition, in attempting to make a deal, if in fact I read them 
correctly, the official Opposition is saying, we’ll keep you here longer than that, as long as we can 
continue the filibustering with no productive activity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we cannot support the amendment, and I don’t know at this particular time if the 
Government is sincere in the accusations they have thrown back. We are quite prepared to sit and debate 
in this House, but we are not prepared to go into next week, and into the Christmas season with no 
productivity coming forth in this House, where we are in exactly the same position as we are today. 
 
MRS. E. G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the Motion and the 
amendment. 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1247 
 

It would to me on reading the rule books, that before such a request to change general rule No. 3 would 
be made, that there would have to be a very good reason. I can appreciate such a request coming before 
this Assembly in the spring, when those elected Members, by reason of their occupations, wish to 
complete their duties in this House so they can return to the farm and spring seeding. However, Mr. 
Speaker, I fail to see a similar urgency at this time, and I fail to appreciate the request that we hold extra 
sittings before Christmas. 
 
It was interesting to hear Members of the Progressive Conservative caucus say they don’t mind sitting 
morning, noon or night. And I would say to that, they certainly have lots of experience sitting. I would 
be more interested to know when they are going to get up and do some speaking. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — We too, would like to be home with our loved ones at Christmas, but the issue 
before us is a very urgent one and we were elected to carry out our responsibilities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — If indeed, the extra time requested is to rush through Bill 1 and Bill 2, I cannot 
accept that as a legitimate and valid reason. In fact, I am of the opinion that the people of Saskatchewan, 
and indeed the Members of this House, should be given more time to consider both Bills. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — At this time of the year we hear much about the Christmas rush, and I say this is 
a kind of a Christmas rush which we don’t need and we don’t like. And I’m not prepared to support it. 
 
I shall support the amendment, if it’s approved and support the Motion as amended. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for 
me to rise and speak against this amendment. 
 
It’s an amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, that Members to my right do not seem to understand that it takes 
twice as much, or perhaps ten times as much work and effort and energy to sit and listen to drivel as it 
does to speak that drivel. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — And the Members to my right might possibly be commended for their drivel. It’s 
amazing. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — He’s got the most awkward way to justify things that I’ve ever seen. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Very convoluted! 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1248 
 

MR. COLLVER: — If I knew what convoluted meant, Mr. Speaker, I’d certainly be able to reply to 
that particular catcall. I would have to look it up in a legal dictionary. 
 
It is our opinion that both the Members opposite and the Members to our right have taken this potash 
issue and are attempting to build it into a political football, in order that they can replenish their sagging 
troops and to replenish their sagging efforts politically. We believe that the Government has introduced 
this legislation and attempted to ram it down the throats of the people of this province in order to build 
an issue against, and to which, the left wing of their party, can suddenly get active again. The Members 
to our right are dragging out the debate with filibustering tactics . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — That’s your term. What does it mean? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — You read it in the dictionary. You look it up in the dictionary . . . with filibustering 
tactics, dragging out the debate in order to attempt to build up their sagging fortunes. Surely, this is too 
much of a gamble. Members opposite - a billion dollar gamble to play politics. And Members to my 
right, surely, surely, we drag this on and on and on to no obvious avail when there are 38 Members 
across and 22 Members here. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Why don’t you go home, then? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — We will continue, Mr. Speaker, to sit and listen. We will continue to attempt to 
learn something from the debate, but I sincerely wish that it was more meaningful and more learning 
full. 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, frankly I have had enough of this 
sanctimonious hypocrisy coming from my left. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — You reach a point when suddenly I guess you say, ‘enough is enough’. About 
the third or fourth day we were in this Legislature as rookies; all of a sudden we get this great lecture on 
what we shouldn’t do, what we should do. Coming from a veteran of the House like Mr. Thibault, or Mr. 
Kramer, who are deans of this House, I could probably accept it, but now when the same gentleman 
stands up and tells me how I’m going to fulfil my legislative responsibility, or how this party is going to 
fulfil its legislative responsibility, that’s too much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I think one thing that has been demonstrated in the past few weeks of this 
Legislature is that there is only one Opposition Party in this Legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — There’s one that is an Opposition Party and there 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1249 
 

is one that pretends to be. You have a choice when you come into this House in Opposition, you can 
either sit back and watch things go, or when something comes up that you are unalterably opposed to, 
that within your innermost convictions it is repulsive to you, and you fight it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Filibuster! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That is your word, and frankly I could care less if you do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Attorney General, I haven’t even had an opportunity to speak on Bill 2 yet. 
Now you call that a filibuster. All that we are suggesting over here, you have a Bill there that we find 
totally repugnant, and if it is a filibuster, to fight that thing with every means that is available in the 
Legislative Handbook, then we are doing it, and boy, I’m proud to be a part of it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I have always had a lot of respect for the Conservative Party, but 
you know I really don’t know what the Conservative Party is in this Legislature any more, because they 
really haven’t stated it. All we have had is sermons, well I don’t know what else you would call them. 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, when the time comes that a political party cannot find something in this 
Legislature with everything that the rules and the handbook made available to them, I suggest that it is a 
very, very sorry situation. One thing which I sincerely hope, that that last speech that that Member of the 
other party here, I sincerely hope that circulates in this province. I think very definitely that the voters, 
the people of Saskatchewan, will have some comment at some future date on that attitude. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — There isn’t one of you Members; I wouldn’t want 
us to shut anyone off . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have to begin by putting the matter back in some amount of perspective, 
because some of the things that I will be saying about an arrogant government may sound as if they are 
off the point, but they are not, they are very much on the point. Because the point of this Motion, and the 
way this Government has been handling the House is that we have a very arrogant Government, a 
Government that I suggest, perhaps is on its last legs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — And a Government that is frightened, not only frightened of Liberals that they 
understand, but Conservatives that, frankly, I don’t understand either. We started off with a potash Bill 
that we believe, and I think the people of Saskatchewan believe, was planned by the Government before 
an election and the Government decided they would bring in that Bill 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1250 
 

as quickly as they could, and they would get it out of the way, and they would hang on and pray that in 
the next 42 or 45 months they might be able to make the people forget that they went through an election 
and didn’t say anything in that election, and then jammed a Bill down the throats of the people. 
 
We were told through the Press that the potash legislation was to go through by Christmas, and of 
course, that dictate by the Government is a part of their manoeuvre now to make that dictate come true. 
When the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) talks about a political football, and they say he is not a 
political man, you have to look back at the way he reacted to the dictate by the Government that they 
were going to pass the Bill by Christmas. He said he wanted them to pass it. He was going to oppose it, 
but he would give his tacit approval to its passage, he would let that Bill through the House . . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, at no time did I ever say I wanted them to pass it. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — What’s the Point of Order? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — That’s the Point of Order. Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that I am entitled to 
clarify a glaring error in fact, if the Member says it. At no time did I ever say I wanted them to pass it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — From the understanding of what the Member has said, I believe the point is well 
taken. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, just exactly how is that a Point of Order? He is getting up to say that 
something this Member says about isn’t true. Now if that is a Point of Order, I have never heard of it. It 
might be a Point of Privilege, I don’t even think it is, but it’s certainly not a Point of Order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I understood that the Member for Nipawin was getting up to correct an impression 
that the, not in fact an impression, but as I understand it, a statement that the Member for Regina 
Wascana made with regard to what the Member for Nipawin, or his party wanted to see a certain Bill 
passed. The Member for Nipawin clarified the statement. He is entitled to a clarification. If there is an 
outright contradiction of what he had said or his position. 
 
MR. STEUART: — I wonder if the Speaker, not today maybe, would give us the quotation from May 
or Beauchesne, exactly where that is a Point of Order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll certainly take that under advisement. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I wonder if I may speak to the Point of Order. Because I suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will take that under advisement about the Point 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1251 
 

of Order and the Member may continue with his remarks on the Motion that is before us. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, what I said was, if I may go on with my remarks in speaking to 
the amendment and to the Motion. What I said was, that the Member for Nipawin wanted the Bill to go 
through, and if I may, may I quote the Star-Phoenix of November 27, 1975: 
 

Mr. Collver said that since the Government had more representatives than the PCs and Liberals 
combined, and since it appears determined to pass the potash Bills, he suggested it would be better to 
have the legislation in the law books, rather than using Liberal stalling tactics. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that, that, which was a direct quotation incidentally, of the Hon. 
Member for Nipawin, is again an example of the fact that they decided as a political football to get this 
Bill through, and he decided that he would be better to draw some distinctions between the Liberals who 
are a legitimate hard-working Opposition, and the way his party would react in this House. And that 
they would sit here and watch those Bills go through, first because they didn’t know how to stop them, 
and didn’t really know how to handle themselves in the House, and they have proven they were right in 
that regard. And secondly, because the Member thought that in four years, somehow he would be able to 
use that as good politics against the NDP Government. One can’t help but note that the only speeches 
that we ever hear from the Hon. Member for Nipawin are on points of procedure and on the fifth or sixth 
question, but when it comes to a matter of substance, he is curiously silent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — He shouts and he screams, he comes into this House, and every time he tries to 
go through a four-paragraph remark, he seems to lose his temper as though having successfully dealt 
with the chambermaids in the Bessborough that way, this is a good way to deal with this House. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I have asked before, and I will ask again, I do not believe it is 
customary for Members to raise personal business of other Members. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Hon. Member has a good Point of Privilege, and if the Members wish, I 
will get a citation for them on that. All right, then the Member may continue, but I think the Member has 
a Point of Privilege, and I think the Member for Wascana should retract the statement that he made 
about the Member for Nipawin. You are referring to the Member’s personal actions in this House, I 
think, in an exaggerated fashion. 
 
MR. MALONE: — . . . ask the Member to retract the position, you could give it some consideration. I 
am not sure that the Member for Nipawin has a good point. If he does, and if you so rule, I would be 
very glad to accept your ruling, but a moment ago you indicated that you were going to check into 
another Point of Order by the 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1252 
 

Member for Nipawin, I would ask you on this particular case, because you have asked the Member to 
retract something, that you also take the time to give it the consideration that it deserves before asking 
him to retract those remarks. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I was prepared to give consideration to that particular point, and I said I will get 
you a citation on it. I distinctly heard one of your seatmates say, No, you are right. So then I said, the 
Member for Wascana should withdraw his remarks. Since apparently, a citation is not necessary in this 
case. However, if you are suggesting that I should have a citation, I will bring one in and make a 
decision later on. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask then in making that decision you decide whether I 
should retract reference to the fact that he has some connection with the Bessborough, or the reference to 
the fact that he treats this House like a bunch of chambermaids. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — . . . I’ll make the decision that I make, on what is in the record of the House. I will 
examine that later. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, now what does the Hon. Member for Nipawin say in nub and 
substance. He says that because we have 22 Members on this side of the House, and they have 39 
Members on that side of the House, that we should lie down and roll over, that we should allow the 60 
per cent that we represent to go unheard in this House and unheard in the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Now what does the Government say with their 40 per cent? What does the 40 
per cent that the Government side represents say when they come into this House? We have one of the 
most arrogant Governments probably in Canada today. It is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to watch a 
government in decay. Maybe I shouldn’t say these things because it may start to smarten you up. I 
suggest that we are viewing a government that is sort of losing its touch. Just look around, Mr. Attorney 
General, you were the best-looking guy when you got elected some years ago, and you still are. Look 
around at the bald heads and the white hair. Look around at the Members with whom you are going to 
have to go back and try to be re-elected. Look around at the attendance, your Party’s attendance in the 
House. The Conservatives are always here and we are always here. When the House opened, you had 
sixteen Members in the House, and we outnumbered you. The other night for the first time in the 
memory of Members of our side, the Government was defeated on a voice vote in the House, for the 
first time in the memory of our side. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A fact, incidentally, which was ignored for some obscure reason by the Press, 
which I suggest was of great significance. I see the Whip with his back turned, and well he might, after 
that. You go out, you have a look, and you will find that where the former Opposition were the card 
players and the cookie eaters, you’ve got them all now, and those are the things that sort of 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1253 
 

smell of defeat. If you had asked me whether the Liberals were going to form the Government in 1975, I 
wouldn’t have been very sure, but I know now, that we will form a government in 1979. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I say to you particularly, the Hon. Member for Riversdale, or the Member for 
Melfort, they are not in the House, and I say it to the Premier, you’re the nub of the front bench, 
certainly the political base, do you remember the smell of a government going out. The oldest Premier in 
Canada, now how does that relate, Mr. Speaker, to what that Government is doing now. This 
Government is coming to us in a very arrogant way. First, they announce when they’ll pass it, and now 
we are to have our seats spanked because we didn’t pass it when they wanted us to pass it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Ted Malone, at 37, is our oldest leadership candidate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — We figured out to take the photographs from down low. The average age of our 
caucus and the average of the Conservative caucus, 39 years. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Yeah, and that’s counting me . . . 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — He blew the statistic. You know shortly after the Government came in, the 
Premier was good enough to come on the air with me, I was doing a radio program. You may not 
remember, Mr. Premier. A woman called and she was the last caller, and she said, "You know, Tony, I 
didn’t support the NDP, but you’ve got to give them this; they’ve got the best darn looking Cabinet in 
the whole country". And they did, and those were the kinds of things that sort of gave the smell of your 
victory. You now have the smell of defeat, the stink from defeat. In so many ways, the vitality is gone 
from your side of the House. Supported by arrogance out of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A question came today. The Hon. Member asked a question about lumber. Who 
wasn’t here? The Minister responsible wasn’t here and he still isn’t. The Minister of Northern Affairs 
wasn’t here then, but he wandered in after the House began, an hour later. The Premier wasn’t here, 
although in fairness to the Premier, I suggest that with his heavy workload he attends the House very, 
very well. But you on your side ignore this House, and it is shocking to hear a man from John 
Diefenbaker’s party get up and say we’ll roll over and let this Bill, or any other Bill, go through without 
. . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I tell you, a John Diefenbaker would take the way you treat 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1254 
 

this House, and beat you into the ground with it. 
 
John Diefenbaker, when Members opposite get up to lecture the Speaker, a Speaker, who in my opinion, 
has been eminently fair, and incidentally right on every decision, including the decision whether I am 
abusing the Member for Nipawin; a Speaker who has been right about every decision and two or three 
times both the Hon. Attorney General and the Premier have gotten up and literally lectured the Speaker, 
because they are perhaps used to lecturing the people in their back bench or perhaps used to lecturing 
their Cabinet. Those are the smells of defeat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Your arrogance, you are demonstrating your loss of respect for this House, and 
through this House, the people of Saskatchewan. The very man, Mr. Speaker, who over a $50 million 
expenditure, rightly said to the Liberals when they were in power, put on the table all of the information 
about the proposal that you make, then sit there smugly and giggle and smile and play cards, and do 
whatever they do, and ignore the right of the people of this province to know what is going on in this 
potash debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — You are starting to feel that you don’t need the House and I’ll tell you when you 
decide you don’t need the House, and you don’t care what the 60 per cent that we represent have to say, 
when you start to fall into the trap that the Hon. Member for Nipawin is in because you have 39 
members, you don’t have to explain yourself to this House, then those are the seeds that will bring you 
down. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, this is a resolution to punish us. We have been told by the Hon. 
Attorney General that we may sit until 4:00 o’clock on Christmas Eve, that we will be here between 
Christmas and New Year’s. That, if we are going to be naughty little boys and not pass his Bills when he 
wants them passed, then they will do something about it, that they will wheel in their 39 and they will 
vote it through and 20 perhaps of our 22 will sit here. We’ll sit here day after day, and they will have 14 
or 15 sit on their side, and the rest will play cards or do whatever they do, and they will wheel them in 
for a vote. You know, it is easy, I suggest, for the Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) to say what 
you don’t need, you can’t handle mornings, evenings and nights. Well so could I if I had an office staff, 
so could I, if I had an executive assistant or two, and so could I, if I didn’t feel that I had to be in this 
House every minute that the House is sitting. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — We are in this House, I am not suggesting, I am not singling out the Minister, 
the Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) just because his potash bills are going through and never 
speaks to them. I am not singling him out as someone who is a bad attender in the House, he is not 
particularly. He is an average 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1255 
 

attender from a Cabinet that are bad attenders. To then say to us, that we don’t need the mornings, not 
just to deal with constituency problems, but to prepare and think about what we are going to say, is 
ludicrous. If I had a speech writer and an executive assistant, I might not be so concerned about the extra 
time either. The people of this province forget that we sit evenings, and the people of this province 
forget that the Cabinet are paid as a full time position, while Members on this side are not. I am not 
suggesting that that should be changed, but I do suggest that it is not very appropriate for the Minister 
for Biggar to say, I can handle mornings, afternoons and evenings, and it won’t be any problem for me, 
and therefore, you should defeat the amendment. 
 
What this resolution and what the attempt of the Government really amounts to, is sort of lashing out at 
the democratic system, the democratic system that allows us to be heard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Why did they want it through by Christmas? First, because the Attorney 
General sort of gave his pledge that he would, and he wouldn’t want to embarrass his wife by not 
coming good on his promises, and second, because they know that there is a mounting concern about 
this legislation, the same mounting concern . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — . . . that made the Premier decide with others that they would spring this 
legislation after the election and not pass it before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have noticed that basically we have been brief; I have been a little more lengthy than 
some of the others. I think it is important for the Press to note that we could easily, if all we were doing 
was delaying the House needlessly and improperly, we could have filibustered this resolution. We could 
easily have come back day after day with amendments which we don’t believe in. We could have 
spoken for very long periods of time and ignored the whole problem. We have amendments which we 
think are appropriate and we believe that probably this resolution will be passed this afternoon. I don’t 
now about the response of Hon. Members opposite. I do know, and I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, and to 
the people of this province, that governments that ignore the right of the people to be heard through their 
Members, aren’t governments for long, and that you have within you, all of the seeds to pull you down, 
and I hope you pull yourselves down, I am not trying to give you any friendly advice. 
 
This resolution and the way you have handled us and the people in the potash debate is a demonstration 
of an arrogant government at its extreme, an arrogant government that I suspect will shortly be imposing 
closure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Souris Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t pretend to be an expert in rules 
or procedures. As I understand it, the way the thing is going here could be, if every Member in the 
Opposition was to make an amendment and every Member speaks to that amendment, we could 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1256 
 

conceivably sit 365 days a year and go on and on and there would be no business done in the House. 
 
The next point I should like to make is that I think Members opposite were very unfair, they totally 
ignored the wishes of 60 per cent of Saskatchewan at least when they brought this Bill in. They ignored, 
probably more than 60 per cent of the wishes, if the truth were to be known. To bring the Bill in a short 
session before Christmas was unfair to everyone. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — The wives and families of MLAs and of staff in this Legislature as well. As for 
who is going to win the election in 1979, any group that would ignore 60 per cent doesn’t stand much of 
a chance. Any group that would ignore 30 per cent, as did the Liberals in their amendment to Bill 1 the 
other day, I wouldn’t think would stand much of a chance either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address myself to the amendment. 
I can understand the wish of the Government to want to extend the length of the sitting hours. I wish to 
say that as a rural Member, it is very difficult for me to lose my morning sitting time. This is a time of 
the year in the area that I am in that the problems of lease allocations come up, in community pasture, 
government pastures and on private leases for one problem. This is the time they are being decided. I get 
a lot of delegations coming in, a lot of phone calls. If I am sitting in the morning we caucus about 9:15, 
the office don’t open until 9:00. I can’t get in touch with any of the Ministers, any of the deputy 
ministers. I now have two cases of welfare from home, they are mixed up in their payments. If I were 
sitting in the House I could in no way get through and get this solved. Believe me, before Christmas they 
need their money. I am not arguing about the sitting, but when you sit in the morning, you cut a person 
away from that. I can’t be in the House and I can’t be up there in my office at the same time. The 
morning is the only time the offices are open. 
 
I don’t disagree with you wanting long sittings, probably if there was a way that you could open your 
government offices at 6:00 a.m., or leave them open 6:00 to 9:00 in the evening, fine. The hours are 
from 9:00 to 5:00 and if you are in the House from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., you can’t do the work. I 
believe, as an elected representative, I am sure as you do, that our constituency problems are important. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — If you don’t believe your constituency problems are important, that is your 
privilege, but I do. When they call me up, they want to be represented. What do you think it looks like if 
they call every day of the week, and they say the Member is not in his office? They can’t get in touch 
with you. It must be awfully embarrassing for you people when they finally get hold of you and say you 
are never in your office. We can’t get you on the phone, you can’t do your work; what are you doing? 
 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1257 
 

If we were going into a spring season, into seeding time, with farmer Members like myself, I could see 
the urgency. You also find that your constituency problems in an agricultural seat drop off because this 
is a time when you have your meetings, leases are set up, this is when your problems come up, because 
rural people have time to come in, they haven’t in the spring and summer. Maybe the city Members who 
live in urban seats don’t have this problem, but we do in a rural area. This is a problem. 
 
I can’t support a Resolution that asks me to take away the only time I have when I am in Regina, during 
the week when the offices are open, to represent my constituents. If we must sit, let’s go on until 2:00 - 
3:00 a.m., if you must, if you are hell fire bent to keep us in the House, but don’t take away my time so 
that I can serve my constituents. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The amendment was negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS - 11 
Steuart Cameron Clifford 
Wiebe Edwards Anderson 
Malone Nelson (Assiniboia Gravelbourg) Merchant 
Penner  Thatcher 
 

NAYS - 35 
Blakeney Robbins Allen 
Pepper MacMurchy Koskie 
Thibault Mostoway Johnson 
Bowerman Larson Banda 
Romanow Whelan Collver 
Snyder Dyck Larter 
Byers Feschuk Bailey 
Kramer Shillington Berntson 
Baker Rolfes Ham 
Lange Cowley Katzman 
Faris Tchorzewski Birkbeck 
Kowalchuk Skoberg  
 
The debate continues on the motion. 
 
MISS L. B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I have been listening to the debate on the 
amendment and the motion and listening very carefully. I feel for a number of reasons that the 
amendment that has been defeated was a very sincere effort on our part and at the end of my remarks, I 
will propose another amendment. 
 
In the first place, there are two main reasons which have adequately been stated and I should like to try 
to shed some more light on the fact. In the news today, the Premier has stated that he would like to get 
this legislation through by Christmas . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — That he would get it through! 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1258 
 

MISS CLIFFORD: — . . . Well I don’t use strong terms like that. This is the term that was used in the 
news. I feel indeed, as it has been stated, it is a definite move so that it will pressure us into getting this 
legislation through. Beside the fact that we oppose the principle of the Bill and resent being pushed into 
this type of legislation, the main reason as we have stated is because we cannot sacrifice the time that is 
so needed in the morning for our constituencies, and some people have laughed when Members have 
suggested that there have been hundreds of telephone calls. I think that you cannot, either on this side, or 
anywhere in this House, disagree with the fact that we are a hard-working caucus, no matter whether we 
are opposing your legislation or not, at least we are preparing speeches and we are participating in the 
House. I think this has to be recognized. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — It is fact. We are also very sincere in our endeavors, whether or not you believe 
that, when we propose our resolutions. In my first speech in the House I stated that if you find that 
Members are not in the House you cannot criticize it, because perhaps they are making calls to their 
constituents. I was very sincere in that observation, and I would respectfully like to outline some of the 
problems that I have to tackle this week, I don’t mean it to be lengthy discussion, but I should like to 
point this out to this House because I don’t think perhaps some of you who do have people to look after 
your problems do realize the number of calls, because you don’t get the calls personally, not because 
you don’t answer the phone for whatever reason, but you don’t get the personal calls. I do get a number 
of calls every day, believe it or not. If I could outline a number of them, very briefly. On this page I have 
23 calls and situations which I have to call on your departments or Ministers. That is no easy job, I am 
sure it is no easy job to get your Ministers on the phone at all times. For an Opposition Member, or a 
member of the public, it is even harder. 
 
I have a call about a job that someone needs in a small town, and in a small town it is not easy to get 
somebody to listen to you to try to find you a job. In my area we have many small hamlets. To find a job 
or to get unemployment insurance is not an easy matter. I have a call about grants for community work. 
I have a call about provincial old age benefits, because this woman is only getting $12. I am not trying to 
make this a miniature throne speech, I am just trying to tell you, that these are the problems that I have 
to look after this week and next week. There will be many more coming in. 
 
I have a call about the rural telephone lines. They have been told by the department that they have to 
bury their telephone lines, at their own expense. Not only is upkeep of telephones in a rural area 
impossible because you can’t get people to do it, it is impossible because they don’t have the money. I 
have a call on low rental problems. I have a call by a person who has polio and is trying to get a 
housekeeper. He is 71 years old. He needs a housekeeper, he needs special assistance. Special assistance 
has been granted by your department, but you can’t find a housekeeper and I am trying to find one for 
him. There is a call for children’s allowance, because 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1259 
 

of the mail strike. This is just one of the many types of programs we have to look at. 
 
There is a call on grants for new rental accommodations to be brought in; there is the problem of this 
pioneer haven that I mentioned. I have to advise them of the avenue which they have to follow for some 
reprimand to union officials if they want to do that. I need to find out about a grant for a handicapped 
person. I need to find out about NIP grants, about whether the Government is going to give grants to a 
small town. I need to find out about a pipeline settlement. I need to find out through the fire 
commissioner whether or not we can propose in my town to get the curling rink opened, because we 
need to get the fire commissioner’s approval. This is a problem for a small town. I need to find out about 
pension cheques; I need to find out about assistance for a blind person. I need to find out about a 
recreation grant for a senior citizens’ program. I have to try to find a job for a person who is qualified in 
northern affairs. These may seem like trivial things, these are the problems that I have to answer for my 
constituents. 
 
I put out an ad telling my constituents to call me, my executive is trying to keep in contact with the 
constituency. These are real problems we have to face, these are the problems which I look after in the 
morning. I really would like you to consider the fact that we are very sincere in asking you that this time 
is needed to respond to these calls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I proposed a resolution that was very sincere. I felt that, although the 
Government has done some good things in education, which I wholly supported in my speech, I felt 
there was need for other avenues through a board of enquiry. I feel this resolution was defeated because 
it was proposed by an Opposition Member. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — I think that I had a sincere resolution to try to do all we could. I am sure 
Members opposite want to do all they can for education. 
 
I should like them to consider that just because an Opposition Member has put up this resolution, I 
would ask that they don’t totally disregard it because it is put in this light. Surely when a reasonable 
resolution is put forth, it shouldn’t be shrugged off in that manner. 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to put forth this amendment, which I hope the Members of this House will 
consider, with the sincerity with which it was made. I move, seconded by Mr. Wiebe: 
 

That the following words be added to the motion: 
 

and that this Assembly provides the Opposition Members of the House with a one and a half hour 
period of each morning of each sitting day, in which to direct to Government Ministers and 
departments, any questions or problems their constituents might have relating to such Ministers and 
departments as the mornings are usually reserved and occupied by constituency work by such MLAs. 

 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1260 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — With regard to the amendment, I believe the amendment is out of order. I will read 
the citation which relates to the order of the motion. 
 

The law on the relevancy of amendments (Beauchesne’s 203) is that if they are on the same 
subject-matter with the original motion, they are admissible, but not when foreign thereto. 

 
And it continues on in another section: 
 

An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a matter which is foreign to the proposition 
involved in the main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 

 
I, therefore, declare the amendment out of order and debate continues on the main motion. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I wonder if I could speak to your ruling, to the amendment. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the motion before us deals with the time of the Legislature, that is, the sitting 
time, the guts of the motion is to have us now sit mornings, commencing tomorrow morning. The 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, I believe deals with that sitting time as well, in that it refers to the mornings 
and asks that the mornings be used for a specific purpose, or a portion of that morning period be used for 
a specific purpose. With respect, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to reconsider your decision. I believe the 
amendment to be in order for the reasons that I have given, and that if you will consider it you will see 
that it does deal with the morning period of time which the Government wants the House to sit. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would agree that the amendment has relevancy to a question period. I do not 
agree that it has relevancy to the motion which is before the House. It is very vague and indirect, if in 
fact there is relevancy there. I would maintain the ruling that I made. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Again, Mr. Speaker, you say question period. The question period has been a 
matter of comment in this House for some time. I don’t think the Member is referring to the question 
period which we normally have before the Orders of the Day. The Member is referring to a period of 
time in which Ministers would make themselves available for questions dealing with constituent’s 
business, not of a matter of urgent public importance, as we have before the Orders of the Day. That is 
what the question period refers to, not the period before the Orders of the Day. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the only way in which it refers to the motion which is before us is that it is 
tacked on the end of the original motion. I do not understand the relevancy of the Member’s comments 
and, therefore, maintain the ruling. If Members are dissatisfied with the ruling, they are free to challenge 
my decision. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1261 
 

might speak briefly to the ruling. I don’t think that . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I won’t accept any further comments on the ruling. I will permit a 
challenge, if the Members wish to challenge it, that is up to the Members. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I would agree with this motion, the motion is a relatively simple one 
and that is to extend the hours by some two and a half hours every morning for the next 7, 8 or 10 sitting 
days. If I honestly thought that this extra length of time would be taken by the Government, especially 
by Cabinet Ministers, by government supporters, MLAs to really make a debate on Bill 1 and Bill 2, I 
would agree. 
 
What has happened to date, in this so-called debate, is that the Government has brought before this 
Legislative Assembly two of the most momentous Bills that we have ever seen in the history of the 
province, there is no question about that. I think they rank with famous Bills, like Medicare and 
Hospitalization, way back to the late 1940s, the pulp mill debate, that was another one, because this is a 
departure if we pass these, from anything that has really ever been done in the history of this province. I 
don’t think any one can deny, whether they support the Bill or they oppose, that what we are engaged in 
is most serious and holds for the future of Saskatchewan a great many unanswered questions. The very 
amount of money that is involved, anywhere from $500 million to $1 billion, and that is just the 
beginning. We recognize that that is just the beginning, because we are talking about expansion and we 
are talking about taking all of the potash industry eventually. We could be well talking about $2 billion, 
or $3 billion. Now for a province containing less than a million people, this by itself, just the amount of 
money, is staggering. It is so large that it boggles the mind. I don’t think anyone then will question the 
importance of these two Bills. 
 
What, surely, is the job, what is the responsibility of the 61 elected representatives in this House? It is to 
consider the legislation placed before it by the Government. Of course, it is to suggest other pieces of 
legislation, Private Members’ Bills, resolutions, attempts to get the Government to embark in new 
policies, to change direction. Essentially the main thrust of the Legislative Assembly, the business put 
before the Legislative Assembly comes from the Government, it must come from the Government. They 
are elected to govern, they have a mandate to govern, no one questions that. One questions whether they 
had a mandate to do this, or do that. They may say that they only represent 39 per cent of the vote with a 
multi-party democracy like we have, that gets to be the rule and not the exception. So no one questions 
that I am sure, no serious person, they have a mandate to rule and a mandate to govern. But along with 
that mandate I say goes a very serious responsibility to proceed, where possible, with caution. Now there 
are times when the Government must act quickly, when it is expedient for the Government to act 
quickly. With a problem before the Legislative Assembly and before the people of Saskatchewan that is 
a fairly open and shut and there is a time factor. I think rent control is maybe not the best example, but is 
an example. It is an example of where the Government 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1262 
 

says all right, a nation is engaged in a fight against inflation, we all recognize how serious it is. The 
National Government has asked the Provincial Governments to do many things, one of which is to bring 
rents under some kind of a control, along with wages and incomes, and so the Government introduced in 
this fall Session Bill 16, a Bill to control rents. 
 
Now we recognize there is some urgency because having introduced the Bill there is a great deal of 
uncertainty and there will remain a great deal of uncertainty until this Bill is passed. So that Bill, had it 
been brought up today for example, would have been (from my point of view) - we have one more 
speaker to speak on it - it would have, I presume, then passed in second reading and put over into 
committee where maybe the other Members of the Conservative caucus have some amendments, 
sensible amendments, which we hope will be considered. It would be passed out of Committee and there 
is no question in my mind that it will be the law of the land; amended I hope, and changed I hope, it 
would be the law of the land within the next few days. No one can accuse the Liberal caucus of 
unnecessarily holding up that Bill because we recognize, while we don’t agree with every aspect, we 
recognize that it is serious and there are some time factors. 
 
But let’s get back to Bill 42. I think the only Bill that was almost as abhorrent to us as this Bill, that we 
have seen in recent times put forward by this Government, was Bill 42. Now we fought Bill 42 but the 
Premier said when he came in that he needed Bill 42, he needed the powers in Bill 42 to go down on 
behalf of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan to negotiate at that very vital energy conference 
the first one that was held in Ottawa. Now we didn’t agree with the powers he was asking for but I don’t 
think the record was so that we questioned that he needed to have some direction. We disagreed with the 
direction he took and we fought the Bill. But again, the record shows very clearly that we did not mount 
any so-called filibuster, or any lengthy debate. We argued this matter, we debated, we attempted to get it 
amended and then it was passed. 
 
All right, we now come to Bill 1 and Bill 2, we come to this resolution. This is even a more important 
Bill, this is even a more drastic Bill than Bill 42. After all, Bill 42 took some possession of some oil 
rights, but it mostly left intact the oil industry. Now they may have decided to leave as a result of it and 
they did and it hurt the oil industry and it hurt the people of Saskatchewan. The results are clear if 
anybody wants to look at them. But it didn’t, by the very stroke of the pen signing, drive them out and 
change forever the complexion of the development of the oil industry. The harm that has been done is 
great and it is deep, but it can be undone. But once we pass Bill 1 and Bill 2 I say that we can break this 
egg, but we can never put it back together again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Once we pass Bill 1 and Bill 2 and the Government opposite seizes, takes over, 
confiscates, nationalizes all or part of the potash industry, whether anyone likes it or not, the economic 
face and the economic future of Saskatchewan is changed forever. 
 
Now, Government Members opposite may say changed for the 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1263 
 

better. We say changed for the worse. However, that is the debate. But again, I want to try and make my 
point as strongly and as clearly as I can, the absolute total importance of these two Bills. All right, what 
is the rush? That has to be the question. The Government has the right, whether they have the full 
mandate or not, they have the right and no one argues that. All right, what is the rush? We admit that it 
is of vital importance, we admit the stakes are so high that they boggle the mind, we admit that it is 
going to change the future of the province for all time without a doubt. The Premier and other Members 
opposite at their own convention said something like this is the battle of the 1970s. So they recognize 
the tremendous importance of these two Bills. What’s the rush? Is the potash market growing and 
increasing and the price going up? Do we have to get in at the right time? No. As a matter of fact the 
potash market is going down and the price is softening. Well, someone may say that is a good time to 
get in. I think it is kind of a bad time to get in. However, is the potash going away? Is it like oil and it is 
going to be gone if we didn’t step in and do something; that we face an end to potash for one, two, three, 
maybe four thousand years. Is the market going to disappear? Well, I say that our market does stand in 
jeopardy because of the action of that Government. But if we take a month or two months or three 
months it is going to make no difference to the markets of the world. It is going to make little or no 
difference to the opposition to Saskatchewan potash, by that I mean the possibility of New Brunswick, 
the possible rival of New Mexico or the entrance in a major way of Russia into the world potash market. 
So the potash is here for a thousand years and that Government, unless some of its backbenchers turn to 
us, is here for a legal term of five years. What’s the rush? 
 
Well, the rush has to be political. The rush has to be political, if it isn’t political then I can’t understand 
it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Government clearly wants to get this Bill out of the way, get this act done, get 
it behind them so they can start healing the wounds and so people will start forgetting. And in this regard 
I suggest very seriously that the Conservative Opposition are playing into their hands. I said from the 
beginning that if we are talking strictly politics, yes, I would much sooner go into a political campaign 
facing a government that had legislation on the books in place, that had confiscated an industry against 
their will. I would sooner have on the books and in place and on the record, the sight and the witness by 
the people of a government who had used its unbelievable powers to walk in, seize and take over. But I 
have also said from the beginning that we have a more serious responsibility than that, that we cannot 
play politics, looking forward to the next election with every piece of legislation that comes into the 
House. And I have also said and I think it is true, that if the NDP Government don’t want to pass this 
legislation, in fact if they are just going to use it as a gun to put to the heads of the potash industry, then 
no amount of shenanigans or filibusters or collapsing and calling for the question will change their mind, 
because they can pass the legislation but they don’t have to proclaim it. The Premier can pass the 
legislation and let it sit there as a threat, a threat hanging over the heads of the potash industry, if that is 
their intent. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1264 
 

Now I can’t read their minds. I am sure if they could buy a couple of potash mines at their own price 
they wouldn’t pass this Bill and some of us have already said that and I don’t doubt but that would be 
true. I say this, it is our responsibility as an Opposition when we think bad legislation is going to hurt the 
people of Saskatchewan, the future of Saskatchewan, and it is brought before the Legislative Assembly, 
it is our responsibility to fight that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I believe the Government has a responsibility too. And that is in legislation as vital 
and as important as this to give all the time necessary to allow public opinion for and against to be 
marshalled. To give all the time necessary and all the information necessary; to give us time alone, 
without giving us the information on which to base our judgment, is almost meaningless. One of the 
reasons, one of the reasons that we are continuing this debate as long and as hard as we can is to bring 
the Government to its senses, to recognize its responsibility and lay on the table before this House and 
before the public some evidence that they have seriously studied all the aspects of the potash industry, of 
the potash industry takeover, the financial implications, the market implications, what it will do or not 
do to the future of investment in this province. What it will do to the political climate, not just in 1975 
and 1976, but on into the 80s and 90s as well. Because what you are doing Premier Blakeney (and your 
Government is going to live in this province for good or bad long after you and I and the Members of 
this House have passed by and passed out of this House, long after that), you are putting on the books a 
piece of legislation that for good or bad, for bad I would say, will haunt the people of this province for a 
long, long time to come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — And yet how many people over there have even bothered to enter the debate. Mr. 
Speaker, I say the Government’s performance in this debate is nothing short of disgraceful. We have 
heard from how many? We have heard from one, two, three, four, five, six Cabinet Ministers, that’s all. 
We have yet to hear in this debate, we have yet to hear from the Hon. E. Cowley, the man who is going 
to be the Minister in charge, the chairman, of the board of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. In fact, 
he should be the man piloting the Bills through. Under any normal circumstances the man responsible 
should be putting the Bills through. Why isn’t he? I say for the same reason that at the last session when 
a Bill was brought forward to force the Saskatchewan Power Corporation workers back to work. It 
wasn’t the Minister who was chairman of the board of the Power Corporation, it was the Attorney 
General. Why? I’ll tell you why. Because the Minister in charge who is no longer here, Kim Thorson, 
had given verbal and I think honest commitments to that union, and if we got into Committee of the 
Whole we could have asked that man questions. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Order. I am sure that the Leader of the 
Opposition is going to relate to this particular resolution the question of what would have been said 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1265 
 

on the Committee of the Whole two sessions ago on the debate of Bill 28, but it is a little tenuous and 
perhaps he could help us a bit as to just how this is relevant to the debate under discussion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have been contemplating that matter as well, how the Leader of the Opposition is 
intending to relate his remarks to the extension of hours in this Assembly. Now I admit I was with him 
for a while, but I’ve lost him, or he has lost me. If he could relate his remarks to the extension of the 
hours, I think it would accommodate everybody. 
 
MR. MALONE: — On the Point of Order, I believe the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake made 
very clear when talking about this Bill he was saying that if we could expect to hear from some of those 
Members opposite we may consider voting in favor of this motion. He used the example of the Minister 
in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan who has said nothing in this debate. He used that 
example and compared it to the ex-Minister of Industry, Mr. Thorson, who took a similar position under 
Bill 42. I suggest t you, Mr. Speaker, that the Member is perfectly in order in the remarks that he was 
making as he set the ground work for those remarks. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t think that I accept the Member’s comments. I think that every Member in 
this House has the complete freedom to express his remarks early in the debate, late in the debate, or not 
at all, and that’s not a point that the Leader of the Opposition can make in speaking to this Resolution 
that he is trying to make time available for them to speak. They will speak if they want to speak, I don’t 
care what side of the House they are on. Consequently, I don’t think that is a legitimate point. I think the 
point is well taken that the Member should relate to the motion before us. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, surely it’s a point to make in a debate involving potash - I’m speaking 
to the Point of Order - it’s a point to make in speaking to this debate which involves potash which the 
Member tied in, the point is that the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has 
yet to speak. Surely that is something for the House to consider. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think there are some assumptions being made in this particular debate that don’t 
necessarily have to be true. Those assumptions are that you want more time so that people can consider 
the potash bills, but potash bills are not the only bills before the House. There are other bills before the 
House. 
 
MR. MALONE: — One. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Oh, no, there are a number of Bills if you will check the Blues, you will find them 
there. Agreed, there is only one more on adjourned debates, but there are a number on second readings 
or are about to begin second readings. I suggest to the Members that it is the general work of the House 
that this 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1266 
 

particular motion is brought forward for. I think the Members should agree that they address themselves 
to the motion. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I will make the connection immediately. The connection is simply 
this, that we are convinced that the motive behind this motion to extend the hours is to force the 
Opposition, to force us to collapse our opposition, our legitimate opposition to this Bill in a matter of a 
few days so they can arrive at their goal, so they can achieve their stated boasted goal, first by the 
Attorney General and then by the Premier and as recently by the Premier as of today, as he was quoted - 
"we’ll get this Bill through by Christmas". 
 
Now, I don’t know what Christmas he was talking about. Is it Ukrainian Christmas, Roy? Maybe you 
got a point. But Irish Christmas, you’ll never make it, believe me. 
 
But the point I . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — It’s an objective! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the point I wish to make here is that it is unbelievable to me that at 
this stage of the debate of these Bills, have we heard from the Minister who will be in charge of this very 
large and tremendously important corporation, the Hon. Member for Biggar? I am convinced that part of 
the motive in early sittings, elongated hours, is to try and force us to collapse so that he won’t have to, it 
is beginning to be embarrassing for him, he won’t have to enter this debate. It goes back to the point I 
made as to question why he isn’t (a) in the debate and; (b) he isn’t leading the debate by taking the Bills 
to the House. The reason I am convinced is that when we get into Committee and we ask the Attorney 
General direct questions, which would have to be answered by the Minister, who is the chairman of the 
Potash Corporation and has been involved a great deal, he would have to answer those questions 
truthfully. The same thing in that famous debate forcing the Power workers back to work, we have the 
precedent, the Attorney General, I don’t know. I guess he forgot to ask the other Minister. So there will 
be a cover-up, they will force the Bill through Committee stage, without us having a chance to ask 
proper questions - at least we’ll ask proper questions without having a chance to get proper answers. 
 
If I thought, and if we thought that the lengthening of hours would in fact bring those Members out and 
if the Members opposite will stand up and say, ‘yes I intend to enter fully in this debate; I intend to 
present facts and figures and studies that have been done, that I have been involved, I know about’, I 
would say we would pass this motion, we would support it immediately and we would welcome 
morning sittings, because that is the kind of debate we want, we want information. The people of the 
province want information about this important move and they are not getting it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The debate about where the headquarters will be, there is no debate about where 
the potash capital of Saskatchewan is. 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1267 
 

It is in Saskatoon, it is in the centre, the hub of the potash industry. Yet I find the Members for 
Saskatoon, the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes), now a Minister of the Crown, 
according to my records, he has yet to enter debate on either Bill 1 or Bill 2. How will he face the 
thousands of people who depend on the potash industry in Saskatoon? Having not even had the courtesy, 
decency, or the responsibility to stand up and offer his viewpoint to this debate in this House. What 
about the other Members, Mr. Dyck? I am having great difficulty finding where they are from - we hope 
not from there for long. 
 
MR. DYCK: — Saskatoon Mayfair! 
 
MR. STEUART: — He may have entered in this debate, yes he did, he entered in this debate, which is 
more than some of the other Members for Saskatoon. The Member for Humboldt has he entered in the 
debate yet? Again, Humboldt, very close, adjacent to the potash area. I would think he would have 
something to say, both as the Minister of the Crown and as a Member from an area that is very 
dependent on the potash industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the attitude of the Members of the Government opposite, as I say, is a disgrace to the 
serious debate in this House and it indicates, as the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) 
pointed out, the arrogance of the Government opposite. It indicates the sort of sheep-like followers they 
have unfortunately, in the back benches who won’t get up and speak and won’t demand that they make 
public the facts and figures and studies to back up the decision to risk up to $1 billion of the taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — It says a great deal about the Conservative MLAs just elected who in effect are 
supporting the Government, they are going to oppose the Bill. I am sure of this. I am sure Bill 1 and Bill 
2 are as abhorrent to their basic philosophy as it is to ours, as it is to any decent and free thinking person 
in this province or in this country. But by their tactics and that is exactly what they are engaged in, just 
as we are engaged in, just as the Government is engaged in, and there is nothing wrong with that. There 
is nothing wrong with engaging or planning - plotting I was going to say, plotting is a good word - the 
tactics that you are going to use in this House. The Government has done that, they have said we are 
going to push this through, get it through, so people will forget, so we can get on with the job. We have 
said that we are going to do our job which is to oppose this and hope that the Government, because of 
the pressure of public opinion and because they have come to their senses, would slow down and taken 
another course. 
 
The Conservatives have decided to take neither one of these courses. By refusing to put up any sensible 
opposition, by refusing to face the responsibility for which I say they were elected, they are playing into 
the hands of the Government, they are in fact going to lie down, let the Government roll over them, pass 
this legislation. I say if they do, they have seriously damaged any reputation they might have had. I say 
they are falling down seriously in their responsibility as elected Members. One or two of them have 
entered into the debate. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1268 
 

The Member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck), we haven’t heard from him and we have potash in that area. 
The Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham), he may not have any potash in that area, but they have oil. 
Make no mistake, if the Government gets away with this then all resources will fall in line next. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it unbelievable the Conservatives are taking the attitude they are taking and then stand 
up, as one of our Members said, for the Leader sanctimoniously to read us all a little lecture about our 
responsibilities in this House. 
 
Now I’ll quote for him a couple of pretty fair parliamentarians and one of them was Winston Churchill. 
Winston Churchill said that when the Opposition thinks the Government is wrong, their duty is to 
oppose, oppose, oppose. I’ll point out the life story of John Diefenbaker, who has been without a doubt 
the outstanding Opposition Member. Some people might argue whether he has been the most 
outstanding Prime Minister this country ever had, but I don’t think you will find many arguments in any 
quarter, from any side of the political fence, that he has been the most outstanding Member of the 
Opposition you have ever seen sit in the House of Commons on any side of the fence. 
 
Can you imagine John Diefenbaker lying down on this Bill? Can you imagine John Diefenbaker sitting 
silent while the Government used its steamroller tactics to do what they are doing here? To jeopardize 
the very future of resource development in this province. To use their powers to go in and seize and take 
over, giving themselves more power over one segment of our industry, one segment of society, one 
group of people, than they give the police when they try to track down criminals. Do you think John 
Diefenbaker would sit silently by? Of course he wouldn’t. He would be on his feet and he would be 
pointing the finger of scorn and I am sure he is pointing the finger of scorn at his namesakes here in this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — He would oppose, but he wouldn’t obstruct. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well, let’s get on to that whether he would oppose or whether he would obstruct. 
What is the responsibility of an Opposition. Well, surely the responsibility of an Opposition is to support 
the Government when they think they are right and we do that. 
 
Bill 16 is a rent control Bill and we think at this time it is necessary, it is repugnant, but it is necessary 
and we have already indicated that we intend to support it. The job of the Opposition, that when they 
think that a Bill or a policy can be improved, is to bring in amendments. Surely we are doing that. 
Again, I will use Bill 16 as an example. We are going to, and we intend to bring in amendments to try 
and make it a better Bill. Already the Premier and other Members of the Government have indicated that 
they have been impressed by some of the suggestions that have been made with regard to that very Bill. 
 
But the final responsibility of an Opposition is when they think the Government is wrong is to oppose 
them and oppose them with everything they have got and that is exactly what we are doing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1269 
 

MR. STEUART: — What is the responsibility of the Government? Well, surely it is to bring forth 
legislation, bring about reforms of changes that they think are in the best interests of the people. And I 
don’t deny, won’t deny for one moment that if Bill 1 and Bill 2 and this motion in front of the 
Legislative Assembly to force these Bills through quickly, the Government is sincerely doing what they 
think is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t doubt that. But what I do doubt, and 
what I do object to, is the cynical manner in which they are attempting to do it and I object. The 
Government’s responsibility is to govern. The Government has got a greater responsibility than that, or 
coupled with that they have a very serious responsibility and that is to make sure, to be positive, that 
they use their majority properly, that they do not use the majority they have got to bulldoze Opposition, 
to frighten Opposition, to withhold solid, sensible, necessary information from either the Opposition and 
through them to the public when they are contemplating or bringing before the Legislative Assembly 
very serious and very vital changes. 
 
Now what implements does the Government have? What implements does Government have when they 
are given a mandate by the people? Of course, the greatest implement they have, the greatest weapon 
they have is the majority. They have a majority of Members in this Legislative Assembly. So eventually, 
sooner or later, they will have their way. That’s proper. But they have some other weapons that aren’t 
quite so savoury. The majority and their final vote is a weapon, is a power given to them under the 
democratic system and as long as they use it sensibly and with responsibility everyone recognizes that 
it’s good and necessary. But they have some other weapons. One of them is closure. Now they don’t 
want to use that weapon. They don’t want to use that weapon because it’s naked power at its worst and 
only should be used and only must be used in very extreme circumstances and the track record of 
governments who have used closure, have resorted to closure in this country as a parliamentary device 
to shut off proper opposition, their track record in getting re-elected is pretty sad. So this Government 
doesn’t want to use closure unless it’s forced to the wall. 
 
But there is another form, another weapon they have and that is the one they are engaged in right now. 
That is to lengthen the hours of debate. 
 
Now this isn’t the first government that has done this, not the first time they have done this. Lengthen 
the hours of debate to wear down, to push down, to wear out the Opposition. To sit there and refuse to 
take part in debate and just put their bills on the table and say, okay boys go to it, talk yourselves to 
death and when you have finally used up all 15, and you have used up any amendments that can be 
passed by the Speaker as in order, we will calmly sit here and listen you out and then we’ll use our huge 
majority to steamroller and vote you down. 
 
Now that’s a form of closure. We’ve seen it, it’s a subtle form and it’s a form of closure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I charge this Government already, this Session with that. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1270 
 

What we are talking about is Christmas recess and getting home for Christmas. As far as I’m aware most 
people who work in this province work up until 3 o’clock or 4 o’clock on the 24th of December and then 
they get off and they have December 25 and December 26 and December 27 and 28th, they have a 
holiday. They go home to their families, if that’s what turns them on. We haven’t got any problem there. 
I’m sure the Government isn’t going to introduce legislation that we sit on Christmas Day or Christmas 
Eve, or Boxing Day, I’m sure they won’t. They would even outdo Scrooge in that regard and I’m sure 
they will not go to that length. 
 
No matter how long it takes in this Legislative Assembly, we’ve only begun this Session of the 
Assembly. We’ve only begun it. We haven’t even, how many days have we sat? Twenty-four days, 
twenty-four sitting days. Now that’s not very long. Twenty-four sitting days, we’ve considered a Speech 
from the Throne, we have considered some legislation, we’ve heard private Members’ resolutions 
debated. I think it’s been very lovely. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Half of a session! 
 
MR. STEUART: — He said half of a session. There is some limit? I wasn’t aware of that Mr. Attorney 
General. The Attorney General informs the House from his seat, that there is some limit, 48 days. I’m 
not aware that there is any limit. In fact, I’m quoting the Premier, when he said on another occasion, we 
said, you know you are bringing in some legislation at the end of the session. I recall the Premier saying, 
what’s the end of session? Nothing wrong with us going to June, July, August, there is no limit on the 
session. 
 
However, there can be a limit to how long Members in the Opposition, with a relatively few numbers, 
can keep up opposition to a bill. We know that. So lengthening of hours . . . Well, some of us older virile 
ones are not doing too badly either. I’m not sure what virile means, but I’ll look it up. If it means what I 
think it does, thank you very much. Eunice will be glad to hear about it. 
 
These are the powers of the Government, make no mistake. Lengthening of hours, I’ve seen that 
Government opposite keep us at night. Now not only in the morning, but the next step, Mr. Speaker, if 
this debate continues will be, say, to extend the hours until one, until two, until three o’clock in the 
morning. It has happened in the history of this House. So make no mistake. Lengthening hours is a not 
so subtle form of closure. When the Hon. Member who introduced this motion stood up, very calmly 
and said, you know, why do we want this motion? We want it so all the Members will have the 
opportunity to speak and somebody said, you know, we know he’s a lawyer, but he should have been an 
actor. The stage lost a great actor. because we know what he said in the corridors, I’ll drive those . . . to 
the wall. I’ll push this Bill through. 
 
Now if he can extend the hours in the morning and that doesn’t sound unreasonable, what’s to prevent 
him from extending them on in the evening. It’s been done before. So make no mistake, make no 
mistake. Lengthening of hours is a form of closure and that’s exactly what that Government is engaged 
in, in this Motion, if it passes in this House. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1271 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned powers of the Government and the responsibility of the Government 
and the responsibility of the Opposition. Now what weapons does the Opposition have? Well, the 
Opposition doesn’t have very many weapons where you have a majority government, but they have 
some. They have debate, where if they make good debating points, it’s possible to convince the 
Members of the Government, or MLAs who are supporters of the Government, so that they will go into 
caucus and convince their colleagues in the Cabinet to change direction or change a bill. If you can 
make good points the Government recognizes that the amendment you are proposing will strengthen any 
bill or any act and in that way the Opposition makes a very positive contribution. And we have seen this 
happen, and again in this Session, this short Session so far. Bill 16, we have said and I think the 
Conservatives have said the same thing that they support the principle of this Bill 16, but they are going 
to introduce some amendments. So we’ve already had the word of the Government that they intend to 
look seriously at these amendments. This is another weapon that is given to the Opposition to carry out 
their responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the greatest single weapon that is given is put in the hands of the ordinary Members, 
whether they be Opposition Members or whether they be Government Members, supporters of the 
Government, and that is public opinion. The final analysis, the only things really in the final analysis 
that keep government on the straight and narrow, that keeps them democratic, that keeps them open, that 
keeps them honest, is public opinion. They know if they ignore it long enough they do it at their peril 
and they will be defeated at the polls. Now public opinion must be roused if the Opposition is convinced 
the course of action being followed by the Government is wrong, they have a very serious responsibility 
to try and rouse public opinion. Now public opinion is slow. Public opinion takes time to arouse. To 
begin with, the Government introduces a piece of legislation, it is reported in the daily Press, it is 
reported on the television, it is in competition with all other news events, it’s in competition with 
everything else that happens. It goes unnoticed by and large in the first instance, except by those people 
who are vitally interested. 
 
Now we have Bills 1 and 2 introduced by the Government and the Government hopes that they’d pass 
with little or no debate, get lost in the general shuffle and happiness of Christmas, and be forgotten, 
except by the potash industry and a few other concerned people in the New Year and the NDP would 
have accomplished their purpose. We say our responsibility is when we think the Bill is wrong. If we 
don’t think it’s wrong, if we don’t think what the Government’s doing is not in the best interest of the 
public, then of course, opposition of any kind would be wrong, whether it’s short, difficult or long. But 
when we are convinced, as we are now, that what we are doing is right, what we are doing is just, what 
we are doing is in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, then we not only have the right, but 
we have the responsibility to fight and fight as hard as we can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — So, Mr. Speaker, this is the greatest single weapon that the Opposition has and that 
is to arouse public opinion. And I say under this Motion, by literally reducing the number of 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1272 
 

days that this debate would normally take if we follow the normal hours, they are in fact attempting to 
quell opposition, they are attempting to stifle opposition, they are attempting to push this Bill rapidly 
through so that opposition that is already mounting to the Bill will not have a chance to grow any 
further. 
 
I am going to tell them about opposition that’s already mounting, and how we are succeeding in what we 
set out to do, and I make no apologies. In fact, I’m proud of it. 
 
The Attorney General undertook to threaten the Chamber of Commerce, the people of Saskatoon, 
because he said the Chamber of Commerce, who basically are believers in freedom of enterprise, that’s 
their reason for being, had the gall from his point of view and temerity to oppose the Government so he 
spanked them. 
 
Well now, very interesting. I’ve learned today that the Regina Chamber of Commerce, who came out as 
opposed to this idea, because it wasn’t a Bill then when it was brought out in the Throne Speech, have 
now gone further and they have written to the Government, and they will receive it today or tomorrow 
(it’s no secret - they have written to the Government) strongly opposing the actions the Government is 
contemplating in pushing through Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
Just as an aside, which I will connect with this Motion very quickly, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be very 
interesting when all these Boards of Trade decide that they are going to stand up and be counted and 
show a little intestinal fortitude, which I think most of them will. They are going to have a very 
interesting time if all of the Chambers of Commerce decide to oppose, as I hope they will, and it is their 
responsibility. I don’t know where they will put the head office. I suggest that they will put it exactly 
where it is now, in Regina, on Scarth Street, and they have no intention of changing it, and Henry can 
rest content because that’s where it is and that’s where it will stay. However, the point I want to make, 
because there has been some time taken, opposition is beginning to mount and that’s healthy and it’s 
democratic and that’s why we are doing this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, one of the catcalls, one of the charges we get continually is that we 
are filibustering, as if filibustering by its very nature was something un-Canadian, immoral, slightly 
tainted and always bad. Yes, American. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Purely American! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well, purely American. Let us not take the attitude that all things American are 
bad - my mother was an American and I have a very fond remembrance of her. So there are many things 
that are American that are great wonderful institutions, including apple pie and motherhood. Now 
filibustering is a name given when people in an elected assembly, whether it’s the Congress, the Senate 
or the House of Commons or the Legislative Assembly in Regina undertake to hold up legislation for a 
great length of time. Now I don’t think that anyone in honesty can 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1273 
 

say that holding up legislation, when we have considered the Throne Speech and Private Members’ Day 
and we have only sat not even fully 24 days, can be really termed a first-class filibuster. But even if it is, 
even if it is, I’m quite prepared to have it termed a first-class filibuster, because there’s nothing I’d 
rather filibuster against than these two Bills. 
 
When we said we would hold up Bill 2 until you gave us the figures, you gave us the figures, or you 
promised to give them. You have given some vague figures and the Premier has made a sort of 
Philadelphia lawyer’s promise that he will give us some more. (I say Philadelphia lawyer because I think 
they are famous or infamous for the weasel-words that they put in the promises they make, the number 
of doors they leave so they can scuttle back out of if they find they have painted themselves into a 
corner). However, we’ve got about as strong a commitment as you ever get from Premier Blakeney that 
we’ll get a firm figure. We’ve made some headway. Not as much as we intend to make, not as much as 
satisfies us, because there are just a whole host of things that an honest, open, sincere, government 
would be laying on the table, would have already laid on the table, studies, feasibility studies, cost 
studies, analysis of markets, and so on. The studies they must have taken as a responsible government 
before they arrived at the decision to launch on this multimillion course, this fantastic risk. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — How many studies did you have on prorationing? Tell us that. 
 
MR. STEUART: — We discussed prorationing, we discussed prorationing as long as anybody wanted 
to discuss it, and as a matter of fact, it is a far cry, Mr. Attorney General, from prorationing to seizing 
and taking over and confiscating an industry. Now if you don’t know the difference then God help the 
people of Saskatchewan. You are the Number One law enforcer in this province, supposed to be, and if 
you don’t know the difference between those two Acts, then I say that you are a pretty, pretty bad choice 
for Attorney General and you have a very peculiar outlook on the role of government. 
 
Now to return, Mr. Speaker, . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think that the question before the House is whether the debate is in order with the 
Resolution that’s before us. I’m having increasing difficulty with the Member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake in relating what he is saying to the subject in the Resolution, which deals exclusively with the 
extension of the hours of the sitting of this House. I have brought this to the attention of the Member 
before and I do it again in the hope that he will relate closely to the Resolution that is before us. 
 
I would admit that a lot of your remarks may be relevant to Bill 1, and are not relevant to this. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I certainly will return immediately to the point 
and stay there, unswervingly from now on. 
 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1274 
 

As I was saying, one of the reasons that we oppose this Resolution in its present form is that we are 
convinced, Mr. Speaker, that it will cut off debate in the final analysis. We are really seriously 
convinced of this, thoroughly convinced. And we think that debate, elongated debate, has a place in this 
Legislative Assembly when the Opposition is sincerely, firmly, wholeheartedly convinced that what the 
Government is doing is wrong, just as we are, and I mean that very seriously. I can’t be more serious, I 
can’t be more sincere when I say that we are not opposing this, we are not staying in this Legislative 
Assembly because we like to sit here or we like to obstruct. We are doing this because we feel with 
every fibre in our being, and I mean this, that this is wrong and we must oppose it and we must oppose 
by every possible legal means. That’s what we are dong, every possible legal and moral means to 
persuade the Government to change its mind and change its course. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Let me give you . . . this has happened before. If I thought, Mr. Speaker, that by 
opposing this Motion in a larger sense, attempting to get the Government to let the debate go on in the 
normal way, if I thought that what we are doing is of no purpose, I wouldn’t do it, neither would the 
Members on this side of the House. I will use a couple of examples. One in the United States, one that 
stands out in my mind very clearly when the late Franklin Delano Roosevelt attempted to back the 
Supreme Court, went before the Senate and the Senate filibustered that Bill and held it up for weeks. 
Public opinion roused up and convinced that very reasonable President that he should not embark on this 
course and shouldn’t have done in a fit of pique because they had thrown out some of the legislation he 
had put on the books. That filibuster, I say, was a milestone in the political history at that time in the 
United States. 
 
Now I shall go to Canada - the famous or infamous pipeline debate. The Government of that day, a 
Liberal Government, bringing in a pipeline that has been one of the blessings of Canada, no one argues 
that the pipeline hasn’t been a great thing for Canada. But attempting to do exactly what you are 
attempting to do, ram it through the House, set themselves deadlines, their own deadlines, no deadlines 
were set by anyone else, the late C.D. Howe, a great Canadian, too much in a hurry in his latter days, set 
himself an artificial deadline and attempted to override the Opposition. The Conservatives of that day, I 
would point out to the Conservative Members here, and the NDP Members of that day, filibustered and 
they did it honorably, and they brought down the Government of that day. Now we might on this side 
think it wasn’t a good thing, I wasn’t all that convinced that it wasn’t a good thing at the time, but I will 
say that those Canadians as they voted very shortly after, obviously thought it was a good thing. I point 
those two classic examples out for both Members, . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Flag debate, this debate is the same kind. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well, again, Mr. Speaker, with all deference the Attorney General has shown his 
priority. He has shown the depth of this intellect, or the lack of depth. If he can compare 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1275 
 

a debate on what kind of flag we’ll have flying, as serious as it is, to a debate that is going to seize and 
take over a potash industry and gamble hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars, and I say to help to 
destroy the political climate, then I have real questions about his . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Mr. Leader of the Opposition, what you are discussing here has no relevance to the 
Motion that’s before the House and I ask the Leader of the Opposition to deal with the extension of the 
hours for sitting of the House. And reciting the attendance record of the House, or the SPC, or Bill 42, or 
obstruction, or filibustering, really has very little to do with this Resolution which is extension of the 
hours. 
 
I agree, some of your remarks have been in order, but in the majority they have been out of order, not in 
relation to the Resolution. 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak, if I may, to that Point of 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was happening at the moment you ruled the Leader of the Opposition out of order, is 
that he was responding to a continuous verbal barrage from the Attorney General while he was making 
his remarks. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — All right - tear it up, tear it up, he’s entitled to do it. Except that he directs them 
occasionally to the members of the Press and except that he gets reported when he makes those 
comments, and here is one from yesterday to illustrate my point: 
 

On occasion during the speech Mr. Romanow had called on . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! That is not the Point of Order. I ask the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake to continue if he intends to. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the Hon. Attorney General admits that he is 
ashamed of his performance. He should be ashamed of his performance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Contempt of Parliament! 
 
MR. STEUART: — There is no Member on any side of the House who tries to get more cheap shots 
for publicity than the Hon. Member for Saskatoon and he’s very good at it too. He shouldn’t try to be 
sort of stand up and say . . . back to the Motion, Mr. Speaker, back to the Motion. 
 
I just want to say in conclusion, that this Government’s move of attempting to lengthen the hours and 
they will eventually 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1276 
 

use their great majority to lengthen the hours, and I want to . . . no! I won’t say that, I just thought of 
something that was out of order and I decided not to say it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to reply to that - contempt of Parliament, if there is any man on any side that has contempt of 
Parliament and the democratic process, it’s the Attorney General. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Twisted speeches, threatening speeches, ramrod things, ramrod things through this 
House. If you didn’t have the safest seat in Saskatoon, where anybody could be elected as an NDP, they 
could run a two-headed cow in your seat and get him elected NDP, you would have been defeated years 
ago. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the Government’s move to lengthen the hours, (they almost did in 
that other seat), the Government’s move is for only one purpose and they stand condemned. They stand 
out clearly to every thinking person to see, naked in their power, they stand for everyone to see, that they 
are forcing the Members on this side, attempting to force their will, their huge majority, their unthinking 
majority by lengthening the hours and shutting off normal, honest, democratic debate. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Shut him off! 
 
MR. STEUART: — They say that we are attempting to obstruct. Again, I go back, Mr. Speaker, to 
emphasize that we are quite prepared for morning sittings, we are quite prepared to lengthen the hours of 
sittings, if they can show us that they need to get this Bill through, as they do need to for Bill 16. Bill 16 
we recognize that there is some merit in getting that on the books to end the uncertainty. We are 
prepared to let it go through, get into Committee, and get it through and get it on the law books so that 
people can accustom themselves to it and it can be at least one small step by the Government in joining 
the rest of Canadians, thinking Canadians, in the fight against inflation. But where hundreds and 
millions of dollars are concerned, where the rights of citizens are concerned, where the freedom and the 
basic rights of citizens are being trampled on when they lengthen these hours and they force this Bill on 
the public, in cases like that I say it is our responsibility to fight and fight as long as we can. And I ask 
the Government, I ask the Government if they are sincere. If they are sincere in wanting to give open, 
public debate to take this Bill, this motion, stand it or vote themselves against it, or have the Attorney 
General stand and withdraw and then let their Members rise in their place, all afternoon, the Ministers 
who haven’t spoken, the Member for Saskatoon and take part in this debate. Let the Premier, or the 
Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley), or the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), who is piloting the Bill 
through, as the reason we are lengthening these hours. Let them lay on the table the studies, and the facts 
and the figures. We still won’t agree with what they are doing. Mr. Speaker, I say very clearly that we 
couldn’t hold those Bills up any longer than it was necessary to finish this debate, put the Bills in 
Committee, attempt to get them amended and then pass them. I say if you 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1277 
 

would move what we legitimately asked from day one in this debate and what the Press is asking for and 
what the public is asking for and that is open up, be honest, play fair, come clean. Take the gloves off if 
you have nothing to hide. What have you got to hide? Put the facts on the table. If you put the facts on 
the table, we can judge your motives, we can judge the clarity of your reason, we can judge whether it is 
or is not a good economic deal and a good business deal. Then debate, I guarantee a debate will proceed 
very briskly and we will proceed to pass the necessary stages of these two Bills and get on with the 
business of this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words about this 
Motion that was presented by the Attorney General. I came here this afternoon hoping that the Attorney 
General would be in one of his more rational moments and give us an explanation as to why these added 
hours are required. 
 
The Attorney General rose at about 3:30 o’clock, unfortunately with tongue set firmly in cheek and gave 
us an explanation as to why this Motion was required that was completely against the statement he made 
to the Press and the media that had been reported to me yesterday. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I feel like the other Members on this side of the House that there is 
only one reason for this Motion to be before us and that is to assist the Government to ram Bill 1 and 
Bill 2 down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — I think that my opinion, Mr. Speaker, has been confirmed by the Premier’s remarks 
as reported on radio today when he indicated that he wanted these Bills through by Christmas. Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier denies, if he denies that is what he said, or if any of the Members opposite feel 
that that is not true, they have had more than ample opportunity to rise today and dispute it. They have 
sat there and said nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have voted for this Motion if I had had an assurance from the Attorney General 
that with the extra hours of debate that the Motion provided that we would have heard from a few 
people, that we would have heard from the Premier on these two debates, which we have not yet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — I would have voted for this Motion if the Attorney General had assured me that the 
Premier was going to rise on either Bill 1 or Bill 2 to try and justify his slander of the potash companies. 
The Premier has called them in effect liars, he has brought no evidence before this Chamber to justify 
those remarks. I would have voted for this Motion if I had known that the Premier was going to give us 
evidence of the truth of what 



 
December 17, 1975 
 

1278 
 

he said, or in the alternative, withdrawn those statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have voted for this Motion if I had had assurance from the Attorney General or the 
Members opposite that we may have had had the Minister of Finance rise in the extra hours we would be 
voting for, to explain where the money was going to come from to finance the takeover of the potash 
companies. To explain where $1 billion was going to be raised. To be explained the amount of interest 
that had to be paid on that money. To explain where the money was coming from, what banks, what 
countries. We have not heard from the Minister of Finance. 
 
MR. B. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Point of Order. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have sat here for three 
hours this afternoon and perhaps ten minutes of that three hours the Hon. Members opposite have 
spoken to the question. They are filibustering by making a mockery of the rules of this House and I think 
you should jump . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the observations of the Member tends to be accurate because I have drawn 
attention to the fact several times during the afternoon that the Members have strayed from the topic 
before us and I would ask the Member who is speaking now to adhere closely to the resolution which 
deals with the extension of the sitting hours in this Assembly. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I am dealing with the Motion precisely and exactly. Everything I have 
said today I have prefaced with an explanation as to why I’m saying it. I am telling this House and I am 
telling you, Sir, why I would have voted for this resolution if we would just receive some explanation 
from the Attorney General. 
 
I would have voted for this resolution, Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General had assured us when he rose 
that the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was going to enter the debate in 
the extra hours or at any other time to explain the risk, explain where the markets are if the potash is 
going to be mined in the years ahead. 
 
I would have voted for this Motion, Mr. Speaker, if during the extra hours that this Motion deals with, if 
we had assurance the Minister of Industry would have risen in this debate and told us about the future 
development in the Province of Saskatchewan. If he would tell us about what effect this would have on 
the future industry of the Province of Saskatchewan. We have not heard from him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have voted for this Motion if I had had some indication that the Minister of 
Education was going to rise in this debate to tell us what those people in his constituency who work for 
potash corporations, who work in potash mines would think about this legislation. 
 
I would have also voted for this Motion, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Labour had taken part in this 
debate, or was going to take part in this debate and tell this House what the trade union people in the 
potash mines think about this 



 
December 17, 1975 

 

1279 
 

legislation. We have not heard from him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also have voted for this Motion, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Municipal Affairs, who did rise, 
I acknowledge that he rose the other night, but he rose and told us what the tax situation was going to be 
in rural municipalities once the Government takes over the potash mines. We haven’t heard from him 
either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — I also would have been voting for this Motion if we had heard from the Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Social Services in this extra time that we are considering to state their opinion 
as to the Attorney General’s threats to the Board of Trade in Saskatoon. I wonder what they think of 
what the Attorney General says. We haven’t heard from them either. 
 
And this is most important, Mr. Speaker, most important. I would be voting for this Motion if we had an 
assurance that the Minister of Mineral Resources was going to enter this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, to 
tell us what is going to happen to the Energy Fund in this province, an energy fund that was to be used 
for the exploration for oil, uranium, coal, natural gas. We have not heard from him either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will vote for the Motion after I propose an amendment to it, an amendment that will not 
change the substance of the Motion in any manner whatsoever, an amendment that will, I am sure, be 
greeted by the Members opposite with some consideration because it does not in any way suggest that 
we are going to be sitting any less hours than suggested by the Attorney General. The amendment, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You wouldn’t put a closure on! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Did you want to say something, Roy? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You wouldn’t put a closure on us, would you, you would allow us to respond to 
that? 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, there are several other speakers to follow me on the amendment. Now 
if the Attorney General wants to call that closure, let him call it closure. But I’ll tell the Attorney 
General, Mr. Speaker, that we are opposed to Bill 1 and Bill 2 and we are going to fight Bill 1 and Bill 2 
as long as we can and in any manner we can. If they want to call that filibuster, that is fine. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, if it had not been for the interruptions of the Attorney General and the 
Members opposite I would have had time to put my amendment to you. However, I see that it is now 
6:30 o’clock and I call it 6:30 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interrupted the proceedings and the Assembly adjourned at 6:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


