
























































Hansard: November 13, 1975


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

November 13, 1975 
2nd Day 

 

13 
 

 
Thursday, November 13, 1975 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Money Borrowed for Potash 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day I should like to 
direct a question to the Premier. In the course of his press reports about the suggested takeover of the 
potash industry, he talked about having some money in place to do this, having borrowed some money. 
My question is: where has this money been borrowed or what arrangement have been made to borrow 
this money (has it been borrowed in the United States)? A fair amount of money is involved. How much 
is actually involved at this stage and what interest rate has been agreed upon? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall using that particular language i.e. 
indicating that money had been borrowed. I believe I used the language to suggest that money was in 
place. This, in essence, is money in the resources fund which accumulates from the royalty surcharge on 
oil revenues. It is not borrowed, as such, but is the yield from a particular taxation measure, which yield 
is not taken into current revenue. I don’t have at my fingertips the amount which would be there and 
whether or not it has been lent out on short term or the like but there is a considerable sum of money 
which has accumulated in the resources fund which in our judgment could be made available for the 
purchase of this asset if it appeared appropriate. 
 
MR. STEUART: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Leaving aside for a moment the fact that our clear 
understanding was that that money was to be used in the development of new energy sources, this 
appears to be a misappropriation of that particular money. It is my understanding that there were some 
of your people in New York attempting to obtain money, my supplementary question is: have there been 
any negotiations going on in New York or in any other of the financial capitals of the world, Toronto, or 
any other place in the world, efforts on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan by any of their 
officials to obtain money, borrow money, to buy into the potash industry and if so, what kind of money, 
American money, Arab money, and what interest rate are you talking about if you have done this? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — In anticipation of the possible need for capital funds, both for the projects 
announced in the Speech from the Throne and other projects, persons on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan have spoken with bond dealers in Toronto, bond dealers in New York, or perhaps I should 
say bond dealers from Toronto and bond dealers from New York - I don’t know where the 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

14 
 

conversations actually took place. These conversations have gone on but so far as I am aware no 
arrangements have been made to finalize any underwriting. Preliminary discussions have taken place. 
 

FEDERAL PRICES AND INCOMES CONTROL BOARD 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Finance or the appropriate Minister. Is the Minister aware that there is a certain degree 
of confusion among the people of Saskatchewan as to the position of the Government of Saskatchewan 
towards the new Prices and Incomes Control Board a package of the Federal Government? In fact the 
Throne Speech made it as clear as an unrehearsed Chinese fire drill. Is the Minister aware that some 
provinces have already indicated that they will sign an agreement with the federal government to accept 
jurisdiction over some provincial responsibilities? Is it the intention of the Government of Saskatchewan 
to sign an agreement under section 4(3) whereby they will give to the federal government the 
responsibility of certain of their responsibilities or are they intending to follow the pattern of Quebec and 
use section 4(4) where they can establish their own prices and income board? If it is their intention to 
sign an agreement could the Minister indicate to the Members of the House the state of negotiations and 
when an agreement is intended to be signed? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, when the Hon. Member talks about 
confusion he is probably naming himself first, being confused about the prices and wages controls, I’ll 
accept that. To the best of my knowledge only the Province of Ontario has indicated that they will be 
entering into an agreement with the Federal Government. The Province of Quebec has indicated that 
they are going to be going their own route with legislation; none of the other provinces to the best of my 
knowledge have stated precisely what their position will be. There are ongoing discussions with the 
Government of Canada on a number of items that were set out in the White Paper as well as in Bill C73. 
These discussions are between officials of our government and the officials of other provincial 
governments and the Federal Government. The Federal Government has not been able to give an answer 
to a number of items as to their clarity. There are going to be further meetings this week and officials are 
meeting again next week. My understanding is that the Minister of Finance is intending to call another 
Federal-Provincial Conference of Finance Ministers for November 26. We are still looking for answers 
for specific clarification by the Federal Government. The Government of Saskatchewan has not reached 
a conclusion of whether we will be entering into an agreement or taking action on our own. These things 
are being reviewed and pending the clarification of federal policy. Our policy will be announced in due 
course. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I know that the Minister is also aware 
that there are provisions in the federal guide lines whereby exceptions can be made for historical 
relationships or catch up purposes. Is the government intending to make representation to indicate 
certain groups of employees within the province of Saskatchewan who will be considered in 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

15 
 

those new categories, and if so, does the Government of Saskatchewan determine which groups of 
employees in Saskatchewan they will consider coming under those particular provisions of historical 
tradition or historical relationships or catch up? Because as the Minister is aware a great number of 
employees are now bargaining collectively and unless there is some indication as to the intention of the 
government, in many cases this bargaining will be a farce. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes, we have recognized that there are disparities. We 
have been discussing with the Government of Canada our particular problems as to the relationships. 
Again in this particular area the Federal Government is not telling us very clearly what they mean about 
historical relationships. We have some ideas, particularly the relationship of jobs in our neighboring 
provinces. So the answer is, yes, we have made representation we are also looking to clarification from 
the Government of Canada. We do recognize our particular problems. Some of these for example are 
teachers, nurses, hospital employees, construction workers; there are quite a few groups. 
 

EXPROPRIATION OF POTASH INDUSTRY 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like 
to direct a question to the Minister of Mineral Resources, I see he is not in his seat this afternoon, and 
after hearing the Speech from the Throne yesterday, I don’t blame him. But in his absence, perhaps I 
could direct a question to the Premier. As we are of course aware, the Speech from the Throne contained 
very severe measures to the taken against the potash companies, that is, nationalization or expropriation. 
The reason given by the Government for taking these measures was that the companies have failed to go 
along with the suggested tax changes made by the Government and in fact they exercised their 
inalienable right of going to court to challenge the Government. Apparently the Government is afraid 
that justice will be done in this action and as a result has brought in these measures. My question to the 
Premier is, Mr. Speaker, how is this going to affect the uranium mining industry? They are in the 
position of having similar tax measures being put upon them that are very similar to the potash industry. 
If the uranium industry does not accept these taxing measures, is it the intention of the Government to 
expropriate them? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, you will have noted the hypothetical nature of the question — if 
something happens in the future, what then? I think it is perhaps best to wait until the dire predictions of 
the Hon. Member for Lakeview do, or do not, take place. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We are having discussions and we have no reason to anticipate that there will be 
any difficulty in arriving at a mutually satisfactory arrangement that will provide for joint ventures, as I 
have indicated, and provide a role for the public mining development corporation and 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

16 
 

a role for the private industry, and in respect to the private industry, have an appropriate regime of 
requisition and taxation. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, by way of a supplementary question. It would appear that the uranium 
industry is going to be treated in the same manner as the potash industry. Have you set any deadlines as 
to when the uranium industry is to agree or disagree with the taxing proposals that you have made? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think that we are not at that stage. I think we have promulgated some draft 
proposals to the industry and are now receiving from them some comments on what they would feel to 
be the effect of those proposals on their industry. We have not promulgated or passed any regulations 
which they have been called upon either to accept or reject at this time. 
 

PURCHASE OF MORE LAND FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICE SPACE 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — I wonder if I could direct a question to the Minister of 
Government Services. If he would explain why with the government having recently begun construction 

of a major office . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! We have had three questions now, it is a practice that has been in this 
House. I wonder if we could move on to Orders of the Day. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — We’ll allow one more. 
 
MR. PENNER: — . . . Thank you. As I was asking, would the Minister of Government Services explain 
why it is that having begun construction of a major office complex in downtown Saskatoon that is worth 
something in the neighborhood of $20 million, that two weeks ago the government further attempted to 
purchase land for office space in the Saskatoon Eastview area? 
 
HON G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Government Services): — I believe the Member asks the question, 
why is Government Services purchasing additional property in downtown Saskatoon. Was that the 
question that you . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — In the Saskatoon Eastview area, you already have a major chunk of land in the 
downtown area. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I’ll have to defer that question until later. Mr. Speaker, I shall refer this to the people 
in the department and I will get back to the Member when I have had an opportunity to check with 
departmental officials. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

HOUSE ADJOURNMENT 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Hon. Mr. 
Bowerman: 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

17 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns today, Thursday, November 13, 1975, it do stand adjourned until 
Monday, November 17,1975. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it is traditional in this Legislature on the day 
following the delivery of the Speech from the Throne that the House recognizes the contribution made to 
the public life of this province by former members of the Assembly who have died since the Legislature 
last met. I accordingly move, seconded y the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing since the prorogation of the 
Legislature of four former Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 
the contributions they made to their community, their constituency and to this Province: 

 
Harold John Fraser, Q.C., who died on September 1, 1975, was a Member of this Legislature 
for Prince Albert from 1939 to 1944. He was born in Ottawa, Ontario in 1893 where he received 
his public and high school education and he later studied law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto. He 
served overseas during the First World War with the Canadian Machine Gun Squadron of the 
Canadian Cavalry Brigade. He practised law in Prince Albert for over 50 years and in 1957 was 
appointed Queen’s Counsel. He served as a public school trustee in 1924 and 1925; and as an 
alderman from 1928 to 1933; as mayor of Prince Albert from 1934 to 1938; and as president of 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association from 1938 to 1939. He also served in 
various offices of the Kiwanis Club, the Chamber of Commerce and the Canadian Club. 

 
George Frederick Loken, who dies on August 25, 1975 was a Member of this Legislature for 
Rosetown from 1964 to 1975. He was born in 1906 at Elstow, Saskatchewan, where he received 
his education. He was a bank employee from 1923 to 1927; was in the real estate business from 
1927 to 1931; and operated a farm implement and automobile dealership from 1932 to 1964. He 
served on the Rosetown Town Council for nine terms and was a member of the Chamber of 
Commerce, the Masonic Lodge, the Wa Wa Shrine Temple, the Elks Lodge, and the Lions Club. 

 
William Henry Wahl, who died on April 1, 1975, was a Member of this Legislature for 
Qu’Appelle-Wolseley from 1952 to 1956. He was born at Carnduff, Saskatchewan in 1902. He 
lived in Glenavon, Saskatchewan and was a farm implement dealer there. He was active for 
many years as mayor of the town; as a member of the school board; as a charter member of the 
Wheat Pool; and as a member of various committees to build recreational and community 
facilities. 

 
Maurice John Willis, who died on November 10, 1975, was a Member of this Legislature for 
Elrose from 1944 to 1960. 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

18 
 

He was born at Stony Mountain, Manitoba in 1900. He graduated from the University of 
Manitoba with a Bachelor of Arts degree and a Bachelor of Education degree. He was principal 
of the Elrose School for six years and then was principal of the Eston High School for 29 years. 
He was a member of the Masonic Lodge and was on the United Church Board in Eston. He 
served as president of the local Teachers’ Association for two years and acted as councillor for 
his superintendency to the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation from 1939 to 1942. He later was 
made an honorary member of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most 
sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are the formal condolences. I should like to add a few words with respect to the three 
of the former Members. I did not know Mr. Fraser and doubtless some Members from the Prince Albert 
area will be commenting on his contribution. 
 
I did sit in this House, as many of us did, with George Loken. I sat during the entire period of the eleven 
years that he represented the Rosetown area. He was a soft-spoken and friendly man. He served his 
constituents faithfully; he did not take a particularly active part in the debates of the House but he did, as 
all Cabinet Members know, look after his constituents and their needs very, very diligently. He made a 
real contribution to his Party and his province and he will be remembered with respect by the people of 
the Rosetown area. I had the opportunity to attend his funeral in August and the esteem in which he was 
held by the people in the Rosetown area who clearly knew him best, was indicated from the many 
people from all walks of life who were in attendance at the funeral to pay their last respects. 
 
I didn’t sit in the Legislature with Harry Wahl, but I came to know him reasonably well in the days 
when I worked in this building as a Secretary of Crown Corporations and used to sit in on the meetings 
of the Crown Corporations Committee regularly for five or six years. Harry Wahl was a member of that 
Committee and an active participant. He was a genial man, always interested and well-informed, 
particularly on farm topics and those aspects of farm topics related to machinery distribution and 
regulation. He was his own man. I well remember on one occasion when Harry decided to express some 
words of fairly strident criticism of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And that was not the normal stance 
of the CCF Members in this Legislature during the 1950s. There were a number of his colleagues who 
raised their eyebrows, but Harry was the sort of man who would not be particularly disturbed either by 
the fact that his colleagues may raise their eyebrows, or the fact that he was a founding member of the 
Pool. He was indeed his own man. He was, nevertheless, well regarded and well-liked by his colleagues 
and by the Members on the opposite side of the House. 
 
I came to know Maurice Willis, the former Member for Elrose, under the same circumstances. He 
served in the House form 1944 to 1960 and I knew him particularly well in the early 1950s and have, of 
course, kept in touch with him because he was an active Member of the Party to which I belong right up 
to the day of 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

19 
 

his death. I may say, the Hon. Member for The Battlefords, the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) who 
served in this House with Maurice for eights years, is attending the funeral on behalf of the Government, 
and I may say so, on behalf of the Legislature. 
 
Maurice was a quiet man, a particularly careful-living man. He was dedicated and sincere; he was the 
sort of man who had a burning interest in public affairs. He exhibited this when I came to know him as a 
critic, a knowledgeable and sympathetic critic of the affairs of our Party. In all of his criticisms he had in 
mind the concerns of the community and the province rather than any personal concerns. As a teacher, a 
principal, an MLA, and in retirement, he was a public-spirited man of principle. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I consider it a privilege to join 
with the Premier and I am sure other Members in this House, in paying respect to these men who have 
passed on since our last meeting, and who served their province and in most cases their communities as 
well at the local level for so many years and so well. I didn’t know Mr. Willis, nor Mr. Wahl, and will 
simply say on behalf of the Liberal caucus that we join the Premier in paying our respects to their 
memory for the services that they rendered to their constituents, to their province in serving in this 
Legislative Assembly, and passing on to their families our deep regrets and our respects to them. 
 
Hal Fraser was elected a Member of the Legislative Assembly for the city of Prince Albert in 1940. He 
had been, as the Premier pointed out, a trustee, an alderman and a mayor. He served the city of Prince 
Albert during the very difficult times of the 1930s, and he served them very well. He continued to serve 
the public even after he had formally moved out of the political arena, through the Chamber of 
Commerce and through the Kiwanis Club, up until literally the day of his death, when at the age of 80 or 
81 he would still have been practising law and he was still tremendously active in community work in 
the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Hal Fraser held one record of which he was proud, a record not given to very many people, in fact, a 
record not given to anyone in this nation in the last 35 years, in that actually at one time he defeated 
John Diefenbaker in the position of mayor of the city of Prince Albert. Mind you it was rather 
unfortunate in his later years in life he spoiled that record by running against him and being one of his 
victims in a federal election in the 1960s. Even Mr. Diefenbaker, at that time, had rather wished that Hal 
had left the record intact and I think Hal did when he finished himself. But he was that kind of a man, he 
knew he didn’t have a chance, but he was a dedicated member of his party and felt that Liberals in the 
Prince Albert constituency should have someone they could vote for and he made the sacrifice and it 
was a sacrifice. But he was an outstanding citizen. He held very strong views and he expressed them 
strongly and colorfully. 
 
I join with the Premier in passing on my respects to his wife and to his son. 
 
George Loken, I knew and liked and admired and respected. 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

20 
 

It was a great loss to his community and to all of us when he passed away so suddenly, almost 
immediately after retiring from this House. George, in the best sense of the word, was a community 
man. Whether they needed to build a rink in Rosetown, whether it was the United Appeal, or whether it 
was work with the Chamber f Commerce, or the Elks, or the local Masons, George was one of the first 
people they called on and one of the most dependable people they had in that community. When he was 
convinced, he stood for public office as an MLA and won that seat. He wasn’t an active speaking 
Member in the House, but few men, I’m sure, no one in my time in this Legislative Assembly, indeed on 
this side of the House, worked harder for individuals. George kept an office just off the main street in 
Rosetown and that office was open to everyone. George never questioned when the people came in and 
had a problem to do with the provincial or the federal government, or anyone else, he never questioned. 
He wasn’t really interested in how they had voted, whom they supported, but he went to work for them. 
It always amazed me how many people he knew in the civil service. He didn’t really bother with 
Cabinet Ministers, even when we were the government, and certainly when we weren’t the government. 
George went directly to the people involved, whether it was the Deputy Minister or the head of an 
agency or a department. As I say, I was always amazed at the number of people working in this 
Government, at all levels and in the Crown corporations, that George knew on a personal basis. The 
action he could get, in fact he could get far more action most of the time than someone serving in the 
Cabinet. That was his attitude in life — he liked to help people and he did help people. That’s why there 
was more than an affection for Gorge in our caucus and I know there was respect and friendship on both 
sides of the House. There was real genuine love for George Loken in his own area. I regret his untimely 
passing. I think he had many more years, we had hoped he would have many more years to give to his 
community and to his family. 
 
I take this opportunity to pay my sincere respects to the memory of George Loken and to pass on to his 
family our regard, our affection and our love for George Loken, and our thanks for the sacrifices that 
they made and that he made on our behalf. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
add the condolences of our caucus to those already expressed. 
 
Although I did not know the gentlemen in question their record shows that they served the interests of 
the Province of Saskatchewan and the people of this province well. 
 
May God grant them eternal peace. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join very briefly 
with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Conservative Party in 
expressing condolences to the passing of these four former Members of the House. I did not have the 
opportunity of knowing three of them, but one was a very close personal friend. 
 
I should like first of all to say about Mr. Wahl, he does come from that area which I have the privilege to 
represent — 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

21 
 

Indian Head - Wolseley — from the community of Glenavon, and one of the things that always amazed 
me as I roamed up and down the constituency, was that everybody kept referring to Mr. Wahl. I think 
that perhaps one of the reasons that I am here today is that he was not able to campaign against me 
because he certainly never lost his interest or his vigor in the political life of his community or of our 
province. 
 
I, too, want to pass on my condolences to George Loken’s family. I don’t think I can add very much to 
what the Premier or Mr. Steuart, or Mr. Collver have indicated about George, but any of you who have 
had an opportunity to walk down the street of Rosetown with George Loken would know why he was 
elected to this House. Everyone stopped him, shook his hand and wished him well. He knew every little 
storekeeper, every dishwasher, every cook in the community and he served them all very well and 
faithfully. 
 
As Mr. Steuart indicated he never really participated in the very vigorous partisan debate in this House, 
but where George really made his effect was in the caucus room, or the committee, or in the halls. He 
provided a great deal of leadership for us in our caucus and for other Members of the House and it is 
with deep regret that the Liberal caucus of this House has lost a very warm and personal friend. 
 
MR. M. FESCHUK (Prince Albert): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with other Members in 
expressing condolences to the bereaved families of the Members who have passed away, and in 
particular to the family of Harold John Fraser, Q.C., known to many as Hal Fraser. 
 
I didn’t know Mr. Fraser as a Member of the Legislature nor as a politician. I knew him, however, as a 
conscientious hard-working gentleman. A man who took a keen interest in his community and who was 
able to make a contribution wherever he was involved. I am told that while he served as an active 
member in the Canadian Army he was wounded and that as an officer with the rank of Lieutenant he 
was known to treat his men as his equals and that he wasn’t afraid to criticize his superiors or challenge 
their strategy. It was from Mr. Fraser that I had learned that he was a Member of this Legislative 
Assembly representing Prince Albert from 1940 to 1944. I later discovered that Mr. Fraser was a strong 
advocate for northern development. In the early 1940s Mr. Fraser had the foresight and called on his 
Government for industrial diversification in the North. He suggested power sites and roads for northern 
Saskatchewan. He appealed to Government, tourists and citizens for the conservation of natural 
resources in the northern parts of this province. It has been said that had his colleagues been as 
considerate and conscientious as Hal Fraser, his Government would have remained in office following 
the 1944 election. I think that like many men of his generation he set a wonderful example. He left a 
record that he, his friends and his family can well be proud of. Mr. Fraser’s passing has been Prince 
Albert’s loss. To the bereaved family I express my deepest sympathy. 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to re-echo the words of the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition and Mr. Collver to the gentlemen named. I knew two of these 
gentlemen, Maurice Willis and George Loken happen to come from the area that I 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

22 
 

represent at the present time. 
 
M.J. Willis, had a distinctive career as a school principal for 35 years. As the Premier has indicated both 
of these schools happened to be in the Eston-Elrose School Unit, No. 33 in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. It was for 14 years that he represented the Elrose constituency. 
 
I did not know Mr. Willis as well as I knew George Loken, a former Member of this Legislature for 
Rosetown. He was indeed a very unique individual. I could re-echo the words of Mr. Steuart and the 
others as I came to know George. He demonstrated to everyone what real citizenship meant. He was not 
a vociferous individual but he did look after the needs of everyone regardless of what walk of life they 
came from or what their political affiliation. It would not surprise me that we may see very shortly that 
one of the many projects which George undertook, or supported or organized in the town of Rosetown 
will bear his name in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Rosetown-Elrose constituency will long remember Maurice John Willis and George 
Frederick Loken. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I join with other Members of the Legislature in 
expressing condolences to the families of the deceased Members. As I was elected in 1971 the only 
gentleman whom I knew was George Loken of the Rosetown constituency. I hadn’t me George before 
being elected and knowing he was of poor health and a very quiet individual, I wondered how he had 
managed to get elected. I was talking to a friend of mine in Saskatoon from Rosetown and I asked him 
that very question. I said, how did George manage to be so successful and get re-elected? He said, do 
you want to know how I got to the University? He told me that George loaned him the money to go. He 
said he never expected any payment and I found out subsequently that that was a very common thing for 
George. I came to realize over the next four years just how much help he had been to his constituents 
and how deeply involved he was. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) has referred to the number of people in government whom 
George Loken knew. I know of very, very few Members who made as many trips to Regina on behalf of 
his constituents as George Loken did. And he did it, as I said earlier, with failing health. He certainly 
wasn’t a well man and yet he constantly, sometimes once or twice a week, would drive down to Regina 
on behalf of his constituents and their problems. I know of very, very few people, Mr. Speaker, who 
served their constituents as well as George Loken did and I join with other Members of this Assembly in 
expressing deep condolences to the family. 
 
MR. D.L. FARIS (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with other Members of the 
Assembly in paying tribute to the memory of George Loken. Those of us who sat in the Assembly with 
George will remember him sitting in that corner over there and sometimes envying him because he used 
a hearing device in the Assembly. I was never myself sure whether it was on or off, but he seemed not to 
get upset by what was going on and I sometimes wondered if that device wasn’t off. 
 
He was a man of tremendous depth and personal warmth and 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

23 
 

anyone who spoke with him could see that. I have the honor of representing part of his former 
constituency and the things that have been said about him by Members opposite are undoubtedly true. 
Anyone who came to George Loken with a problem was put number one on his list and he had a deep 
personal concern. I sometimes reflect that perhaps the reason George didn’t get upset by what was going 
on in the Assembly was simply that he had his priorities right. He was looking after his community and 
after the people who mattered most to him because they were his responsibility. I sometimes wonder 
with a man like George Loken if he had continued to run if he would ever have been defeated. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to express belated 
condolences to the family, relatives and many friends of the later Mr. Loken, Member for Rosetown, 
who represented that constituency for a number of years. As for the Hon. Member, I got to know him for 
approximately the last four years as a natural consequence of our two constituencies being adjacent to 
one another. I must say that I ran into numerous citizens of all political, economic and social stripes who 
had nothing but praise for his genuine concern for people in his own quiet manner. But that is not to 
imply that the Hon. Member did not participate in movements and organizations in his community, 
constituency and even his province, for he did, and in this regard he certainly left his mark. 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join the other Members in 
paying tribute to those Members deceased and particularly George Loken. I had the privilege of being 
one of Mr. Loken’s constituents for many, many years and knew him well both in and out of politics. It 
is interesting, I suppose, that my relationship with George Loken grew to the point where in 1968 he 
urged me to prepare myself to pay an active role in the political process in Saskatchewan. This I did with 
encouragement and guidance from George Loken and in many way I expect I owe my election to this 
Legislature to George Loken. 
 
George was both an astute businessman and equally an astute politician. These characteristics of George 
Loken are well known and have been mentioned here this afternoon. Just as well known, however, was 
the fact that George had a natural understanding of people and this fact I suspect more than anything 
coupled with his principles and his integrity and his keen eye for justice made him the Member worthy 
of respect that those who sat with him were aware of. The fact that George was elected each and every 
time he ran is certainly proof positive that the people in the Rosetown area held him in high esteem. I 
know that George will be sadly missed by the constituents of Rosetown area and certainly by his family, 
and also I know by the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to add my words of regret and condolence to 
those expressed by Members before me. It seems each year at the opening of the Session that we are 
reminded of those Members who are no longer with us but who have made contributions to those they 
have served during their stay here in this Legislature. 
 
The late William Henry Wahl who served as a Member for 



 
November 13, 1975 
 

24 
 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, a neighboring constituency of mine, during the years from 1952 to 1956, not only 
was active in politics as you all know but his record speaks for itself: a mayor, an implement dealer, a 
member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. These all demonstrate to me, Mr. Speaker,, the contributions 
he has made to this community and it certainly shows the esteem in which he was held by his people. 
 
I would also wish to express condolences for the late Mr. George Loken, Member for Rosetown. Having 
sat here in this House with the late Mr. Loken for a period of 11 years, I can assure you that I found him 
a gentleman at all times. And while we knew his health was not of the best for sometime he never 
complained or shirked his duties. I should like to join, Mr. Speaker,, with other Members in expressing 
sympathy to the Members of the bereaved family. 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the other Members of the 
Assembly in paying tribute to some of the Members who are no longer with us. 
 
I should like to say a few words about Mr. Loken. I got to know him very well when he was on the 
Highway Traffic Safety Committee, the intersessional committee, there is where you saw George Loken, 
and the contribution that he made because there he spoke his mind, he changed his mind, he studied and 
he really tried to bring out the best that could be recommended. 
 
Also, Mr. Willis was a senior Member when I came to this Legislature. I want to tell the older Members 
that when new Members come into the Legislature it can be quite lonely. Maurice Willis was a man who 
was out there to help you. You went to him with problems and he showed you the way. That was 
Maurice Willis. He was a school teacher and Maurice Willis was really appreciated by the people who 
knew him. 
 
As for Henry Wahl, only one Member is left in this Legislature who sat with Henry Wahl. He is the dean 
of the House today, Mr. Kramer, who is attending the funeral of Maurice Willis. But Henry Wahl came 
to this Legislature many times later and I met him and had many conversations with him. To describe 
Henry Wahl I went to Hansard and looked at one speech he delivered in 1956. I shall read two 
paragraphs of his speech: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would first like to state that I became interested in the Indian question many years 
ago. In fact when I was a boy and listened to my grandfather talk. He used to proudly say that his 
grandfather and his grandmother had travelled by boat and walked with other troops with the 
United Empire Loyalists to what is now known as Nova Scotia to live and enjoy the rights to go 
and live under the British flag. And at that time he stated that no one had a better right to call 
themselves Canadians than the Empire Loyalists except the Indian. I always remembered that as 
I grew older. I came to realize that those privileges that my ancestors had been willing to make 
sacrifices for had been denied to Indians and it is about that that I am going to speak. 

 
And it goes on in another paragraph: 
 

Now who has a better right to look after the affairs of 



 
November 13, 1975 

 

25 
 

the Indians than the Indians themselves? I think that it would help to correct the ills of the 
Indians to give them self-government and allow them the right to vote, and not only municipally 
but for the provincial and federal governments. 

 
And we know that after those days they did receive the right to vote. 
 
I consider it a privilege and an honor to be able to express a few words of deep sympathy on behalf of 
myself and the Assembly to the members of the bereaved families. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, as well, I should like to take this opportunity just briefly to 
add a few words to pay respect to the man whom I consider to be possibly one of the greatest 
representatives, namely George Loken, whom this province has ever seen. I hesitate to say one of the 
greatest politicians because George was the kind of an individual, as has been mentioned already today, 
who immediately, once the election was over was no longer a politician. George Loken was a servant, a 
representative of the people of his constituency. It was for this reasons too, that he was one of the very, 
very few MLAs in the history of Saskatchewan politics to take his job seriously enough to make himself 
available at all times to his constituents. He set up a constituency office at his own expense within his 
constituency so that at any time, a constituent would have the opportunity to drop in and talk to his MLA 
personally. Because of this, I feel George was successful in three consecutive elections. As has been 
mentioned earlier, had George decided to run again I feel that the people of Rosetown would have 
honored him with another four years of representation. 
 
As a new Member when I first came into the Legislature back in 1971 following a by-election and being 
rather green, it was George Loken who helped the junior Member along, not only with suggestions but 
also with criticisms of how one conducted himself in this Legislature. I feel that because of this George 
took an active interest in not only his constituents but also within his own caucus and within his own 
party. 
 
I should just like to add my respects to his family. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Steuart): 
 

That the resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased Members be communicated to the bereaved families of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:31 o’clock p.m. 


