
























































Hansard: March 20, 1975


 
 
 

1062 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

22nd Day 
 

Thursday, March 20, 1975 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Air Cadets 
 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to introduce to the House on 
behalf of Mr. Speaker, 25 Air Cadets seated in the Speakers Gallery. They are the Wynyard Air Cadets 
who are accompanied here today by their teacher, Mrs. Eccles. The Wynyard High School as I have 
indicated is in the constituency of Mr. Speaker. On this occasion I hope that their visit to this legislature 
will be worthwhile and that it will provide an opportunity for them to further their appreciation and 
knowledge of the democratic process. 
 
I invite all Members to join with me in welcoming this group of Air Cadets from Wynyard and I hope 
that their stay and visit here today is worthwhile and fruitful. 

 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — I am very pleased to extend a warm welcome to a group of 60 
Grade Eight students from St. Andrew School in the Douglas Park area. They are accompanied by their 
principal, Mr. Halter. The St. Andrew School is located in Douglas Park which is a highly organized 
recreational community and which will play a very important part during the summer games this year. 
 
Again, a very warm welcome to the students and I hope their stay here will teach them much in the field 
of legislative work. A warm welcome to you all. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you, Sir, and to the Members of this Chamber, 40 students from Princess Alexandra School, 
Saskatoon. I think they are in the Speakers Gallery - right. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 
Ulrich and Mr. Hawthorne. Princess Alex is one of the older schools in the city of Saskatoon. When I 
went to Westmount Public School we used to lick them regularly in hockey and the like, but now that 
I’m the MLA for the area, they lick Westmount regularly. 
 
I’ll be meeting with the students at 3 p.m. to say hello to them. I welcome them to Regina. I hope they 
find their visit here entertaining and informative. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1063 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Inflation Controls 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should 
like to direct a question, in the absence of the Premier, to the Attorney General. In view of the fact that 
in the last election campaign the now Premier of this Province, Mr. Allan Blakeney, promised that a 
Saskatchewan NDP Government would impose selective price and wage controls if inflation continued 
and Ottawa failed to act. He also promised that they would at least have a prices review board. We are 
facing a continuing, sharp escalation in the price of farm machinery. The fact that we are coming to the 
time when farmers will be seeding, other farm inputs continue to rise . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Will the Member ask the question. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I will. It doesn’t appear to have any connection . . . 
 
Mr. Messer: — What’s the Federal Government going to do? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — The Federal Government isn’t doing enough. I’ll say that right now - the Federal 
Government isn’t doing enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Okay, we’ve settled that. Now, what are you going to do? My question is: Will you do 
something, because I think our farmers facing seeding this year are finding this totally unacceptable. For 
us to say Ottawa hasn’t done anything and for you people to sit there with the budget you have, my 
question is: What are you prepared to do to back up the need of our farmers to bring in these other 
controls, or at least bring the light of publicity on these rip-offs that appear to be taking place? What are 
you prepared to do? You haven’t done anything up to date. What are you prepared to do right now? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to answer the Leader of the Opposition with respect 
to the election promise. I stand to be corrected, both by my seatmate and the Premier, but I know of no 
provincial election promise with respect to price controls. I stand to be corrected in this area. But leaving 
that part, I do agree with the Leader of the Opposition when he says that not enough is being done by the 
Federal Government to combat inflation. Nothing is being done by Ottawa to combat inflation. Now, the 
simple fact of the matter is that it is going to take the leadership of the Federal Government, which has 
the fiscal tools, the fiscal controls, federally, to control the question of inflation, to take leadership and 
wrestle this matter of inflation to the ground. And the only answer has to come from Ottawa. But I 
would say to the Leader of the Opposition that we have done our bit, provincially, in a number of ways. 
To use an example, the stabilization program for the hog producers comes in an inflationary period with 
respect to the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1064 
 

costs of production for them. And I say above all, what we have done is we have brought down a 
responsible solid provincial budget which does not fan the fires of inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question. Just for the information of the Attorney General, it is quoted 
in the Leader-Post of June 16, 1971, the Premier made that promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We can’t have debate. We must just have a question. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Well, I shall now move very rapidly, instantaneously to my supplementary question. 
The truth is, you’ve said you’ve done nothing. Now, will you recommend to your Premier, to your 
Cabinet and when the rest of them show up if they do, will you recommend that they immediately take 
what steps a provincial government can do and there is lots a provincial government can do. Set up the 
committee you promised to look into this and make it public, focus public attention if they are gouging 
our farmers for machinery and other farm inputs. That is number one that you could do. Also, would you 
take action into bringing in legislation to put in price controls which you have the power to do. So, 
would you quit ducking behind Ottawa, pretending you’ve done something when you haven’t done 
anything at all and take some action. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition makes all sorts of, with all due respect, 
wild statements about inflation. The fact is that about a year and one-half ago this Government took 
positive action to ease inflation in a number of areas. Removal of the Medicare and hospitalization 
premium was an example in a series of actions. The leader of the Opposition says it’s not enough, well 
I’ll tell you it’s not enough by his standards but it is enough as far as the people of the Province of 
Saskatchewan are concerned. The Department of Consumer Affairs is on top of all of these areas with 
respect to gouging. The Minister of Agriculture has advised me that there is a committee, an internal 
committee with respect to fertilizer costs which has looked at the matter. And as far as the Province of 
Saskatchewan is concerned, for example, fertilizer costs are probably as low, if not the lowest, for any 
part of the western region. Now the simple fact is that inflation has to be controlled at a federal level and 
until such time as Prime Minister Trudeau and the Federal Liberal Government makes a commitment to 
fight inflation Canadians are going to suffer from it. We’ll do our bit, I can assure the Leader of the 
Opposition, we’ll do our bit to try and publicize that point to the Prime Minister of Canada at every 
opportunity we can. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — The short answer is you’ve done nothing. 
 

Cable Television 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question I 
should like to direct to the Minister in charge of Government Services. Recently there was 
announcement in the Leader-Post in connection with cable TV that the advent of cable 



 
March 20, 1975 

1065 
 

TV was going to be in the very near future. However, there was no date in the report that I saw as to 
when this service could be expected in the city of Regina. My question to the Minister is: Can you at this 
time give us an approximate date when cable TV will be available to the citizens of Regina. Secondly, 
Mr. Speaker, I should like the Minister to assure us that the cable TV co-op or company or whatever it 
is, the franchise holder, will offer to the people of Regina and Saskatchewan all available channels, that 
is all the American channels that are available and they will not restrict their service to just one or two of 
these channels. 
 
Hon. J.E. Brockelbank (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, answering the Hon. 
Member’s questions in reverse order. The number of channels that will be allowed for cable television in 
any city in Canada, let alone Regina or Saskatoon, will be determined by the federal regulatory body, the 
CRTC. It will be up to the community groups to put forward a recommendation to the CRTC with 
regard to the number of American channels they would like to receive, or foreign signals of any kind. 
The CRTC will then make the decision, it may be one or two or three, I am unable to say at this time. 
 
With regard to the date when people can expect cable television in Saskatchewan, I would say with 
reasonable accuracy, 18 to 24 months after the licence has been granted. Now the granting of the licence 
date is the imprecise factor in this because that has to be decided by the CRTC, the federal regulatory 
body. They will make their decision, I would assume, on the basis of applications that come before them 
and requests by those applicants for a date. The date being talked about at this time by some of the 
applicants is the fall of 1975. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. Why the fall of 1975? Are there no 
CRTC hearings prior to that date or is it a matter that the applicants won’t be prepared until the fall of 
1975? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The CRTC is holding hearings at all times during the year on different licence 
applications. I would assume at this time that the CRTC doesn’t have enough pressure for hearings in 
the Province of Saskatchewan and consequently they are not calling them at this time. I would expect 
that pressure to increase as we get into the year further and that they will at that time decide to call 
hearings. 
 

Meeting At La Ronge 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). I believe about two weeks ago the Minister of Health 
and the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman) visited La Ronge and had a meeting with 
the town council and members of the hospital board and so on. The mayor of the town invited the local 
editor of the newspaper to attend the meeting and I understand from the newspaper that the Minister of 
Health insisted that the editor be removed from the conference room prior to the start of the meeting and 
would not allow him to attend. I wonder if the Minister would give the reason why he 



 
March 20, 1975 

1066 
 

took that action at that time? 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, it is true I was in La Ronge about ten days 
ago and we had a meeting arranged with the hospital board and with the medical profession. The 
invitation to the newspaper man was not extended by me. He came there uninvited. 
 
Mr. Guy: — He was invited by the mayor. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Well, he might have been invited by the mayor but the meeting was called by us. We 
had things to discuss with the hospital board and it is not normal when there are things you might want 
to discuss in confidence with a board or the medical profession to have in attendance the newspaper 
people. We did then meet, following our meeting, with the newspaper man and we gave him the story 
for the press. He was also free to discuss with the mayor what we discussed and also the medical 
profession. It is not our customary method to be having a meeting with delegations in the presence of the 
press. 
 
Mr. Guy: — A supplementary question. I think that the Minister hasn’t really answered the question. 
Surely to goodness if the mayor of the town who is also the chairman of the hospital board . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Ask the question, please. 
 
Mr. Guy: — I would if you would just allow me. The mayor of the town is also the chairman of the 
hospital board. He invited the editor. I don’t think it is fitting for the Minister of the Crown to overrule a 
local government. That is always their pattern, overrule a local government of any community. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Prior to the meeting I met with the mayor and he did not advise me that he invited the 
press to that meeting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Budget Debate 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Robbins (Minister 
of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance and the amendment 
thereto by Mr. Malone (Regina Lakeview). 
 
Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, quite a number of Members on both sides of the 
House in this Debate have referred to the Land Bank Act and rightly so I believe because there is no 
doubt this is going to be one of the major issues in the coming election. Rural people continue to he 
concerned about massive purchases of our farm land by the NDP Land Bank. Last fall when they 
purchased the huge Matador Farm in western Saskatchewan they set up the first state or collective farm 
in North America and Mr. Messer was reported in the paper, and I haven’t heard him deny it on any 
occasion: “That this is the first of many such arrangements.” 



 
March 20, 1975 

1067 
 

These are the words he used. Land will no doubt be purchased from independent farmers, consolidated 
into large blocks and operated as state farms. No one is allowed to buy this land from the government 
and this again is something that has been discussed here and I invite anyone who is in doubt about this to 
get a copy of the lease from the Land Bank. It is no problem to get a copy of the up-to-date lease, read it 
very carefully yourself and in no place will you see that a farmer has any option or any opportunity to 
ever buy that land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — One of the main issues in the next election will be simply this, who is going to control 
the farm land in Saskatchewan? Will it be free and independent farmers or will it be the socialist NDP 
Government? You know we are often asked in the country at meetings where the NDP are getting all the 
money to buy this land. Up to now we have had to give rather a vague answer. The Finance Minister has 
now admitted that they are using money borrowed from the Canada Pension Fund to finance the Land 
Bank. Over $43 million of money contributed for pensions has been used by this socialist Government 
to buy up farm land for the state. We are also asked what the Liberal policy is regarding the Land Bank 
and I should like to put it on record rare today so that there is no doubt about it. 
 
First, we would abolish the NDP Land Bank because we simply don’t agree with the philosophy of the 
Government owning our farm land. We could go into this in great detail but I am just making this point 
very clearly. Secondly, land presently leased from the Land Bank would be sold to the tenant who now 
has the land. Now we feel that this farmer is the logical purchaser because he has built his farming 
operations around this land. He may or may not have been the most deserving applicant originally but 
we feel it would be an injustice to take the land from him now. Thirdly, the Provincial Government 
would not buy farm land but would facilitate the transfer of the land from a retiring farmer to a 
deserving farmer. The provincial Liberal government to do this would provide the security by 
guaranteeing a loan for these farmers so they would have no difficulty in purchasing land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — This, Mr. Speaker, is the key to the Liberal program as it is now one of the major 
problems facing young farmers. I should like you to note at this time also that there will be no problem 
for retiring farmers who wish to sell their land as the market would improve by having government 
guaranteed purchasers in the field at all times to buy land. If necessary the provincial Liberal 
Government would subsidize the interest for a period of years or other conditions of the sale to facilitate 
transfer. At the time of sale we would do whatever is necessary to facilitate the transfer but we would 
not break the lease of the farmer if he wished to hang on to it for a period of time. This is consistent with 
the Liberal philosophy of returning ownership of farm land to farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, in this debate 



 
March 20, 1975 

1068 
 

yesterday, my colleague for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) referred to our position on the Crow’s Nest 
rates and to be sure that everyone is clear on our position I am going to repeat what he said: 
 

The Crow’s Nest rates are a basic right of western farmers to which they are fully entitled. I am 
opposed to any change in these rates. You know what the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board has 
said, he said, farmers have no need to worry, there will be no change in the Crow’s Nest rates. The 
Federal Government and the Wheat Board have no intention of changing the Crow’s Nest rates. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, a good deal of time and money is being spent on a subject where 
everyone is in agreement. We see ads in the paper, we see the NDP politicians holding meetings and of 
course everyone wonders why they’re doing this. And it’s a very simple political reason. The NDP and 
the Minister of Agriculture, the Provincial Minister of Agriculture want the farmers to forget about real 
provincial problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — The Provincial Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Messer would like the farmers to forget 
about the Land Bank for about three months. He doesn’t want them to talk about the Land Bank. He 
doesn’t talk about it in his speeches. He likes to talk about something else. The Minister doesn’t want to 
talk about the compulsory Hog Marketing Commission. He doesn’t want them to remember that there 
was no vote of producers when he put it in. He doesn’t want them to remember that there is no producer 
control of the Commission and that hog marketing in this Province is now a mess. And I have here a few 
recent press reports and I’m sure that most people have seen them. One indicates that the hog manager 
was fired and we realize that there have been some great problems in the Hog Marketing Commission. 
We see in another press report of a hog marketing workers strike. Another one said fewer pigs were 
going to market and they go on to report that the hog population in the province is down by 28 per cent. 
And I’d like to make a comment on this. 
 
I see the Minister of Mineral Resources is not in his seat but I should like to quote from a press report 
that he put out a year ago last spring, April 1973 and he was speaking at Kindersley, I believe. And this 
is put out officially in a press release at the taxpayers’ expense. At that time Mr. Cowley said: 
 

Programs like the Land Bank and FarmStart are aimed at increasing cattle production by 75 per cent 
and tripling our hog population as soon as possible. 

 
Now if they are going to triple their hog population, they are going to have to reverse the trend because 
immediately after he said that the hog population went down by 28 per cent. 
 
The provincial auditor, as you know, has reported inefficiencies in the operation of the Commission and 
again I look at the press report. It says, “First hog marketing records 



 
March 20, 1975 

1069 
 

inadequate”. The producers, Mr. Speaker, could do a better job of operating their own affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — The Minister of Agriculture should immediately change his policy of having 
government officials and himself run the Commission. He should turn it over to the producers. And I 
call on him to do this immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — You know Mr. Messer would like farmers to forget about the difficulties faced by our 
cattlemen at the present time. His cash advance program for calves has been a disaster. Feed costs are 
high and calf prices have declined. The Minister of Agriculture has put our farmers further in debt and if 
the young farmer doesn’t pay his loan in the time it is due, the NDP will charge him 14 per cent interest. 
14 per cent interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have in my hand here, and I’d be glad to send anyone a copy who would like to look at it, an 
Order-in-Council put out by the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Messer on October 29, 1974, referring to 
the calf loans and I quote: 
 

Each loan shall bear interest on the principal sum at a rate of 14 per cent per annum until the entire 
amount of the principal sum and the said interest thereon is paid in full. 

 
Now how is that for taking a whack at the cattle farmer when he is in real difficulty! 14 per cent interest 
by the Minister of Agriculture for these young cow-calf producers in the province. 
 
The NDP would also like farmers to forget about the drastic rise in the price of materials used on the 
farm. It’s been mentioned here already and farmers are aware that fertilizer has gone up from about $95 
a ton to $190 a ton and indications are that it may continue to rise. Baler twine up from nine dollars a 
bag to $30 a bag. Barbed wire about the same amount. Machinery and repairs are sky high. 
 
What is the Minister of Agriculture doing about it? Absolutely nothing. We would welcome a Provincial 
Government investigation into machinery prices, and if initiated by the Government, we would give it 
our full support. 
 
Farm fuel is up 50 per cent in two years. Still the NDP does nothing. 
 
We’re supposed to have a Consumer Affairs Department in Saskatchewan. No one has ever heard of 
them, especially the farmers. 
 
The NDP would rather not talk about strikes that are plaguing our grain industry and the problems we 
are having with our grain movement. Farmers are losing many millions of dollars in lost sales at a time 
when grain prices are excellent. By the time the grain is moving freely, we don’t know what can happen. 
The price might drop and there will be a very 



 
March 20, 1975 

1070 
 

substantial loss to the farmers. In addition to this our reputation as a reliable supplier of grain is being 
ruined. Union bosses who are responsible for a good number of these strikes are friends of the NDP. Our 
Provincial Minister of Agriculture doesn’t want to talk about that. He doesn’t get in touch with them and 
tell them to try and get these strikes settled. He does nothing. He goes around the country talking about 
some mythical change in Crow’s Nest rates. The Minister would rather talk about some non-issue like 
this so that farmers would forget about the mess that he’s created with his own policies. You know the 
Minister of Agriculture would also like to sweep under the rug the situation regarding the Saskatchewan 
Feed Grain Commission which he set up in 1973 with a great deal of fanfare as we all recall. He sent out 
a letter to every farmer in the province and he keeps saying he doesn’t know how many farmers there 
are but he doesn’t have any difficulty in sending everyone of them a letter very often and a very 
politically motivated letter at that. But the Feed Grains Commission that the Minister set up with a very 
auspicious birth, with all of these letters going out, he quietly disbanded last year and I have the report 
from the paper, “Saskatchewan Feed Grain Market Commission officially disbanded.” The truth of the 
matter was that he spent thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ money setting it up and announcing it. It 
served absolutely no function and it simply died a natural death. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP want complete and absolute control of every aspect of agriculture and 
complete control over the farmers of this Province. They’re working towards that goal and no one can 
deny it. If they are ever re-elected they will accelerate this program. Much of the legislation has already 
passed by this NDP Government. They’re just waiting until after the next election to put it into effect. 
 
And I’m going to tell you some of the things the NDP would do. First of all purchases for the Land Bank 
would be very greatly stepped up. They like to talk about the time it would take to take over the land at 
the rate we’re going. Of course we all know that as soon as the election is over, they’ll very greatly step 
up the rate at which they’re purchasing these farms. State farms would be established all over 
Saskatchewan. And again I quote Mr. Messer s words from the Leader-Post on October 12, 1974 when 
he talked about the Matador farm purchase. He said this would he the first of many such arrangements in 
the future. We also would know there would be a compulsory cattle marketing board set up by this 
Government without a free vote of producers, without producer control. He’s done exactly that for hogs. 
Cattlemen, you know, Mr. Speaker, are a pretty independent bunch of people and the NDP are afraid to 
jump on them too hard just prior to an election. And as soon as an election is over, we all know what 
could happen. 
 
Those of you who followed the press reports of the last NDP provincial convention will know that they 
discussed at length two proposals which are basically NDP policy and I’d like to remind you of those 
two proposals. 
 
One was the abolition of tax-free gasoline for farm trucks and I’m sure all those Members opposite who 
were at the convention will remember the discussion and also the discussion that went on about 
restricting the size of farms. You will also recall the press report put out by the former Deputy Minister 
of Agriculture, Mr. McArthur stating that there would 



 
March 20, 1975 

1071 
 

have to be something done about restricting the size of farms. Some moves have already been made in 
these directions but they are again waiting until after the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — If you’ll remember in last week’s Western Producer a letter which I think gives all 
farmers something to think about and I’d like to refer you to that letter, if any of the Members would 
like to take a look at it. It was suggested that the Government could insist in having the first option in 
buying any farm land offered for sale and that all the land in an estate might revert to the province. If 
re-elected, Mr. Speaker, the NDP will no doubt set up an Agriculture Land Board which would have 
tremendous power in controlling and gaining control of farm land for the socialist state. Now some of 
the NDP Members may get up later in this debate and say that this is only a guess or speculation. I might 
remind them that we were guessing when we guessed that a hog board would be set up without a vote 
and without producer control and we were exactly right. 
 
I’d also like to remind you that in the December 1973 session I predicted that the Department of 
Agriculture was checking into the possibility of setting up state farms and subsequently this has been 
done. Again we guessed right in this regard. All evidence indicates that we are right again and I’m sure 
that some of these suggestions will be emerging facts if the NDP are ever re-elected. NDP philosophy is 
to control agriculture completely so it is not difficult to speculate on how it will be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other item in the budget that I would like to spend a moment on and I refer to 
the pitifully small amount given to our old age pensioners. At the present time the old people of this 
province receive a guaranteed amount of about $220 per month, all from the Liberal Government in 
Ottawa. Many provinces across Canada have added benefits for senior citizens. But what about 
Saskatchewan? Now there is some doubt in the budget whether the payment was going to be $14 or $20 
to these people, but regardless of what it is, out of a budget of $110 million, only $7 million is being 
spent on this program for senior citizens. We’ve made it clear that a Liberal Government has made a 
firm commitment to guarantee all people over 65 years of age an income not of $225 or $230 a month 
but $350 a month or $500 for a couple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, rail line abandonment will be discussed by one of my colleagues later in 
this debate but I should like to mention one thing in this regard. In certain areas of this province most 
people agree that some rail lines must go. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is in the process of reducing its 
elevator points from about 1,100 down to about 375. The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Messer, in this 
House a few days ago mentioned a number of rail lines where there is a duplication of service but many 
present rail lines are absolutely necessary and these must stay. There’s one in my constituency, Mr. 
speaker, running through Maryfield and Kipling. It is a main CN line and it must be transferred to the 
permanent network as soon as possible so that it cannot be touched for 25 years. There should 



 
March 20, 1975 

1072 
 

be no problem having this done. The districts concerned should get together and present a united front. 
I’ve already done some preliminary work in this regard and accumulated some necessary information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make one further comment. The provincial government revenues today are at 
fantastically high rates, due to high grain prices, inflation, and a world demand for potash and oil. The 
Provincial Government is getting far more revenue from the taxpayer of this province today. For 
example, in the Education Tax in 1972 they took $72 million from the people of the province. This year 
they will take $139 million from the people. The Provincial Income Tax in 1972, paid by the taxpayers 
of this province, was $70 million. This year the Government will get $169 million. From Liquor Tax, 
$29 million in 1972, $55 million this year. It is unfortunate that the NDP are not using this money to 
either reduce taxes or improve services. 
 
Alberta, with a similar type of economy has no sales tax. They’ve removed completely the education tax 
mill rate levy on farm land. They have a much lower rate of provincial income tax and it’s too bad that 
we are not able to enjoy these advantages here. But Alberta has a free enterprise government, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan has a socialist government. 
 
A wasteful, extravagant inefficient government that hires hundreds of its friends at huge salaries and 
throws the peoples’ money away on socialist schemes while the taxpayer is paying the shot. 
 
I believe it’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the amendment, but not supporting the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. T.L. Hanson (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure and 
enthusiasm that I rise to enter this budget debate. I want to take a couple of minutes just to counteract 
some of the misrepresentation that the Member opposite for Moosomin has given to this House. When 
he talks about using Canada Pension Plan money to finance the Land Bank Commission, I think he is 
misrepresenting the facts, because every government in Canada is entitled to use the Pension Plan 
money for anything it sees fit. That is our money. We have paid into the fund and every government 
uses it for its priority projects. Under the Liberal Government the priority project happened to be 
four-laned highways and pulp mills and I say we’re doing a lot better job with that money, putting 
farmers back on the land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — When I hear them talk about the Crow’s Nest rates, last week the Crow’s Nest rates 
had to go! This week they’ve got to stay! I think they’re getting saddle sores and a little crotch bound. 
They switch sides on a horse so often. I was just absolutely amazed out at Sedley last week at a ‘Save 
Our Railways Committee’ to see the smooth politicians coming on totally adopting a Pool policy when 
two weeks before they were opposing it strongly. You know figures lie when politicians figure, or at 
least when some politicians figure. When the Member talks 



 
March 20, 1975 

1073 
 

about the Feed Grains Commission, the reason the Feed Grains Commission had to be abandoned was 
that the Federal Government would not allow us or give us the power to make it work and they full well 
know it. And I ask the Members, when is the vote coming on the Feed Grains Policy that Otto Lang 
brought in? Remember that was promised a while back. You talk about the freedoms of democracy. 
When are we going to get some out in western Canada? The old Liberal strategy is divide and conquer, 
and that’s exactly what they’re trying to do on the railway situation right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the people of Saskatchewan and particularly the people of Qu’Appelle-Wolseley 
endorse and support the programs outlined in this progressive, humanitarian document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I think that the statement in the Financial Times of March 17 sums up the attitude of 
the vast majority in measuring the performance of this Government and I want to again read it into the 
records of this House. I quote: 
 

Nonetheless the 1.14 billion Budget was still considered a conservative document in an election year, 
forecasting in classic New Democratic terms a slim surplus of some $3 million. The document 
appeared at first glance to be typical of the character of the Administration of Mr. Blakeney, attractive 
to the taxpayer, yet sensible enough to stand the testing appraisal of professional economists who are 
fed up with having to hand this Government the good housekeeping accolade every year. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I think the sound business practices of this Blakeney Government will soon become, 
not only the envy of other governments, but the example to the other governments. And I’m proud to 
have played a small part in the direction of this Administration. 
 
I want to refer specifically to a few programs which affect my constituents directly and you will notice, 
Mr. Speaker, that I use specific figures in my comments, not the generalities like thousands of jobs and 
millions of dollars, as are so callously bandied about by the Liberal rumour mill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Have you ever noticed, Mr. Speaker, they do not take a position on a question or issue 
based on principles or morals. Their only guidance has been and will remain pure pork barrel politics 
and motivation by the dollar sign. I’m sure they have picked their colour well. Green is a cold colour in 
the colour spectrum, Mr. Speaker, and is used in most countries as a predominant colour in paper 
currency. Cold hard cash. Cold hard politicians and I suggest that after the election, Mr. Speaker, we 
will see a lot of cold hard green-faced politicians, mainly Liberals, turned out to pasture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1074 
 

Mr. Hanson: — The Leader of the Opposition criticizes our Hog Stabilization program saying we give 
more to the pigs than to the pensioners. My farmers, and I repeat, farmers, receive $264,751.37 to 
stabilize their operations as of August 1974. We have 319 producers in the Qu’Appelle-Wolseley 
constituency which would make the average received $830. I repeat, the $830 was received by the 
farmers, not the pigs and these farmers do not appreciate the front rows of the Liberal benches opposite 
referring to them as pigs. 
 
The FarmStart program has granted $375,892 to 69 farmers in my constituency. Total capital loans to 
these individuals reached $1,898,232. Are the Members opposite trying to tell us that the inflow of this 
nearly $2 million has not stimulated the economy of every community in my area? Yes, I will admit that 
most of these farmers borrowed funds to go into cattle, not hogs, and I can well imagine that some of 
them are having difficult times with cattle prices being as low as they are. But let’s remember a few 
things. Cattle prices are low because of a fictitious law of supply and demand. To say that there is not a 
demand for beef when millions of people are starving, is an outright contradiction. It is the need for 
money which deprives the Ethiopians and the Bengalis from purchasing food that they so urgently need. 
A problem accountable not only to nature’s droughts but to the capitalistic system which permits people 
to die of starvation while beef producers lose money here, only to create an artificial market, Mr. 
Speaker. The federal answer, send some fertilizer over to them to eat. 
 
I want to also remind those opposite that under FarmStart the repayment terms are far more attractive 
than from the banks. Most of these farmers, Mr. Speaker, do not have to even make payments until next 
fall on FarmStart cattle loans. We are not about to foreclose on their assets as would the banking 
institutions whose representatives are the Liberal Members opposite. 
 
Land Bank has also played a role in revitalizing and strengthening our communities. The Liberals are 
trying to smudge up the success of the Land Bank on the question of the words ‘may sell’. I want to 
stress the fact that those who sell to the Commission do so voluntarily and those who lease the land do 
so voluntarily. If the lessee is worried about the right of ownership, why would there be nearly 20 
applicants for every parcel of land offered by the Commission? The answer - they trust our Government, 
they like our program, and they appreciate the opportunity to start farming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Would the farmers in the southwest corner of the province, where Allen Oliver 
(Shaunavon) comes from, would they be willing to give up their leasing rights? I don’t think that any of 
them would want to try and finance the capital required to purchase the large blocks of land that they 
need to make a viable cattle operation in that area. It seems strange to me that the Liberals can argue to 
do away with the Land Bank and yet they would oppose most vociferously the sale of that land down 
there because maybe some of their friends couldn’t muster up enough cash to buy it. I want you all to 
consider the lessees of these Land Bank farms in your own area. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1075 
 

Let’s look at our own district. Let’s look at the individuals, Mr. Speaker. I look at Fillmore, where a 
young farmer and his wife got a farm unit. He formerly worked for the corporation farm in our area. Did 
the Boll Land Company offer to get him started? No way. They like hired hands and they want hired 
hands and they don’t want tenants. They don’t want someone running his own farm. 
 
I look at Odessa, where one of the first units was allocated. He complained about some problems with 
the red tape and the forms and the purchase provisions on the buildings but when I asked him if we 
should have delayed allocating the land until all the forms were perfect, he answered “no”. He 
appreciated getting that extra year of production and he appreciated getting that start. That start to be a 
farmer. 
 
I look at Sintaluta, Mr. Speaker, where two young couples rent from the Land Bank. They are a vital 
part of that community and they will be a vital part of the school system in years to come. They 
appreciate the Land Bank and they know it works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — When asked whether they worried about the option to buy the land, most of the Land 
Bank tenants replied, “Who cares, we like it this way”, or “With what, if we had money we would have 
borrowed through Farm Credit and bought our own land”. Probably the most common answer has been, 
“No, we don’t worry, we trust you fellows!” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I wonder if the Liberals opposite ever had anyone tell them, ‘we trust you fellows’. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Last week a man from Calgary came to see me. He has a family with three small 
children and he’s fed up with the city rat race. He wants to farm and he wants to farm in Saskatchewan. 
He has some savings and qualifies well under the Farm Credit Corporation’s regulations. Decent land in 
Alberta now moves at about $250 to $300 an acre, comparable to approximately $175 an acre for similar 
land in Saskatchewan. No matter which province this individual chooses, Mr. Speaker, he must almost 
certainly rent land or maintain another job if he expects to provide a decent living from the land. His 
collateral base can not finance enough land to make a viable living. If he did buy a farm for $100,000 he 
would pay $285,000 for it by the time the mortgage was paid off. This potential farmer wished that there 
was more Land Bank land available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly we know of some problems in this dynamic new approach to land tenure and we may know of 
an applicant who is just as qualified as the one who received the land. But let’s not forget the 1,500 new 
farmers who are farmers because of the Land Bank, instead of being chained to some job that does not 
fit their ambitions. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1076 
 

I want to turn now to another aspect of the budget. Mr. Speaker, since I was elected as part of this 
Government, $2,296,631.77 has been spent on highway programs in the Qu’Appelle-Wolseley 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — I am proud of this program which is rebuilding highway 33, highway 16, doing work 
on 47 and eventually on the four lanes of No. 1. Another $3 million of work is still needed, after the 
complete neglect of this constituency by the former government. Sure they oiled some highways just 
before the election but we needed a complete rebuilding program and we’re getting it now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Had they not scuttled the Department of Highways’ construction crews, our highway 
budget might be 15 per cent lower today. The few crews that we did have left moved dirt last year for 
approximately 35 cents a yard, while many of the tenders were coming in at 55 to 60 cents. Certainly 
government crews are not the total answer. But, we must rebuild those crews to a size where they will 
act as a proper yardstick and control in the construction costs. I’m glad to see further funds coming into 
my constituency this year. The spin-off of these highway programs certainly affects the economies of 
our communities in a favourable way and we appreciate it. 
 
I want to turn now to our budget and to the senior citizens. The flexibility and humanitarian conscience 
of this Government permitted nursing homes to be built in communities never before possible. We’ve 
got a nursing home in Indian Head, a 32 bed home and I’m certainly proud of the fact that we were able 
to do this as our Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had other prepared motes. I had to take some time out of my address to correct some of 
the problems that the Member opposite brought up; some of his misrepresentations. In summing up, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish I had more time to deal with other matters which are important to my constituents, but I 
shall deal with these at a later time and in a later debate. The most serious matter for Saskatchewan right 
now, Mr. Speaker, is the fungus-langus virus which has once again attacked Saskatchewan and threatens 
to destroy the railways, the elevators and the small communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hanson: — Fungus-langus can only be controlled by small bits of paper and these small bits of 
paper are ballots and I’m confident that the electorate, the farmers and the townspeople and the senior 
citizens will not forget the actions of the provincial and federal Liberals. LIFT, deterrent fees, 1,600 new 
taxes in 1968. They will not forget and they won’t forget being called pigs today. I’m confident that the 
people will rally behind our Government and bring in more budgets such as this one and that’s why I’m 
a New Democrat. I like working with a government the people can trust, Mr. Speaker. I will support the 
budget and oppose the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1077 
 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, budgets presented in this Legislature, we all 
know, have far-reaching effects on the whole economy of this province. They either spell restraint on the 
economy, thus creating unemployment, or give it a buoyant future, thus creating more employment. This 
budget contains sufficient funds that will keep up with the rapid progress and growth of our fine 
province at a solid pace. Yes, it is a budget of progress and achievement. I commend the Minister of 
Finance for his presentation. 
 
I have said time and time again that the future strength of our Canadian economy will always lie in 
agriculture. Canada and Saskatchewan can only remain strong by having a good agricultural economy. 
How can this be achieved? First of all, there must be security given to farmers. This can be 
accomplished through a stabilized agricultural industry. By this I mean, we need to set floor prices for 
all agricultural commodities. Floor prices for hogs, similar to what this Government has done over the 
past two years. Floor prices for cattle and all other livestock on the same basis. Not one year at a time, 
but at least for a five-year period, tied to an escalation clause if prices rise or decline. 
 
Who is to take the lead in this? It is obvious that the leadership in this must rest with the Federal 
Government because agriculture is spread over most provinces in this country in some form or other. 
Yes, there could also be a cost sharing by provinces. This is the only way we will get security and 
stability for the farming industry. This is the only way to keep the farmers on the land. This is the only 
way to encourage others to take up farming. 
 
The agricultural countries are saying, grow more food for the hungry world! Even Otto Lang is saying 
this now. Not too many years ago his cry was: “Seed less, the world has an overabundance of natural 
foods. Please, farmers don’t grow any more, follow me and I will LIFT you out of your problems.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Yes, he lifted us into hundreds of millions of losses for our western Saskatchewan 
farmers. It is on his conscience that perhaps many in the world have suffered through starvation because 
of this senseless policy. The extra grain we would have had might have been shared with the 
undernourished and starving millions. 
 
What else is lurking upon the horizon that can financially put our farming industry into bankruptcy? 
Number one is freight rates, Mr. Speaker. To destroy the freight rate structures that now exist under the 
Crow’s Nest rate system, would spell disaster to the farmers, the cities, towns and villages of this 
province and the whole West. The issue of Crow’s Nest rates is an issue of such magnitude that it is 
enough to declare war on Ottawa or create another Louis Riel Rebellion. You can’t trust them in Ottawa, 
because they are always speaking with a forked tongue. You will be paying 75 cents to $1 a bushel in 
not too many years, Mr. and Mrs. Farmer, to haul your wheat if the federal policies are carried out, when 
today you only pay an average of 12 cents a bushel. I have always understood that Mr. Weatherald, the 
Member for Cannington, emphatically wants 



 
March 20, 1975 

1078 
 

the Crows Nest rates removed, thus supporting the Federal Government. This is what his people out 
there are telling me. Yes, our cities, villages and towns will suffer, too. 
 
These Crow’s Nest rates must be kept at all costs as they are the pulse and heartbeat for western 
agriculture and particularly for Saskatchewan farmers. Agriculture is also the heartbeat for our urban 
communities. If the farmer hasn’t got it, we in the cities and other urban centres haven’t got it either. 
Actually behind it all is that they really want to destroy orderly marketing, and this is part of their 
overall plan. 
 
I could also bring into this the financial and economic effects that rail line abandonment will create for 
many of our smaller urban centres. It is difficult and rough now to maintain the status quo for them. Rail 
line abandonment would destroy the very basic fabric of our smaller urban areas, thus causing further 
financial ruin and decreased taxation for our future provincial budgets. 
 
Another serious cause for ruined provincial and municipal budgets is that dreaded word, inflation. Last 
year the generous contributions given to urban municipalities, namely cities, towns and villages 
revitalized these communities. The cities, towns and villages received the $10 unconditional grant per 
person, also police grants, transit grants, sewage grants, library grants, equalization grants and others, 
making a total of over 2 1/2 million dollars for 1974 for our city. The urban centres for 1975 really 
needed another $10 to $15 unconditional grant . . . 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What’s the Point of Order? 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, the Point of Order is I wish to make it absolutely clear, I said in my 
speech yesterday I was not in favour of removing the Crow’s Nest rates. 
 
Mr. Baker: — . . . to help defray the 12 per cent cost of living that hit this country and us in 1974. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — The Member has misconstrued, deliberately misconstrued what I said. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Those are debating points . . . 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — I am not in favour of changing the Crow’s Nest rates . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! When a Member makes a statement and the other Member comes back with 
their interpretation, those are debating points. 
 
Mr. Baker: — The Member for Cannington likes to dish it out but he can’t take it. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1079 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: —The urban centres for 1975 . . . 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — The Member opposite can read the transcript. I dare him to read the transcript. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can’t have a crossfire this way. This is a debate . . . 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — It is a matter of what I said, and what I said was I am in favour of no change in the 
Crow’s Nest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If you wish to follow the rules then you must wait until the conclusion of his speech 
and not during the speech to do so. 
 
Mr. Baker: — The urban centres for 1975 really needed another, if I may repeat, Mr. Speaker, $10 or 
$15 unconditional grants to help defray the 12 per cent cost of living that hit this country and us in 1974. 
The $75 per capita grant from which Regina will receive over $11 million over a five-year period was a 
welcome gift last year. These moves, as I said, revitalized our communities. Through this we created 
new projects, increasing employment which was the reason in part we had the lowest unemployment 
rate in Canada. Virtually we have no unemployment in our city of Regina, in other words, we are 
looking for people. Because of these new facilities and services, naturally our operating costs have gone 
up, but the inflation of last year has skyrocketed so much that it is putting municipalities into financial 
difficulties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now turn to other items in the budget. The $200 Property Improvement Grant being 
raised by $40 this year will certainly be welcomed by taxpayers to help cover the spiralling inflationary 
trend over the past year and will cover some tax mill rate increases which will be imposed by most of 
the cities, towns and villages in 1975. 
 
I will always be proud of the Property Improvement Grant because it was in my first speech in this 
House of 1965 at which time I advocated this method of property tax relief. I am pleased that the 
pensioners or senior citizens will receive an increase in their pensions for a single person of $20 and for 
married couples an increase of $36. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — We know they deserve more in this day of high costs. But it is time that the Federal 
Government acted on pensions now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — I have always advocated pensions be given without the Means Tests to all pensioners 
and in this case the increase 



 
March 20, 1975 

1080 
 

would have applied to all pensioners over 65 years of age. To this end I recommend that this House call 
upon the Federal Government to reduce the age to 60 for men, under the Canada Pension Plan and a 
lower age for women. I am glad to see an increase in grants to those living in nursing homes. 
 
May I repeat, as I have done on numerous occasions, that I believe most emphatically that all costs for 
levels of care in our nursing homes be brought under the medicare plan. I have always believed and 
advocated in this House that the Government must have a cradle-to-the-grave program for all people 
whether rich or poor. 
 
I am pleased to see the plan for pensioners, in which they will receive $500 for repairs to their homes, is 
continued. Many pensioners are very pleased with this plan and are taking advantage of it, in other 
words, over 14,000 pensioners have taken advantage of this fine program. Perhaps we could expand it to 
the point where a pensioner can apply for it every three years. This is one way of upgrading their homes 
and does not permit deterioration of properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the budget last year did give new life to our throttled economy and our population, 
our population has increased by over 6,000 people in Saskatchewan since January, 1974. The city of 
Regina’s population is growing rapidly. Our housing and other construction had reached a new all-time 
high of close to $94 million. Regina was the only city in Canada that showed a marked increase in 
housing construction and it appears it will exceed that record in 1975. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — It appears that this year’s overall construction could also exceed that of last year. 
Hopefully, many of the 103,000 people that left us from 1968 to 1971 will come home again. Many are 
already making their way back because of our buoyant and heated economy, realized because of a good 
New Democratic Government. 
 
The people of this province in the coming election are not going to be hoodwinked by false promises as 
was the case in 1964. They want this Government returned . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — . . . to keep building a solid economy, one that will give us a wider tax base, one that will 
give all of our Saskatchewan people security. They want an economy that will give us freedom from 
want; an economy that will keep us free from deterrent fees on people who become ill; they want a 
government that will continue to give us free medicare for hospital and doctor bills; they want an 
economy that pays people decent wages; they want a government that provides extended holidays with 
pay and good workmens’ compensation payments; they will fight to help us keep our New Democrat 
wonderful government insurance plan; they want to keep the hearing aid program and the dental care for 
children. They enjoy free chiropractic services; hopefully it is not too far off that we have a complete 
dental care plan for all citizens in Saskatchewan as soon as possible, and they will support a drug plan 
that keeps costs within reason. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1081 
 

We believe in sharing the fruits of our labour or in other words equalize and share the wealth with 
others. They don’t want a government that creates a situation where ten or more people are waiting for 
the other man’s job. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have confidence in the good people of Saskatchewan, that they will return this New 
Democratic Government at the next election . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — . . . because they know if there is a change again, it will create disaster for them; 
insecurity in making a living for their families and destroy their standard of living and quality of life 
once again. 
 
To those of you who are within reach of my voice today, I know that you appreciate the security that this 
Government together with you has developed in this province. I know, too, that you and I want to keep it 
so for our families. I invite the people of Regina and Saskatchewan to gird themselves and see that we 
never lose this Government again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this people’s Government will be back even stronger than before. 
 
I support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a great pleasure to take part in this Budget 
Debate. This year’s budget is the fourth balanced budget of this New Democratic Government. All four 
budgets are benefiting the people of Saskatchewan and they have the effect of carrying out the NDP 
election platform of 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want first of all to congratulate Finance Minister, Wes Robbins, for his effective 
presentation of Saskatchewan’s record billion-dollar budget. I am certain that the people of this province 
will appreciate the tax cuts, as well as the added services contained in the budget. The majority of 
Saskatchewan people will recognize that this Government is trying to provide the best in service to its 
people, but, Mr. Speaker, there will be a small minority group of Liberals and Conservatives who will 
not see, nor will they hear, nor will they understand, what this budget is all about, and particularly so, 
Mr. Speaker, is the group to your left led by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday last when taking part in the debate, the Leader of the Opposition indicated that 
this budget is a ‘Do nothing Budget.’ He also spoke of it as “Nothing of consequence for anyone”. Can 
you imagine anyone being so shutoff, so tunnel-visioned and so politically confused, as not to see 
anything good in this budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1971 election, the New Democrats presented a New Deal for People program. The 
people recognized and accepted the program as in their best interests and gave the New Democratic 
Party a strong mandate to carry out the program. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1082 
 

This New Democratic Government, Mr. Speaker, has now carried out its election program. In many 
instances it has gone beyond its commitments. The performance of this Government is one that the 
people of Saskatchewan can trust. Mr. Speaker, it has demonstrated responsibility, faithfulness and 
honesty to the electorate. The Liberal preachings of “doom and gloom” and “impossible” turned out to 
be a New Democratic Government success story of action and true performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to address my next remarks more specifically to the people of my 
constituency. 
 
The economic and social conditions in the Canora constituency are typical of the parkland region. 
Agriculture is the prime industry. The small family farm is the life fabric of the community. The 
statement of “when the farmers have it, everybody else has it”, is very true and very applicable to our 
area. The economic conditions of the farmers relate directly to the economic conditions of the 
businessman and the worker in the community. 
 
Over the last few years, Mr. Speaker, and during the New Democratic Government’s term of office the 
farming industry has been experiencing some of its best years. With fairly good crops, improved prices 
and greater farm security, farming in our area is becoming quite attractive. Through the Government’s 
Land Bank, FarmStart, and other agricultural programs many elderly farmers were given the opportunity 
of retiring in dignity and many young people were given an opportunity to start and expand their 
farming operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Land Bank is talked about very highly in our area by both the old and the young, by 
New Democrats and, as well, by many open-minded Liberals. These people, Mr. Speaker, recognize the 
real purpose of the program and how it could maintain the existence of the family farm. The distortions 
and untruths used by the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal spokesmen to scare people that the 
Government is taking over the land in the province simply illustrates and reinforces the lack of 
credibility in the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to devote some of my remarks to the various accomplishments in the Canora 
constituency. During the last four years, the condition of highways in the Canora constituency has 
shown marked improvement. No. 5 highway from Canora, west to Saskatoon, was reconstructed; No. 14 
from Yorkton to Saskatoon was reconstructed to a high grade standard; No. 49 from Preeceville to 
Kelvington was completed; oiling of highway No. 314 from Buchanan south to connect No. 14 at 
Springside and highway No. 229 to the provincial park provides a dust-free road between two main 
highways, No. 5 and No. 14, and a resort road to the park area at Good Spirit Lake; and No. 9 and No. 
49 between Stenen junction to Preeceville was also reconstructed. We in the Canora constituency can be 
proud of the highway system we have in our area. At this time I want to commend the Minister of 
Highways (Mr. Kramer) and his staff for allocating a fair share of the highway program to our 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns of the New Democratic Party and the Government was, and is, to 
continue to encourage young people to take up farming. This Government’s Land Bank, FarmStart and 
associated agricultural programs are being 



 
March 20, 1975 

1083 
 

directed towards that concern and are proving very successful. In the Canora constituency alone, some 
88 Land Bank leases were granted and some 67 FarmStart applications were approved. The capital 
amount expended in FarmStart amounted to over $1.5 million and the grants provided to the 67 young 
farmers amounted to $308,000. This, Mr. Speaker, is a real and true effort by this Government to set up 
young people in farming. 
 
Through the agriculture support programs, other projects have been undertaken. A new veterinary clinic 
is being built in Preeceville. The grant allocated towards its construction amounts to $25,000. In 
addition, this Government is providing substantially increased veterinary travelling, clinic maintenance 
and stockyard inspection grants to the Norquay and Canora veterinary services districts. Attention has 
been given by this Government to flood control and drainage projects. The Canora constituency in the 
year 1973-74 received grants amounting to $116,150, as compared to $31,214 paid in the last year of the 
Liberal Government. 
 
The Hog Price Stabilization program, Mr. Speaker, was a salvation to the many hog producers we have 
in the riding. Some $117,922 was paid in subsidies to 283 hog producers. Incidentally, the payment here 
was made to hog producers and not to hogs, as insinuated the other day by the Leader of the Opposition 
when he spoke in this debate. His remarks, Mr. Speaker, were an insult to the farmers and hog producers 
of this province, as well as a smear on our senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the Leader 
of the Opposition ought to make a public apology to these people and the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our New Deal for People election program we promised to reduce property school taxes 
down to 25 mills. We have fulfilled this commitment and as a matter of fact have gone beyond the 
promised tax reduction. In 1974 school taxes were reduced to an average of 23 mills. This Government 
is aiming to maintain this level in 1975. This tax reduction was only possible through substantial 
increases in school operating and construction grants and through this Government’s performance in 
increasing and extending the Homeowner Grants from $70 to homeowners, to the maximum Property 
Improvement Grant on homes, farms and businesses up to $330 - Mr. Speaker, a difference of well over 
four times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to examine now with you how this Government performed in providing our 
school system with assistance towards improving services in the small community centres in the Canora 
constituency. These are some of the accomplishments: a new gym in Preeceville; a new gym in 
Invermay; an addition to the Senior Elementary School at Canora; a new gym at Buchanan; the 
beginning of construction of a new gym at Rama; and presently plans are being finalized to construct an 
addition to the elementary school at Preeceville. 
 
This Government, Mr. Speaker, has great faith in the young people and it believes in providing the best 
possible school facilities in our education system. I want to commend the Minister of Education (Mr. 
MacMurchy) and the Government for giving special attention to vastly improving school facilities in 
small community centres. On behalf of my constituents I want to say, “Thank you, it is appreciated.” 



 
March 20, 1975 

1084 
 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most effective community programs introduced by this Government is the 
municipal-provincial Winter Works program. The program is having a tremendous impact in providing 
small communities with facilities, particularly recreational, that otherwise would not have come about. 
 
Under this program, many local governments and projects in the Canora constituency benefited from the 
grants available from street and road improvements to construction of new municipal buildings and from 
the renovation of community halls to construction of new community skating rinks. In Canora 
constituency alone, Mr. Speaker, many thousands of dollars of grants were paid during the past several 
years and many more thousands of dollars have been committed to be paid to the various municipalities 
and communities in this coming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new and increased grants enabled rural and urban municipalities to maintain and provide 
the services demanded by local people. The increased snow removal grants for rural municipalities for 
last winter’s operations reduced the cost equivalent to about three mills and in some instances up to five 
mills. 
 
Allocation of more funds for grid and main access roads helped to speed up the construction of 
all-weather roads in rural areas. Since the introduction of the Operation Open Roads and MainStreet 
program, by this Government a couple of years ago, the quality of life in small urban centres has become 
richer and more attractive. As a matter of fact, some communities are experiencing a population growth. 
 
The greatest impact in urban community development, Mr. Speaker, is coming from this Government’s 
introduction of the Community Capital Fund. Under the program all towns undertaking capital projects 
can receive up to $75 per capita over a five-year period. In the Canora constituency, this amounts to 
some $500,000. In addition, the communities are paid an unconditional grant of $10 per capita which 
amounts to well over $60,000 annually. And, Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget will extend the 
unconditional grant to organized hamlets. 
 
The Liberals during their seven years of office and during campaigns gave lip service rather than 
deliveries. Rather than providing assistance to the town communities and equalizing the cost of services 
to the people of Saskatchewan, the Liberals imposed taxes upon taxes and said to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they have to be responsible and that they have to be prepared to pay for services. In 
the words of the Leader of the Opposition when he was the Provincial Treasurer in 1968, he said in his 
Budget Address and I quote: 
 

Our Government believes that the amount people pay for services should be related to the use they 
make of these services. 

 
This was their philosophy in 1968, and this is their philosophy today. 
 
You can be sure, Mr. Speaker, that when Liberal spokesmen criticize the proposed drug plan and 
suggest removal of the small fee to be charged, they are speaking tongue-in-cheek and with hypocrisy. 
Their motive is to make it difficult for the Government to introduce the drug plan with the objective of 
destroying 



 
March 20, 1975 

1085 
 

it before delivery. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the budget before us is a good budget. A budget that will receive the 
acceptance of the majority of Saskatchewan people. This budget continues to move in the direction I am 
convinced people want us to move. It clearly documents that this Government, through its good 
management and through its new policy of resource development, is returning to the people of 
Saskatchewan the benefits of tax reductions and services they are rightfully entitled to. I will be giving 
my full support to the budget and will be supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H.W. Owens (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to congratulate the Minister of Finance on the budget 
he presented to this Legislature on Friday, March 14, 1975. It is a pleasure and a privilege to support 
such a magnificent document portraying the plans and ambitions of this Government for 1975-76 and 
beyond. A forecast for the magnitude of the programs has been made possible as a result of the 
institution of farsighted, revolutionary policies of the New Democratic Government since assuming 
office in June, 1971. 
 
It is hard to realize that in only four years, the Province of Saskatchewan has been lifted from a 
deprived, depressed, despondent economy with high unemployment and falling population to the 
progressive, positive, healthy, economic surroundings we enjoy now, with practically full employment, 
to increased population figures. This Government during the 1971 election campaign proposed changes 
to upgrade our lagging and failing economy, the result of the seven years of Liberal Government 
administration. This Government has carried out those proposed changes, made them a reality, and the 
people of Saskatchewan are now reaping the benefits and according to the budget, will continue to reap 
the benefits of this progressive legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are enjoying the results of four years of the most effective government in 
Saskatchewan’s history. It is encouraging to note the healthy financial position of our province and the 
prospects for continuing prosperity. It is discouraging to note the regressive and restrictive policies we 
are, as a province, confronted with from our federal counterparts in Ottawa. The most distressing aspect 
is that these policies that have such an impact are proposed by our own Saskatchewan elected 
representative Otto Lang, and supported by the Liberal Members sitting in opposition to your left. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are expecting a provincial election in the month of June. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are listening to the progress in this Assembly. Their reactions to 
what they hear during this Budget Debate will be reflected in their actions at the polls. I feel fortunate to 
be sitting on a Government bench and, therefore, able to fully support this budget. Opposition Members 
cannot effectively oppose it and retain any credibility as legislators in Saskatchewan. 
 
I note the Minister, in the budget, has designated significant sums of monies for the institution of new 
programs and for the extension of many that are currently being supported, either partially or totally, by 
provincial revenues, in every case for the betterment of society in general and for humanitarian 



 
March 20, 1975 

1086 
 

principles in particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cancellation of taxes in some instances, the reduction in taxes in other areas, the 
increases in exemptions in the succession duty, the increases in grants in many programs are measures 
that will be welcomed by most residents of our province. These changes reflect the increases in revenues 
from a growing economy and adjustments to the rates of royalties from natural resources. I congratulate 
this Government on its progressive and aggressive action in the total field of natural resources. These are 
actions which are providing the people of Saskatchewan with a greater return from their own reserves, 
returns which earlier filled to overflowing the bank accounts of corporations in faraway cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about a Government program that intrigues me, and that is the 
Saskatchewan Land Bank Program. I suppose one of the reasons for this is because of the deal made by 
the Land Bank Commission and the Matador Co-op farm at Kyle, Saskatchewan and the deal made by 
private individuals with the Beechy Co-op Farm at Beechy, both farms located in the Elrose 
constituency. 
 
The Matador Co-op farm deal is I am sure, the largest single transfer of farm land made by the Land 
Bank Commission, up to this time. 
 
I draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to this transaction because of the storm of protest that rose from the 
Liberal Opposition Members to your left, following the announcement of that most significant 
transaction. You recall, I am sure, the cry, “New Democratic Party Government Grabs More Land.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is beyond my comprehension to understand how anyone, be it a single person or a 
government, can ‘grab onto’ anything under a voluntary program. The owner makes the decision 
whether or not to accept the price offered. No pressure is applied by the Commission - the seller 
voluntarily decides. 
 
In this particular case, Mr. Speaker, the owner, the Matador Co-op farm, turned down an offer of 
significantly higher price than that made by the Commission. Their principles could not be bought with 
money. Those principles uphold the co-operative concept of farming and only through the rental system 
of land transfer offered by the Land Bank Commission, was it possible for a new farm co-operative to 
become a reality. The result has been the incorporation of a ten-family co-operative farm unit. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, ten families are secure in a viable farming operation. Their future livelihood is assured, the 
community will thrive as a result. 
 
May I contrast that transfer of land with the sale of the Beechy Co-op farm about 12 miles distant, a 
similar co-operative farm sold to private investors. Three in number, only one actively farming in the 
community. The result, in this case, of a loss of approximately ten families from the community. I leave 
it to you to decide which of the two transactions is the better for the future of the respective communities 
and for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend this Government for instituting the Land Bank system for land transfer. I 
commend the Government for 



 
March 20, 1975 

1087 
 

budgeting more funds to extend the program. Its popularity is spreading rapidly. I recommend to the 
land owners of Saskatchewan the facilities available to them through the Commission for land transfer. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, let me repeat, the plan is voluntary, you are not obliged to accept the offer made by 
the Commission, the choice is the seller’s. Likewise, the lessee has a free choice to apply for a lease. If 
the agreement is not to the applicant’s liking - no agreement is made. 
 
What could be more democratic? The cry, “Wolf, wolf”, is falling on deaf ears. Young farmers and 
expanding farmers are finding a way through the Land Bank Commission, to set up or build up a viable 
farm unit, thereby allowing them to stay on the farm or return to the farm and pursue the livelihood they 
love. This opportunity was not available to them under the former Liberal administration. Well do they 
remember the promise of that Liberal Government of low-cost money for farmers - money that never 
was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people remember the promises made and they also remember the promises kept, and 
well will they remember the Government that kept them, come next June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another matter facing our agricultural community and in fact all of Saskatchewan 
and western Canada, that I wish to make a few comments on and that is rail line abandonment. Much 
has been said and is being said with few, if any, concrete decisions being made. Our spokesman from 
the West, sitting in Ottawa, appears to be backing-off recently toward a less aggressive policy. I just 
wonder if the prospects of an election in Saskatchewan in June is having a bearing on the emphasis he is 
using in his recent news releases. 
 
Farmers, especially grain producers, are showing more concern in recent days, about rail line 
abandonment as they realize the disastrous effects the proposed changes would have on the future of 
their farming enterprise. Rail line abandonment coupled with inland terminals, variable handling charges 
and elimination of the Crow’s Nest rates could change and will change the entire farming economy in 
Saskatchewan. Not only will it change the farming economy but it will change our total economy 
including our communities, our towns, our cities, our total way of life. 
 
When I survey the situation that would exist in the Elrose constituency, if the rail line proposals were to 
be carried out, I am amazed, it’s unbelievable. The Elrose constituency without any rail lines is just not 
conceivable. Such a move would be a disaster. I am heartened by the actions of the farmers in the area 
meeting to study, to protest, to propose acceptable change. I encourage them to continue and increase 
their efforts. This grassroots support will enhance the efforts of the Government of Saskatchewan as it 
continues to deal with Ottawa, endeavouring to reach a rational approach to rail line and grain handling 
services in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Crow’s Nest rates are an integral part of Saskatchewan farming economics. Removal of 
this legislated rate on western grains from local elevator delivery points to ports of export is beyond the 
comprehension of fair-minded citizens. The prospect of forfeiting this piece of legislation, for any 
reason, is not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, inflation is probably the most disturbing 



 
March 20, 1975 

1088 
 

factor in our budget process and is reflected by our apparent inability to have any control over 
ever-increasing prices. The Minister has dealt to some extent with the problem as it affects the 
provincial budget. I should like to make a few comments as I see a phenomenon as affecting the 
individual. 
 
Inflation is reflected very graphically in the cost of everything one wishes, or indeed needs to buy. 
Prices are constantly rising. This is accepted today as a fact of life and is beyond the control of the 
buyer. Whether or not the article, be it an electric appliance or an automobile that is needed is the 
decision of the buyer. Just how the purchase is to be paid for is also the decision of the buyer. However, 
that decision is far too often influenced by the easy availability of credit, one of the curses of modern 
living if one fails to understand how to handle it. 
 
In purchasing an article, far too often the buyer is more interested in the lowest dollar amount of the 
down payment than the actual cost of the purchase, in many cases not even inquiring into the amount of 
finance charges and/or interest charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shopping for financing is a most important part of buying on a credit base, sadly, an aspect 
that is seldom considered. Finance contract buying along with credit card purchasing has become a part 
and parcel of our society. These conveniences are easy to come by, but are not free, as many are led to 
believe. Someone pays and pays dearly for the privilege of the use of credit and that someone is the 
party who accepts the service with a signature. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, credit buying can be convenient, but is the convenience worth the price? Credit 
purchasing is costly, a very significant factor in pushing inflation to unprecedented levels. I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, can we as individuals protect ourselves, even in a small way? 
 
In my opinion, personal budgeting is a process in learning to manage our resources and as such should 
be a subject in our educational system, now very conspicuous by its absence. In consideration of the lack 
of budgetary instruction in our school curriculum, I would propose that a suitable course be designed 
and its use urged through the community college education system. A simple easy route to the people. 
 
It is my firm belief that next to the use and abuse of alcohol in our society, comes the misuse and abuse 
of our financing or money in our society. Proper buying and budgeting practices would have a very 
beneficial effect on the final cost of an article with a related effect on the cost of living and inflation. 
Marriage counselling has become a very important subject for young people contemplating matrimony, 
money counselling or budgetary control could possibly smooth off some of the bumps normally 
encountered after the sparkle of the honeymoon has faded. 
 
Credit cards and finance contracts are like lambs in wolves’ clothing. They miraculously and 
unsuspectingly materially increase the cost to the unlearned. They should be stamped, “users beware”. 
 
On a more pleasant note, Mr. Speaker, it is most encouraging to witness the growth of the co-operative 
movement in 



 
March 20, 1975 

1089 
 

Saskatchewan. It is encouraging to realize that more and more people are turning to this philosophy of 
working with each other to accomplish objectives they know are not attainable by individual effort. It 
has been a long time since the Rochdale residents of England pioneered this humanitarian way of life. 
Statistics are providing the figures to show the momentum of growth in recent years, indicating the 
residents of Saskatchewan are realizing the benefits available through co-operative effort. 
 
One phase that is extremely heartening is that of the credit union movement, in which the members are 
using the service available to them to handle their own financing and return the fruits of their efforts to 
them, to enrich their standards of living, rather than having the cream of the profits skimmed off through 
institutions over which they have no control. 
 
To indicate to you what can happen and is happening throughout the province, may I use as an example 
the credit union in my own home town of Eston. This credit union was organized in 1942 by only a 
handful of members. I am proud to say I was a founding member and have had the privilege of watching 
this growth from a small founding membership with practically no assets to an organization of 2,385 
members with assets of $12,843,000. This is only one of many that could be cited. Mr. Speaker, I point 
this credit union growth out to you to show that along with other affiliates such as the Co-op Credit 
Society and the Co-op Trust, the people of Saskatchewan are building a firm financial institution upon 
which they can rely. The credit union movement is owned and controlled by members on a one-to-one 
basis. I foresee great things for future Saskatchewanians through this great organization. 
 
May I also, Mr. Speaker, compliment the Government for the formation of the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund, thereby providing a means whereby people may invest in a fund to help build 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, the fourth budget of Saskatchewan is the largest ever for the Province of 
Saskatchewan. Other budgets were received with enthusiasm by our people, this one will bolster their 
pride in our Government to higher levels. The performance of this Government since taking over the 
reins of office in 1971 has no equal. Saskatchewan citizens know that what this Government says it will 
do - will be done. Its credibility is beyond question. Many times we hear comments such as, “Oh well, 
this is an election year so this is an election budget.” In all probability this is true. However, this budget 
is much more than an election budget. This budget is designed to promote the growth of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in every facet of its varied economy. This budget is designed to make Saskatchewan a 
better place to live in physically and financially. This budget is designed to build Saskatchewan’s future 
into a model of socialist democracy, to be enjoyed by Saskatchewan residents and gazed on with envy 
by all people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the budget and oppose the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1090 
 

Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the pleasure of speaking 
at one of the nominating meetings for an Independent candidate of the northwest constituency of 
Athabasca at Ile-a-la-Crosse. Since then Mr. Rod Bishop has been declared as an Independent candidate 
in that constituency and my lonely vigil as the one Independent candidate for the forthcoming provincial 
election is ended. I wish Mr. Bishop a success in his challenge for the riding of Athabasca in the 
forthcoming provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to come to the budget before us perhaps the most important single figure pertaining to the 
finances of Saskatchewan is a figure that nowhere appears in the budget. It is a figure of $160 million 
which the Minister of Finance informs us existed in the Energy and Resource Development Fund as of 
the 28th of February, 1975. Mr. Speaker, if we begin to look at the windfall resource revenue available 
to the people of Saskatchewan, even assuming there may be no drastic re-organization of priorities in 
taxation this year to be added to that $160 million, assuming a conservative production of 70 million 
barrels at $3, achieved by the Government will be $210 million. The Government is estimating on 
potash, $119 million, making a very reasonable assumption of a $2 increase in Ottawa on the price of oil 
and that the Provincial Government takes 50 per cent of that, and another $70 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the moment Saskatchewan is in the rare privileged fiscal position of having upwards of 
$400 million in annual revenue which, if you had asked a Treasury official two years ago whether it 
would be available to the Saskatchewan people, he would have scoffed and laughed and considered it to 
be in the realm of total impossibility. Obviously we have the sheiks of OPEC (Organization of 
Petroleum Export Countries), the most successful union the world has ever seen to thank in large part for 
this, but also we’ve got the hassling that has gone on between provincial governments, federal 
government, the oil companies, over who is to benefit from this windfall increase in resource revenues. 
So ferocious has been the hassling back and forth among all the parties involved that any rational 
discussion of how best we, as citizens of Saskatchewan, should spend that money, has been lost. At the 
risk of being a bit utopian, Mr. Speaker, I should like to devote my contribution to the Budget Debate to 
trying to force into the political debate coming up for this provincial election, just precisely what are 
some of the options that we as Saskatchewan people could choose to do with these fortuitous funds 
which are at our disposal. Now what could be done with it? Well, if we were to believe some of the 
worst Liberal ravings on the subject, it should all be given back to the resource companies because they 
need it. Somehow the oil companies would spend on an average of $20 million on exploration during the 
late 1960s per year, somehow they should get a great deal more of up to $200 million on oil tax revenue 
now. But, Mr. Speaker, if you ignore the Liberals and I think it is a fairly safe assumption to do so when 
it comes to looking for rational ways of using tax revenue, if we ignore the Liberals and we concentrate 
on what the Government is doing, I don’t think we have cause for a great deal more optimism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Richards: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to quote from Bill 42. Bill 42 was a piece of legislation 
which established the Energy and 



 
March 20, 1975 

1091 
 

Resource Development Fund, and the purposes of that fund, Mr. Speaker, were: 
 

(a) to encourage and assist the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation or any person operating jointly 
or in partnership with such a corporation to the exploration and development of oil and natural gas 
resources of the province; 

 
(b) to encourage and assist persons to explore and develop the energy and mineral resources of the 
province; 

 
(c) to encourage and assist research into the conservation, development, production and utilization of 
the energy of the mineral resources of the province. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is clear from that kind of a document is that the thinking involved is a thinking 
that continues and perpetuates the idea that economic development in Saskatchewan should be based on 
large capital, expensive projects whether of a resource or industrial nature. It implies that. It implies that 
the province that tries hardest is going to emulate Alberta and its massive pouring of funds into an oil 
base, petrochemicals, tar sands, ammonia, fertilizer, petrochemical projects. We are going to try and use 
this money to develop energy, capital intensive resources. Now alternatively, Mr. Speaker, it could be 
said that the full purpose of that clause is to try and pull the wool over the eyes of the feds, that the 
purpose was to try and confuse the feds and that this wasn’t really tax money, it was something which 
was over there in some separate energy fund. It wasn’t really available to be used for discretionary, 
general programs, the Government and the people of Saskatchewan might decide upon. 
 
I very much doubt if Tommy Shoyama, former head of Saskatchewan’s Economic Development 
Planning Board was very much amused or confused by that piece of legislation. I suspect the Federal 
Government is fully cognizant that there is a final clause in that piece of legislation which permits the 
Lieutenant Governor-in-Council to do anything he likes with that money. And I suspect that the only 
effect that section on the Energy and Resource Development Fund may have had is to confuse the 
Saskatchewan people as to what are the options open to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that is one concept of what could be done with the money I am afraid another 
unconscionable way to spend the money is merely to fritter it away. Governments are very good at 
frittering away even large amounts of money. And to give you one example of where that insidious 
process is afoot, rather than thinking through what could be imaginative alternatives and ways of using 
this windfall which has arrived is instead that we are frittering it away on programs such as the Minister 
of Finance’s announced intention of spending up to $35 million for subsidizing gasoline. Why spend 
$35 million to keep down gasoline prices? Why not spend it on sugar prices or food prices? It is totally 
arbitrary, Mr. Speaker, that we should choose to spend $35 million on gasoline as opposed to any of a 
number of other commodities whose prices have seriously inflated recently. Inasmuch as the utilization 
of energy is roughly proportionate to the income there is no progressive aspect in the reduction of fuel 
prices. 
 
Let’s look at the orders of magnitude involved. The 



 
March 20, 1975 

1092 
 

expenditure of $35 million on a gasoline price subsidy is more than the combined total to be spent on the 
Senior Citizens’ Supplement and the Family Income Plan. In fact the Senior Citizens’ Supplement 
which the Minister says will cost $7 million for an entire year, is merely 20 percent. In other words, the 
Senior Citizens’ Supplement could have been increased five-fold if we were prepared to pay higher 
gasoline prices. A very good case could be made that there would be a lot more equity involved in the 
paying of higher fuel prices and a higher Senior Citizens’ Supplement. 
 
The Family Income Plan is an excellent plan that I support. It’s a large and expensive program but it 
costs only $24 million, considerably less than the $35 million budgeted for fuel price subsidy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that instead of frittering it away, instead of seeking the large pulp 
mills, potash mine expansions, steel mills, not that I have anything per se against their development, but 
instead of seeking these large capital investment projects and certainly instead of the Liberals’ proposals 
to give the money back, I would argue that what we should go for now and what we should be prepared 
to argue, is for an ongoing rural wage subsidy of considerable scope and magnitude. Shades of John 
Deverell! 
 
I have certain modifications to make of which I won’t refer to explicitly but none the less it is high time 
that we resurrect the idea. Mr. Speaker, a particular reform such as an ongoing wage subsidy, only can 
make sense in the content of the overall politics of rural development. Far be it from me to want to 
ignore the needs and nationalize the resource industries. I would also argue that such a program as I am 
proposing would make no sense unless we tackle the organizational inefficiencies of rural government 
as it exists now. Shades of the whole county argument of a decade ago! We should be prepared to 
resurrect the arguments and the need for an efficient strong local government system which involved the 
elimination of the patchwork of overlapping rural administrations. And far from arguing for the 
retrenchment or the abolition of the Land Bank I think ultimately we in Saskatchewan are going to have 
to face the need that ultimately the Saskatchewan Land Bank become the sole owner of land in 
Saskatchewan and that leasing become the major ten-year device to be used to preserve farming as we 
want it. 
 
But to return to this wage subsidy and let’s give it a more dignified title, I’ll call it a rural income bonus 
for the sake of the argument. I would argue that it should be available to all enterprises outside 
Saskatoon and Regina. That if incorporated they would have to be either Crown corporations or 
co-operatives. And if unincorporated, they would have to be owner-operated family enterprises. In other 
words, the family farm - if truly a family run operation - would be eligible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what purpose could be served by expenditure of a large sum of money out of the windfall 
resource revenue we have? Very simply, I will list five. Obviously we are interested in the creation of 
more employment in rural and northern Saskatchewan. Secondly, I think it is nonsense to promote such 
employment unless we also promote non-capitalist modes of organizing that employment. We are 
interested in the promotion of equalization of incomes. And a technical economic argument that I shall 
try to make as simple as possible, is that we should be using; our subsidy dollars for encouraging labour- 



 
March 20, 1975 

1093 
 

intensive techniques as opposed to subsidy of capital that is involved in most existing subsidy programs. 
Fifthly, I would argue that inasmuch as we are paying for these programs out of this resource taxation, 
implicit in all of this is a desire to conserve and reduce energy utilization. 
 
What is the rationale for doing this? Why should we be interested in expending large sums of money in 
this manner and have the kinds of provisions that I have specified, have any rationality to them? 
 
First, I would argue that it should be available potentially to all enterprises, not strictly to manufacturing 
enterprises. The main important employment opportunities to be generated not only in the 
manufacturing sector but also in farming, in the service sector, such an ongoing wage subsidy could be 
the margin that is preserved and encourages the development of retail services in small sectors and 
overcomes the built-in advantage of the large urban sector. Such a subsidy could be the margin which 
means that there are a number of small pole treatment plants throughout northern Saskatchewan instead 
of one large pole treatment plant costing $3 million in Prince Albert. This program should be graduated 
by regions, going from, I would argue, nothing in Regina and Saskatoon and I trust the Hon. Mayor of 
Regina doesn’t take offence to that; another graduation for other cities in Saskatchewan; another 
graduation for rural southern Saskatchewan and increasing to the order of $2,000 per year, which we 
should be prepared to pay for jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to elaborate on a further point, virtually all existing subsidy programs for regional 
development have been built up on a patchwork basis and they basically involve the subsidy of capital. 
They lessen the cost of capital used in production. They don’t lessen the cost of hiring people. The 
DREE programs are a classic example of that. It would be far more efficient for a $1 of subsidy spent in 
subsidizing the hiring and employment of people, not the hiring and utilization of machinery. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the same argument which applies to the DREE grant also applies, for example, to a fuel 
subsidy. Fuel subsidies constitute a subsidy to the operation of capital and as such I think that we should 
be prepared to face up to the idiocy - I think there is no other word ultimately to describe it - the idiocy 
of programs such as purple gas. 
 
Purple gas has been a sacred cow in Saskatchewan politics, almost as sacred as the deterrent fees in the 
other direction. But if anybody looks rationally at the expenditure of dollars of taxpayers’ money on 
purple gas for farm fuel subsidy as opposed to some more rational way of getting that money into the 
farmers’ pockets, I think he would be willing to see and to admit that it is irrational. It is irrational in the 
sense that the subsidy is worth more, the bigger your operation, the more machinery you have, the more 
fuel you consume. The bigger your farm, the more you benefit. 
 
I think of another classic kind of contradiction which it creates, a very particular and humble example. 
You now have a native fellow who runs a trucking operation near Lestock. He was running a trucking 
operation, he didn’t qualify for purple gas because he wasn’t a farmer. But why? What rationality is this 
to deny a form of subsidy to that native person trying to 



 
March 20, 1975 

1094 
 

operate a small trucking operation when it was available to farmers in the immediate vicinity. Both are 
valuable services, both the local farmers in the Lestock area and that native fellow running a trucking 
operation, both are providing a useful valued, economic service to the community. 
 
I think a final question, Mr. Speaker, is how much? It is impossible to budget for this kind of program 
with only the limited research material which is available, that’s not a plea for any increased budget 
allocation this year. I am very grateful for the increase over last year accorded for the Independent 
Member in the Estimates. Nonetheless I think that for such a program to have any impact we must be 
prepared to consider that the whole income bonus would have to run up to $2,000 per job in northern 
Saskatchewan. I think we must be prepared to envisage the expenditure of $100 million to $150 million 
annually on such a program if it is to have any benefit, Of course, that sum would partially be offset by 
the cancellation of the wasted moneys in the Department of Industry and Commerce on capital grants. It 
would, in part, be offset by the elimination of farm fuel subsidies. Nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
this program must involve, if it were to have any impact, a major expenditure of funds from the 
Provincial Treasury. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, is such an idea utopian? Yes, I think certainly such an idea at this juncture 
is. But if we don’t use the time that we have now, Mr. Speaker, in the brief fiscal sunny climate that we 
have in Saskatchewan to think through the major new directions that we can go, then we will have only 
ourselves to blame when, come to the next recession, we are scraping and scrambling as we were in 
1969 and 1970 and in depressions before that. Now is the time when we don’t have overwhelming fiscal 
pressures upon us. Now is the time with the forthcoming provincial election for Saskatchewan people to 
start thinking how do they plan, how should we use the windfall revenue that has come to us, are we to 
follow in Alberta’s footsteps and be “Avis” to Lougheed’s “Hertz”, are we going to find steel mills and 
potash expansions to use up the money? Not that I have any particular objections that there should not 
be some developments in these fields. Are we going to fritter it away in a series of uncoordinated, 
ill-thought through programs, or are we going to use this opportunity that has been sent us to try and 
seriously, once and for all, put the energy, the money, the effort into preserving rural Saskatchewan. In 
fact, making of the Saskatchewan option, as the Premier has referred to it, not political rhetoric but the 
substance of measures, financial and organizational thrusts of the Provincial Government in years to 
come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take part in this Debate and I 
first want to say that there really were no surprises. I had predicted that the budget would be a record 
budget so far as spending was concerned in the province and it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one realizes that this is an election year, it is not hard to understand why the NDP 
Government is handing out payments to all segments of society to try and buy their way back into 
office, and with the taxpayers’ own money. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1095 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Lets have a look at the NDP record of taxation and see where this money is coming 
from which they are giving away. In 1971 the last year of the Liberal administration we estimated 
revenue from all sources of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan at $451 million. This year the NDP will take 
$1,144,000,000 from the taxpayers. Some record. Mr. Speaker, to break this down we find the Liberal 
Government in 1971 collected $68 million in education and health tax. This year the NDP Government 
will take $139 million, an increase of over $70 million. Or take the income tax, as an example, Mr. 
Speaker. In 1971, in the last year of the Liberal Government, we collected $69 million income taxes 
from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan but under the NDP in 1975 they will take $170 million, a whopping 
increase of $100 million. Another first for the NDP. Liquor profits have doubled under the NDP from 
$20 million in 1971 to $54 million in 1975. One could go on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Even the 
energy crisis created by the Arab countries enabled the NDP to take an additional $50 million in revenue 
from the oil companies and virtually put them out of business in Saskatchewan. The NDP Government 
is receiving $119 million from the potash industry due to the world shortage and high demand and I am 
sure that they will kill the goose that is laying the golden egg by their excessive and depressive tax 
policy, which has already stopped the expansion of over $200 million in the potash industry. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this expansion could and would have provided a bright future for a lot of young people in our 
province and would have also assured the supply of fertilizer for the countries around the world who 
need it so badly to stave off starvation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP in 1975 will receive $333 million from the Federal Government in Ottawa. This 
is three times as much as the Liberal Government received in 1971. Mr. Speaker, this $333 million, 
while it is federal money, it is still money derived from the pockets of the taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, with 
all this revenue coming into the provincial coffers it is no wonder the NDP Government are scrambling 
around trying to find places to spend all this extra money in light of the upcoming election. They have 
tried to give every voter a little piece of bait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the people of Saskatchewan to look around and assess the improvements that they see 
in their own areas and see if they can see where the Government is spending that additional $690 million 
of the taxpayers’ money to their advantage and I am sure they cannot. Mr. Speaker, a good deal of this 
additional revenue is being used for the 4,000 additional employees the NDP have hired since taking 
office, not to mention the tremendous increase in office space needed to house these additional 
employees, nor the cars and expenses that go with driving cars, providing hotels, meals and so on. I am 
sure the money has not been spent on highways. Try going to Lloydminster from St. Walburg. No. 3 
highway, especially from the Saskatchewan River to the meridian, cannot even be called a road. No. 55 
highway to Green Lake from Meadow Lake leaves a lot to be desired. Cars were being pulled through 
all last summer. The Government started work on that over a year ago, did some work last summer but 
still no road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people will ask why mill rates in towns and 



 
March 20, 1975 

1096 
 

cities have to go up this year when the NDP Government has an extra $690 million to spend. Or the 
cattlemen could ask, why there could not have been a tax holiday on lease fees and taxes on their leases 
to help them over a tough situation of low cattle prices and help them recover from the serious flooding 
situations of last spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hospital boards could ask why the Government is so niggardly in the amount of money 
they get to run hospitals. One could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure people throughout the 
province will be assessing the record of spending of this NDP Government and will find it wanting. It is 
very easy to give away money, especially if it is the other fellow’s, such as the $6 million they gave 
away to get rid of the pulp mill in Meadow Lake; $10 million to Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon; 
$15 million to IPSCO out here. Mr. Speaker, when revenue is coming in like it is and I might add that 
the reason Saskatchewan is in such good economic condition is because of the federal agriculture 
policies that have put money in the hands of the farmers of the province from which we all benefit. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, rather than finding ways of spending all this extra money coming into the coffers of 
the Provincial Treasury, the Government should either cut back on what they are taking from the 
taxpayers of the province or set up a reserve fund against the day when economic conditions may not be 
so good. That would be far more responsible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, It seems this Government is more 
concerned about building up a bureaucratic empire in the Province of Saskatchewan which they think 
will keep them in office than they are about the welfare of the taxpayers of the province, or our senior 
citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago I mentioned a case of Government interference in a local credit union which had 
caused the firing of their manager. I want to inform this House of another case of Government 
interference. This time in a co-op. It seems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a person cannot say anything about 
this Government for fear of losing his job. This happened to the manager of the co-op in Canora. He 
wrote a letter to the Minister of Agriculture criticizing his department for buying the Matador Co-op 
farm. He felt governments should not interfere in co-ops. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture did 
not appreciate this criticism so he turned the letter over to the Minister of Co-ops. The Minister of 
Co-ops, in turn, got in touch with the Board of Directors of the local co-op at Canora and had the 
manager fired forthwith. This is just another example of the arrogance of the Government opposite, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. No one is safe from the heavy hand of this NDP Government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the same thing happened to numerous people who criticised the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. When they had the fortitude to criticize DNS they were fired. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few words about programming on the CBC. I realize this is not a 
provincial responsibility but I have a lot of concerned constituents and it is time someone took a stand to 
clean up programming on the CBC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in February I wrote a letter to Pierre Juneau, Chairman of 
CRTC, with a copy to the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1097 
 

Hon. Hugh Faulkner, Minister in charge of CBC, expressing my concern about the obscene garbage we 
have been watching over CBC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — I get a bang out of their slogan, “First Choice”. I have to say, and I have to admit, 
that in Meadow Lake the CBC is first choice, but only because it is the only choice. My letter was 
printed in our local paper and in the North Battleford News Optimist and Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must 
say I have received a tremendous response both by phone and letters in support of my stand. I feel it is 
time that people speak out against this obscene, pornographic garbage that is being thrown at us. It is 
bad enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this is in a theatre, in movies, but when it is brought into our 
own living rooms and at the taxpayers’ expense, I object strenuously. To follow that up, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I was amazed to see an article in the Leader-Post, of the 13th of March, by one John Hirsch, 
CBC head of television drama and to see him on CBC Sunday night, last, saying that they are going to 
rerun such programs as Baptizing’ which was a program that triggered off all the adverse response. To 
say the least, the program was disgusting. Mr. Speaker, John Hirsch is going to rerun that program in 
defiance of all the people who found it obnoxious and I call on the Hon. Hugh Faulkner to remove him 
from the post as head of television drama on CBC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Speaker, just to show Mr. Hirsch’s arrogance I will quote his last two 
paragraphs in this article: 
 

Obviously programming must not go more than a few steps beyond what viewers are accustomed to, 
and just as obviously there must be a very wide range of programming that caters to the famous ALL 
. . . 

 
In other words, we have to give the viewers not only what they think they want, we have to give them 
the kind of high quality that the honest, creative artist we are trying to employ, knows they will want 
once they try it and once they get to like it. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Speaker, who is to say the honest and creative artists he talks about are qualified 
to tell us what we should see and what is good for us. I say hogwash! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — This is what we get, Mr. Speaker, when we have too much government control. We 
have bureaucrats telling us what is good for us, whether we like it or not. I feel there is an underlying 
scheme to try and break down the moral fabric of our society and it must be stopped, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1098 
 

Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Speaker, people are really concerned about the NDP buying up land through the 
Land Bank and setting up state farms such as the Matador. I was happy to hear the Leader of the 
Opposition enunciate our policy which will place the credit of the government behind any new farmer 
and the small farmer wishing to expand. We also will offer for sale on easy terms the land now being 
rented to those farmers holding leases. If a farmer does not want to buy then he may continue to lease. 
Mr. Speaker, I am positive the Liberal Family Farm Development Plan will be well received by the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, both those wishing to sell or retire, as well as those wanting to get started. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was at the SARM convention and was glad to hear the Hon. Mr. Lang make statements 
that should allay the fears of the farmers in regard to the Crow’s Nest rates. He stated, and I quote from 
a news release dated March 14, 1975: 
 

To Mr. Messer I say stop your distortions and stop worrying farmers about the Crow’s Nest rates. To 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool I say it is sad to waste the money on a needless advertising campaign 
about the Crow’s Nest rates. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — 

To farmers I say there will be no change whatsoever in the present structure of the Crow’s Nest rates 
unless you yourself see the advantage in getting the money involved more directly. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Coupland: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Lang is saying is that there will be no change unless the 
farmers want it. That is a lot different than the NDP policy who put in the Hog Marketing Commission 
and never gave the farmers a chance to say what they wanted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Otto Lang also stated that the Government of Canada has no policy to abandon 
rail lines, but just the opposite. They have a program of reasonable, logical rail line protection, wherever 
and whenever it makes social and economic sense to provide that kind of service. It’s interesting to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that while the NDP try to spread gloom and doom in regard to transportation that the only 
rail lines abandoned in Saskatchewan were done when we had an NDP Government in Saskatchewan 
and a PC Government in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I feel this is an irresponsible budget I will support the amendment and vote against 
the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance on his budget of fulfilment. 
 
This fourth budget of our Government, as my colleague so 



 
March 20, 1975 

1099 
 

aptly pointed out marks the fulfilment of the commitment we made to the people of Saskatchewan in the 
New Deal for People during the course of the 1971 election campaign. 
 
The current budget and those presented in the three previous years document the systematic way in 
which our Government has gone about fulfilling the commitments we made to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
New Democrats take pride in their election programs. We regard them as firm commitments, not mere 
political gimmicks as the Liberals do - something to be thrown away into the garbage can once elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Liberal financial critic and Leader of the Opposition followed the footsteps of 
his predecessors, his eyes fixed firmly on the past and his brain turned off to the progress and 
circumstances of today. 
 
During the presentation of the budget by the Honourable Minister of Finance last Friday, I watched with 
care the behaviour and facial expressions of the Members opposite. Mr. Speaker, first they tried to 
heckle, then they tried to laugh, then they slouched in their chairs, then their chins dropped and then 
their faces turned pale, almost green as each new program was announced. Then they called for an 
adding machine, Mr. Speaker, to tally up the tax reductions and tax cuts and add up the new programs 
that were being announced. Mr. Speaker, one of them just about fell off his chair into the wastepaper 
basket as they realized that their small group of 13 would be reduced to even lesser numbers after the 
next election, except for the Leader of the Opposition, who every once in a while exploded in a nervous 
giggle or laugh, as he saw his chances improving for a seat in that other place in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, 
finally the Leader of the Opposition got to his feet to deliver his rebuttal and the hundreds of people who 
came to listen to the budget got up and left. And there he stood gasping to say something useful as 
comment. But it just didn’t come. Mr. Speaker, afterwards he met the Press and how did he describe the 
budget? Let me quote, “Nothing of consequence for anyone!” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure he was living in the past, back to the last budget of Friday, February 26th, 1971, 
that he presented. His budget which had nothing of consequence for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have with me the Steuart budget which was presented to this House in 1971 and the 
estimates that he presented. 
 
And let me compare the budget for agriculture for example, of 1971 to the 1975 budget, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, in 1971 the gross budget, ordinary and capital expenditure including the federal 
reimbursements, that’s the gross budget, amounted to $16.8 million. Mr. Speaker, look at the 1975 
agriculture budget, almost $60 million, close to a 400 per cent increase. $11.5 million for programs 
under FarmStart, designed mainly to help young farmers to get established in farming. $12.7 million in 
grants for the farm cost reduction of fuel, that is rebating farmers with seven cents per gallon on farm 
fuel, an average of $170 per farmer. $2.8 million in grants for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, almost 
double what was provided last year. $1 million for agricultural stabilization, another new program 
announced. You know these four programs alone, Mr. Speaker, totalled to the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1100 
 

amount of $28 million, programs that were not in effect in the years of the Liberals. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition says, ‘Nothing of consequence for anyone!” You know, if he tries to 
tell that to the farmers there’s no question they will laugh at him. They know the value of these 
programs. They know the value of crop insurance, of FarmStart and of seven cents per gallon rebate on 
farm fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked at the 1971 budget for Education, including university operating costs. In that year 
the Liberals proposed to spend $140.3 million in total. Why, Mr. Speaker, this budget will provide 
$140.2 million in operating grants for school boards alone, over $26 million more than last year, 
designed to keep the mill rates down and allow extra funds for school boards and to establish new 
programs and to provide for salary increases. Over $4.6 million in Saskatchewan student grants or 
student aid programs, over 300 per cent more than was provided in the last Liberal budget which was 
less than $1.5 million. 
 
$10.25 million of gasoline taxes have been allocated to automobile insurance to keep car insurance 
premiums down to reasonable costs. 
 
I compared the 1971 Liberal budget for health and I looked at our budget at the present time. Mr. 
Speaker, a curious thing I discovered. You know, Mr. Speaker, this year we will be spending almost 
$9.5 million more on the hospital services plan alone than the Liberals proposed to spend on the total 
public health programs, excluding the Mental Retardation program which has been transferred to Core 
Services and now under the jurisdiction of the Department of Social Services. And further, under the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, there are no deterrent fees to pay, no premiums to pay, no wage guidelines for the 
hospital employees and nurses to fight, no major deficits for the hospital boards to face. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, the budget for the Department of Health has been increased by $124 million when you include 
the services provided under Social Services for the mentally retarded. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition says, “Nothing of consequence”. 
 
Well, the hospital employees’ wages which have gone up by more than 100 per cent in the last four 
years, is that nothing of consequence? Chiropractic services ensured; a hearing aid plan established; a 
children’s dental care plan has been launched; double the number of chronic care beds, mainly for the 
elderly; ten health and social centres opened; small hospital closures stopped. Mr. Speaker, some $100 
million worth of hospital construction has been approved or is in various stages of development, and 
more new health programs at various stages of implementation; a drug plan on the horizon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whom are health services for? They’re for the people, they are the beneficiaries. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll have more to say on health services a little later. 
 
Now let’s take a look at housing. In the last term of office, the Liberals budgeted for a measly 
three-quarters of a million dollars for housing. This budget provides for $11.25 



 
March 20, 1975 

1101 
 

million worth of a housing program, a 15-fold increase. 
 
This budget provides a 24 per cent increase in the highway, bridge and public improvement construction 
over that provided last year, almost $30 million more than was provided in the last Liberal budget. 
 
In this budget we propose to provide over $40 million in Property Improvement Grants, that is almost 
four times as much as was provided by the Liberals, all designed to help reduce property taxes. 
 
For the Leader of the Opposition to say that there is nothing of consequence in this budget, is an insult to 
the intelligence of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the Honourable Members to compare the budget and programs of the Department 
of Social Services of today with the budget of 1971, the last, last budget of the Leader of the Opposition. 
1975 budget, $1.6 million for employment support programs, nothing in 1971. Look at allowances for 
day care, $1.7 million in the current budget. What was provided for by the Liberals, Mr. Speaker? It was 
a mere pittance, a mere pittance of $65,000. This year we are providing over $8 million for residents of 
special care homes, almost a 50 per cent increase over last year. Do you know what the Liberals 
provided, Mr. Speaker? Not a single penny for this kind of support for the senior citizens. 
 
But to hear them talk now, they would try to make you believe that all of a sudden they have developed 
a concern for the senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, as my colleague says, “deathbed repentance” because the 
record of the Liberal Party in the field of health and in the field of provision of services for the senior 
citizens is indeed a dismal record, a record for which the Liberals have no credibility at all. 
 
There is $24 million for the Family Income Plan, a plan that is the envy of all low-income people of 
Canada. You know watching the television news last Monday evening, I noted that the Federal Minister 
of Health and Welfare says that this is the type of a plan that is essential to lift the poor from the welfare 
rolls and to create incentives for them to seek employment. 
 
And now we are moving with an income supplement plan for the senior citizens. 
 
These are just a few comparisons between the last Liberal budget in 1971 and our budget of 1975. No 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was gasping and grasping and reaching in every 
direction in an effort to finding something to attack this budget with. But he failed, as did his 
predecessor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first two years of this Legislature we had Mr. Ken McLeod as the budget critic. But, 
Mr. Speaker, as I look about he’s not here any more. Ken is gone. 
 
Then we had Cliff Mclsaac as the Opposition critic last year and after one year he gave up. He is gone 
too, Mr. Speaker, and now, this year we have the Honourable Dave Steuart, Leader of the Opposition as 
the budget critic. One wonders if he, too, 



 
March 20, 1975 

1102 
 

will soon be departing from our midst. Perhaps to join some of his former colleagues in Ottawa’s resting 
place for the unsuccessful Liberal political leaders. I would have to say that Saskatchewan’s gain would 
be Ottawa’s loss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have now briefly described what this budget means to the people of Saskatchewan, as I 
compared it to the last Liberal budget. 
 
Let us look at what this budget does for the citizens of Regina. Naturally many of these items will also 
apply to the other cities and towns of our province. But what does this mean to the citizens of our Queen 
City? 
 
First, I want to remind the people of Regina of a $15 per capita community capital fund, this means $2.2 
million for the current year. Over a five-year period, this program will provide $11 million into the city 
of Regina. It will help to keep the mill rates down to a reasonable rate. 
 
Second, unconditional grants at $10 per capita this year will mean a further $1.45 million for Regina. 
Just in these two programs alone our Government is assisting the citizens of Regina with $3.65 million 
in the current fiscal year. 
 
But there is more, much more for the citizens of Regina. Property Improvement Grants have been 
increased from $160 this year to $200. Compare that to the Liberal Homeowner Grants of $70, Mr. 
Speaker, three times what the Liberals provided in 1971. Again, I find it difficult to believe that the 
people of Regina will consider these grants as something of ‘no consequence’. 
 
Library grants have been increased from $43,000 in 1971 to $190,000 in the current fiscal year. 
 
Our public health grants to the cities have increased from $1.50 per capita to $1.75 per capita in this 
budget. In 1971, under the Liberal Government, per capita grants were only $1.25. Our 1975/76 per 
capita grants of $1.75 represents a 40 per cent increase over the Liberal Government figures. 
 
Police grants for Regina in 1971 were $145,000. In the current Budget we are proposing over $1 million, 
Mr. Speaker, nearly ten times that provided by the Liberals. 
 
Significant funds will be provided for the regeneration of both the Regina General and Pasqua hospitals. 
 
Significant increases in school grants for both the separate and public school systems have also been 
approved. Again, a comparison with the grants in the last Liberal Budget in 1971 shows increases of 
more than 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. In 1971 the Liberal Government budgeted for $3.5 million for the 
separate schools and $5.7 million for the public school system. In the current budget our Government, in 
contrast, has approved a grant of $7.1 million for the separate system and $11.5 million for the public 
school system. This is more than double what was provided for by the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Department of Highways is spending $1.7 million on the Ring Road and a further $800,000 on the 
rail line relocation. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1103 
 

Housing programs under the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will see a further $2.8 million to 
expand and upgrade housing in Regina. 
 
Planning is being started on a new provincial office complex located in downtown which will make a 
major contribution to the revitalization of the downtown core. Also a new government building is being 
planned for the area immediately south of the Health Building. We hope to tender this building in the 
current fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, both these projects will mean a significant economic contribution to the 
construction and service industries in Regina. 
 
The Government has committed itself to capital grants for a new high school for Regina North East. It is 
now up to the Public and Separate School Boards to come to an agreement on what they are prepared to 
do for this needed facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last budget, our Government approved $1 million for the Western Canada Summer 
Games. This will help build an Olympic track, Olympic-size swimming pool and a marina for the 
aquatic events. 
 
We have also approved a further $350,000 for change room facilities in Douglas Park. These facilities 
will add significantly to the facilities for Regina athletics and for those who enjoy recreational sports. 
 
Does the Leader of the Opposition really believe that this is ‘nothing of consequence’ in this budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Leader’s criticism of the budget is only matched in cynicism by his comments 
on the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan. The Honourable Member’s pleas for immediate action 
made me think that he has lost either his memory or his sense of shamefulness completely. It was his 
Party and his Government which procrastinated for seven long years over a drug plan. 
 
Perhaps the Leader of the Opposition thinks that the people of Saskatchewan have forgotten his Party’s 
promise of a drug plan in the 1964 election campaign. During their three years in Government after 
1964, they did nothing about introducing a drug plan that they promised in 1964. 
 
Since the Liberals fooled the people once, they decided to try again in the 1967 campaign. In 1967 they 
promised that they would hold a referendum on a drug plan. Did they bring in a drug plan, Mr. Speaker? 
Did they even hold a referendum? No, Mr. Speaker, they did what Liberal governments are so capable 
of doing, of doing nothing. 
 
In 1971 we promised that we would implement a plan to greatly reduce the cost of prescription drugs for 
the citizens of Saskatchewan - a plan that would be based on a drug formulary and bulk purchasing. We 
then decided to go beyond that pledge, Mr. Speaker. We appointed an expert committee to develop a 
drug formulary. This committee will continue to work to update and extend the formulary. We have 
entered into distribution contracts with existing wholesalers. We have been involved in extensive 
negotiations with the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association. These negotiations were successful 
with the negotiating team named by the druggists. However, the members 



 
March 20, 1975 

1104 
 

did not support the agreement by their own negotiating team and then approved by their executive 
council. As I have indicated publicly and in this House, the fact is the druggists rejected some of the 
main features of the plan to which their own representatives had previously agreed. 
 
I should like to remind this House that in the fall of 1973 the pharmacists met with us and presented us 
with their recommendations as to the main features of a provincial drug plan that they wanted to see 
established. Among those recommendations was one that said that the beneficiary should make a 
contribution towards the cost of each prescription. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the pharmacists have now said that they want to remove any charge to the 
consumer even though they previously suggested this should be included in a provincial plan. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that partial financial participation by the consumer is a feature which has 
been supported initially by the pharmacists, is being supported by the doctors and by the nurses as well. 
This was also recommended by the Saskatchewan Advisory Committee on Medical Care known as the 
Thompson Committee and also recommended by the Federal Royal Commission on Health Services for 
Canada, chaired by Chief Justice Hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pharmacists have asked for a limit of a 50-day supply on drugs. We don’t understand 
this new requirement which would limit pharmacists and doctors to exercise their professional 
judgement on the amount of drugs to be supplied to a client through a single prescription. Thirdly, the 
pharmacists want more money - $3 per prescription instead of the sliding scale negotiated from $2.65 to 
$2 depending on volume of prescription sales. We think the negotiated dispensing fee was fair, perhaps 
even generous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In British Columbia they can charge up to a maximum of $2.55 per prescription; in Alberta up to a 
maximum of $2.65; in Manitoba up to a maximum of $2.25; in Ontario up to a maximum of $2.60 and 
in Quebec a flat rate of $2.15. But here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because we are trying to 
introduce a universal plan they are insisting on a flat $3 fee, much higher than in any other province. 
 
We suggested a sliding fee in order to give extra financial support to the small rural pharmacists. This 
sliding fee scale would not over reward the large volume outlets in the cities and which are in many 
cases owned by chain companies and department stores. The final point of difference involves the term 
of the contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Government agreed to the additional request by the pharmacists, the cost to the 
public purse would be in excess of $13 million per year. I want to emphasize that under the plan that had 
been negotiated, the maximum consumer prescription charge would not have exceeded $2 per 
prescription. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are back in negotiations again with the pharmacists and we shall continue to negotiate 
as fairly and as responsibly as possible. We will certainly not be stampeded into hasty action by the 
unsolicited advice from the Party opposite. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1105 
 

Mr. Speaker, following Liberal advice in how to bring in a drug plan would be like following a 
prescription for disaster. The people of Saskatchewan trust the NDP with health programs. They know 
that we will introduce a comprehensive drug plan. They know that we are not responsible for the delay 
and I know that the model that we will set up for the prescription drug plan, the model that we will 
establish will be followed eventually by other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Party’s concern for the senior citizens of Saskatchewan illustrates most strikingly the 
difference between NDP and Liberal philosophy. The NDP want to help senior citizens to be as 
independent as possible contributing their talents to make our country strong. We want our senior 
citizens to be happy and have a fulfilling life. We are not prepared to use senior citizens as political 
footballs like the Liberals do. 
 
During those seven lean and hungry years of Liberal rule in Saskatchewan, what did the Liberal 
Government do for senior citizens? The answer is brief and clear. The Liberals imposed deterrent fees. 
They closed their hospitals; they did not provide help to the senior citizens, they did not even express a 
concern for the plight of thousands of our Saskatchewan senior citizens. 
 
By comparison, what is the record of our NDP Government over the past four years? And, what does 
this budget do for the senior citizens - a budget which the Leader of the Opposition characterizes as 
containing ‘Nothing of consequence.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a first move and a first gesture in a major effort for the senior citizens we removed the 
deterrent fees within a matter of days after taking office. We then abolished the medical and hospital 
premium for the senior citizens. We introduced the Hearing Aid Plan to drastically reduce the price of 
hearing aids, a program of particular benefit to the senior citizens. 
 
It is true we have had some difficulties with the plan; it is true we have had some administrative 
problems, but, Mr. Speaker, this is a program that is now being examined by every other province in 
Canada to be copied by every other province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, we introduced financial subsidies for people in Level II and Level III 
nursing homes. A large sum of additional money is provided in this budget to increase their benefits. My 
colleague the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Taylor) has given the details of this program yesterday in 
the House. Level III subsidies increased from $7 to $10.50 per day and Level II subsidies increased to 
$3.50. 
 
We virtually doubled the number of extended care beds in Saskatchewan. We introduced the Senior 
Citizens Home Repair Program. We extended reduced fares on Saskatchewan transportation buses for 
senior citizens. We increased the amount of government money for low-cost senior citizens’ housing, 
which is most welcome and appreciated by the senior citizens. I could list many more actions which our 
NDP Government has taken to assist our senior citizens. In this current budget, we have the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1106 
 

beginnings of a senior citizens’ program which we feel is a dramatic move forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are introducing supplements of $20 per month for single individuals and $36 per month for married 
couples, who are receiving full OAS and GIS benefits. Not a large supplement, Mr. Speaker, but a good 
beginning. We have established a senior citizens’ council and will be creating a senior citizens’ branch 
with the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are launching a chiropody (foot care) program in the Department of Public Health - a 
program of particular benefit to senior citizens. The foot care program will be staffed by salaried 
chiropodists of the Department of Health, at a cost for the first year estimated at $100,000. Home care 
will be expanded by increasing the number of home care programs operating in the province and 
increasing the services available for these programs. We will increase the sum allocated to current home 
care programs from $916,000 last year to almost $1.6 million this year. That represents almost twice as 
much money for home care to what was provided last year. We will be setting up a demonstration 
project in occupational therapy with a budget of $68,000. 
 
Two teams of two occupational therapists each will work in a variety of settings to determine the 
rehabilitation potential of occupational therapy in home and community settings. 
 
I also want to announce the beginning of another new health program, Mr. Speaker, for senior citizens. 
The beginning of a special geriatric program - $85,000 is provided for the employment of a geriatrician 
and provision of a special bursary program to assist physicians to specialize in diseases of the elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins) said in his address, senior citizens will also 
benefit from an expansion of the respiratory disease unit at the University Hospital, Saskatoon. I am told 
that fourteen and one half per cent of hospital and medical care costs are attributed to respiratory 
conditions primarily affecting the senior citizen. The need for specialization is self-evident. This special 
unit will include 11 new positions and other resources, at a total cost in excess of $170,000. 
 
You can add to these programs like the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Plan and the Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living program, both of which are of particular significance for senior citizens. 
 
I recently announced the beginning of phase I of the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living Plan 
which will cost just under three quarters of a million dollars this year. SAIL will provide needed 
artificial limbs, braces, wheelchairs, walkers, commodes and similar aids, at no cost to the handicapped. 
Phase I, which began on March 1st, involves the provision of prosthetics and orthotics, that is the 
replacement of a missing body part with an appliance such as an artificial arm, leg or hand, called the 
prosthetics, and devices such as leg or back braces called the orthotics. 
 
Phase II of the SAIL plan will be introduced in the near future. This will involve the provision of 
equipment such as wheelchairs, lifts, commodes, walkers and other aids designed to make daily living 
easier for the handicapped. These devices 



 
March 20, 1975 

1107 
 

will be provided on a loan basis for as long as they are required by clients. There will be no charges to 
the handicapped for any of these aids or services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1971 we pledged that we would provide a program which would reduce the cost of these 
devices. We went beyond this pledge, we are providing them at no cost to the handicapped, another first 
in Canada. 
 
In addition we are providing funds to enable municipal governments to improve transportation for the 
handicapped. $543,000 has been budgeted for this item. 
 
The Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program, which was expanded by more than 50 percent, to $4.6 
million this year, is assisting senior citizens in making their own homes more adaptable for independent 
living. These programs have done a great deal to enable our citizens to remain in their homes and to 
remain as independent as possible for as long a period as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you combine the existing and new health programs designed to help the elderly and 
those that will be introduced such as the drug plan, when you add up the new, existing, and improved 
senior citizens’ programs developed and administered by the Department of Social Services, coupled 
with the senior citizens’ house repair program, I am confident that our pioneers are better off living in 
Saskatchewan than in any other province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — In total our programs give our senior citizens more security in every way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has come out with a promise to guarantee senior citizens 
$350 per month for single persons and $500 per month for married couples. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 
Liberals have bothered to work out how much that promise would cost; I have been told that preliminary 
estimates suggest that it would cost at least $80 million a year. This reminds me of the 80,000 new jobs 
promised by the Liberals in 1964. They didn’t put much more thought into that promise today than they 
did in 1964. This Liberal promise for senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, will end up in the same category as 
the 80,000 jobs that they promised to the workers. 
 
Since this legislature opened we have heard a number of comments from the other side of the House 
about the delays in opening the Plains Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, let me try to set the record straight. 
 
Perhaps the Opposition has not been sufficiently awake to realize that the Plains Health Centre is open 
and is operating. Some 77 beds are currently in operation and I am advised by the administration of the 
hospital that within the next few days more beds will be open increasing to 100 beds. 
 
The Opposition Members like to talk about delays in getting this facility into operation. Mr. Speaker, let 
me tell this House a little story pertaining to the Plains Health Centre, history that they so conveniently 
forget. Mr. Speaker, The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act was introduced by the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1108 
 

Hon. Premier in 1964, when he was the Minister of Health. The legislation was passed during that 
session. That same year the Liberal Government took office. During the 1964 election campaign the 
Liberals promised the people of Regina and Saskatchewan that if they were elected they would proceed 
to build a new hospital in Regina. They said they would take immediate action. The NDP Regina 
candidates also campaigned on the pledge to build a new hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us look at the Liberal immediate action. It took them until 1967, three years, to 
proclaim The South Saskatchewan Act, an Act which was passed in 1964. Finally they appointed the 
first board and then they procrastinated for another year while the so-called hospital planning committee 
examined the question of allocation of services between existing hospitals and the proposed new 
hospital. The record will show that in April of 1965 the then Minister of Health, now the Leader of the 
Opposition, stated in this Legislature that construction would start within two years, with completion 
within three years. That would have meant completion in 1970. 
 
When the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Board presented its initial planning report to the 
Department the projected completion date was then changed to November of 1971. Then in December 
of 1968 the board revised its completion date to August of 1972. The reasons for the delay primarily 
related to problems in allocation of services and as well as consideration of an automated material 
handling system in a new hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, line drawings for the hospital were finally submitted to the Department for approval in July 
of 1969. Remember that the Minister of Health, in 1965, stated that construction would start in 1967. 
The construction timetable was then changed to indicate a December, 1972 completion. Construction 
finally commenced in August of 1970. Remember that the Leader of the Opposition said that by 1970 
the hospital would be open. What happened? That was when they just began construction. That makes 
almost six years of Liberal bungling and delaying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I became Minister of Health, I found that the problems of bed allocation and services between the 
Regina hospitals was still to be settled. The two former Liberal Health Ministers laboured for four years 
and produced nothing and resolved nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we appointed Dr. Clarkson to work with the Regina hospital boards and the medical 
community - he worked with all the interested parties and finally an acceptable solution with all 
concerned parties was worked out. It didn’t take us years, Mr. Speaker, it did take several months. 
 
The architect who was appointed by the previous administration went bankrupt - this certainly did not do 
anything to expedite the construction. We had to find a new architect in mid-stream. The construction 
project was certified as completed in May of 1973. 
 
But the final checks demonstrated that some 260 flaws such as minor electrical and mechanical 
deficiencies. These took tine to correct. Just at that time the construction industry was in dispute. 
 
Since the Liberal administration did not, or could not come to grips with the allocation of services, much 
of the equipment 



 
March 20, 1975 

1109 
 

could not be ordered, thus a further delay, Mr. Speaker. It is these problems - the failure or inability of 
the Liberals to make decisions which have caused the serious delays in getting the hospital into complete 
operation. 
 
It should be recognized that this is not just another hospital, Mr. Speaker, it is a teaching hospital, 
affiliated with the College of Medicine in Saskatoon. The College experienced problems in recruiting 
some of the permanent department heads. Also at present the nursing shortage is causing some 
difficulties in adding further beds. Mr. Speaker, I should add as well that it is the intention of the board 
to phase in the remainder of the beds in the Plains Health Centre as the two boards rationalize the 
number of beds in the other two hospitals, the Regina General and the Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals tell us that they don’t believe in planners and in planning and that is true, Mr. 
Speaker. When I became Minister of Health, among the other things that I found out that while they 
started construction on the Plains Health Centre and just a few days before the election was called, they 
started the initial construction of the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences, immediately east 
of the hospital. We found to our amazement that they provided a roadway of 28 feet, a roadway of 28 
feet, which, if the third phase of the Wascana Institute would be built, it would mean that within a period 
of a half an hour in the mornings, there would be 1,400 vehicles going to the hospital and to the Institute 
on a 28 foot roadway, Mr. Speaker. It is true that the Liberals don’t believe in planning. One of the 
things that we had to do immediately was to acquire land to provide enough of a roadway to be able to 
take the traffic. This, Mr. Speaker, certainly didn’t add to expediting use of the hospital. 
 
While the Liberals perhaps had in mind a hospital, they didn’t want anybody to go into it and that is why 
they didn’t provide for an adequate road to the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about the hospitals and especially the Regina General and Pasqua 
hospitals. Some weeks ago, I announced a major regeneration of these two health facilities. We 
appointed Dr. Graham Clarkson to come up with a program design, in consultation with the 
administrations of both hospitals, that would have the overall objective of completely modernizing both 
the old hospitals and integrating their services with those of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
When we talk about regeneration, we mean major rebuilding to bring these facilities to the most modern 
and current standards possible. It will mean an expenditure of millions of dollars. But, we are 
determined to provide the best possible health facilities to the people of Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan - services that are co-ordinated and integrated. Provision has already been made in the 
current budget of $1 million in the much needed renovations to the Pasqua Hospital and I hope that 
those renovations can be started at the earliest possible date, those are the directions given to the South 
Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Board. 
 
The job of renovating and adding to the University Hospital in Saskatoon is proceeding and we have 
allocated a further $2.5 million for that project in the current fiscal year - tenders on that project are to 
be called any day now - this project is 



 
March 20, 1975 

1110 
 

expected to cost in excess of $20 million. 
 
These allocations are part of our continuing efforts to keep our major hospital facilities up-to-date and 
capable of delivering the kind of quality care that our citizens have become used to. Mr. Speaker, I only 
regret that the previous government did not see fit to devote the same amount of concern and funding in 
keeping these major facilities up-to-date. Perhaps if the Leader of the Opposition had been as concerned 
about the Regina General and Pasqua Hospitals - as he would have us now believe - a great many of the 
improvements might have been made in the era where costs were considerably less. 
 
While we are committed to spend large sums of money on rebuilding and regenerating our hospitals in 
Regina and Saskatoon, we are not ignoring the smaller communities. Major renovation expenditures 
have been approved for Yorkton, Kamsack, Swift Current, further renovations for Moose Jaw are being 
considered. New hospital construction is well on the way in North Battleford, Biggar and Lestock. New 
hospitals have been approved for Elrose, Climax and Lampman and many others are being renovated 
and improved. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o’clock p.m. until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, when you called it 5:30, I was discussing the question of our provision 
of funds for the redevelopment of hospitals and new health facilities. 
 
While we have been providing funds for new and better hospitals and expanding our health services 
generally, we have not forgotten the employees who deliver health services on a daily basis. There were 
few areas of Liberal mismanagement which were more glaring than their handling of wages and their 
wage guidelines for hospital employees. Just compare the hospital employee’s wages at the present time 
to those of the Liberal years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, dietary, laundry and housekeeping aides ranged from a low of $213 a month to a maximum 
of $295 a month in June of 1971. They now receive from a low of $520 to $558 for this same class of 
employees, an increase of almost 145 per cent at the bottom of the wage ranges. Nurses aides who were 
earning as little as $242 to $330 a month, are now ranging from $536 to $575 per month. Certified 
nursing assistants who were getting $330 a month to a high of $405 per month, now are in the range of 
$653 as a minimum to $711 per month. Orderlies who were at $370 a month to a high of $430 a month, 
now get a minimum of $700 to $764 per month. Registered nurses were earning a minimum of $500 to a 
maximum of $570 per month, now, Mr. Speaker, the lowest wage for a nurse is $798, going up to $927 
a month. 
 
There are few areas where the Liberal record is as bad as their treatment of low 
paid hospital workers. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to compare the Liberal record 
from 1964-1971 with the record of this Government in its first four years of office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we have increased our budgetary allocations for programs to deal with 
alcoholism and alcohol abuse. Last year, you will recall, we launched the AWARE program 



 
March 20, 1975 

1111 
 

with a budget of $520,000. That budget has been increased by over 40 per cent for the coming year to 
enable the program to carry on the good work that has been done. Recognition has come to the program 
from a number of sources. The Manitoba Alcoholism Commission has purchased some of the AWARE 
ads and commercials for their own use. I also understand that the Ontario Government has expressed 
interest in the material in that program. I have no doubt that as other jurisdictions see the generally 
positive reaction we have had to the AWARE program they will also show an interest in the materials 
we are producing. I am advised that a telephone survey of some 800 families is being undertaken to 
evaluate the response to the AWARE program. I am also told that the advisory committee which we had 
appointed from a cross-section of a community of Saskatchewan is considering an analysis of baseline 
data on attitudes toward alcohol and alcoholism. I expect to hear from the committee in the near future 
with its recommendations and its comments on the data being provided to them. 
 
We have also increased the budget for the Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan to just under $1.9 
million. That is close to four times the amount the former Liberal Government spent on the work of the 
Commission. The Commission is developing a community service program which provides for a 
regional co-ordinator for each one of the ten health regions in the province. This will enable the 
Commission to reach greater numbers of people within communities outside the main population 
centres. 
 
Last year the total amount budgeted for education, treatment and rehabilitation, programs related to 
alcohol abuse and alcoholism totalled $3.2 million, Mr. Speaker. This year our Government will be 
spending approximately $4.3 million for alcohol-related programs. Included is $600,000 for hospital 
care provided for patients diagnosed as suffering from alcoholism. In addition, several thousands of 
dollars will be spent by the Medical Care Insurance Commission for physicians’ services. I think it is 
safe to estimate that the cost will be, or the money allocated will be closer to $4.5 million. Mr. Speaker, 
I am also pleased to announce that we have budgeted almost $120,000 for an alcoholism detoxification 
unit in the city of Moose Jaw. This is one more step to carry the program to all parts of the province. 
 
We are also working with the Indian and Métis people towards new and better treatment, rehabilitation, 
counselling and alcohol education programs for the native population of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention four items related to the operation of our psychiatric Services Branch. 
The first item concerns three projected relocations of facilities. The Munroe Wing, here in Regina, and 
the McNeil Clinic in Saskatoon and the establishment of a new psychiatric facility in Weyburn. 
 
The McNeil Clinic in Saskatoon has been housed for many years in rather small and inadequate 
facilities. The growth in services rendered through the clinic has grown significantly and new premises 
are needed. I am happy to announce that we have obtained a lease on much larger facilities - the Sisters 
of Zion residence in Saskatoon. This building will be renovated and I am told the clinic will be moved 
into the new premises in early summer. 
 
In Regina for some time now, the physical conditions of the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1112 
 

Munroe Wing have been a matter of concern to many of us. I am sure they were a matter of concern to 
the former Minister of Health. Deficiencies were identified in the structure as far back as 1967. While a 
number of these deficiencies were remedied by various small renovation projects, it has been evident for 
some time that alternative accommodations were required. Discussions have been held with the Board of 
the Regina General Hospital and an agreement has been reached whereby two units of the Regina 
General Hospital will be reassigned to serve as a 44-bed inpatient psychiatric unit. That is an increase 
from the present 30 beds. We anticipate that units will be functional as a psychiatric ward early next 
month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A few weeks ago I was in Saskatoon to officially open the new Applied Research Unit for Psychiatric 
Services Research facilities. As you may know, we already have what is regarded as the most advanced 
Biochemical Psychiatric Research Unit in North America. The addition of an applied research unit will 
broaden the base of our psychiatric research effort. This unit will give us the capacity to thoroughly 
research the future course of our psychiatric program and enable us to evaluate more completely the 
present program and make appropriate changes where necessary. I expect the unit to be able to give us 
some good insights into the cost effectiveness of community versus inpatient care costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much more can be said about new and improved Saskatchewan health programs. When a 
province becomes recognized by noted authorities from one end of the country to the other, and many 
others, as again regaining the leadership in the health field - there is a feeling of satisfaction and pride. 
Hardly a day passes when we don’t have out-of-province and out-of-country visitors coming to examine 
and to learn about our health plans, and to see this laboratory of success and experiment being put into 
action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dental program for children is the health success story of the year. There is just no 
doubt in my mind that this plan will be copied by other provinces. As has already been stated, next year 
children ages 5, 6, and 7 will be covered. 
 
The $250,000 neonatal intensive care unit or referral centre at the University Hospital at Saskatoon is a 
major step forward for high-risk newborn infants and their mothers and is designed to reduce the infant 
mortality rate. 
 
The new medical bursary program is beginning to produce positive results. It is expected that out of 
50-some medical students who will graduate from our College of Medicine this year, 30 or 33 will 
remain in Saskatchewan. Over 60 percent, a major breakthrough, Mr. Speaker. All of us should be proud 
of this positive result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal financial critic says there is nothing of consequence for anyone. Even the most 
cursory glance at the budget reveals that there is a great deal for the people of Saskatchewan in this 
budget. Even the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix which is not noted for its support for the New Democratic 
Party, Mr. Speaker, writes a complimentary editorial on March 19 calling the budget Mr. Robbins’ New 
Deal. I invite the Members opposite to read that editorial and to have an outside group help open their 
eyes to see that they, too, concur with what this budget is trying to do. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1113 
 

This budget has a significant number of direct and indirect tax reductions as has been previously stated. 
Let me give you just a few examples. Remember each of these items represents taxes that would have 
been collected from the ordinary taxes of this province, in some cases in the form of higher mill rates 
had these measures not been introduced. These represent annual savings of millions of dollars. Let me 
point out in conclusion, income tax reduction of $27 million; abolition of deterrent fees, $7.5 million; 
abolition of hospital and medical premiums, $18.5 million; property improvement grants, $40 million; 
grants for police services $3.2 million; equalization grants almost $2 million; community capital fund 
$9.4 million; unconditional operating grants to local governments $6.2 million; grants to LIDs $.6 
million; gas tax rebate and reductions $35 million; taxes on meals and reading materials $1 million; 
raising the exemptions on succession duties $1.7 million. These represent a per capita saving, Mr. 
Speaker, of over $195 for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, some $179 
million in direct and indirect tax reductions to the people of Saskatchewan. It is not quite the same thing 
as simply reducing the tax rate to what it was in 1964. No matter how the Leader of the Opposition tries 
to cover up the facts, Mr. Speaker, I support this budget because it represents another step in the orderly 
development of this province. This budget, like the other three that preceded it are of major 
consequence, of major benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, a budget of fulfilling our New Deal for 
People. Mr. Speaker, the Opposition may find nothing of consequence in this budget but I say to you 
that the people of Saskatchewan will find in this budget the seeds of prosperity and they will show their 
support of it when the next election is called. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the budget and I will oppose the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Melfort-Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, you know I have been keeping very quiet 
listening to a lot of garbage and I never bothered you, now I should like to have a few minutes just to 
speak about the budget. Before I proceed in speaking about the budget, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say 
a few kind words about the way you have performed your duties in this House. 
 
Some time ago I went and asked you whether you would permit me to bring my knitting in the House 
and knit while I listened to all this noise. You said that you would have to order me to remove my 
knitting. You know, knitting is very relaxing and when the pressures are on you know you can pass a 
little time away. So I decided to do something about it and I think it is the first time in the 
Commonwealth that an MLA has knitted a pair of mitts for a Speaker. Therefore, here you are, Mr. 
Speaker. You see, I took two evenings to knit these. The cuffs are knitted in gold colour to represent the 
way you have done your job and I think it is a little way of expressing how well you have done your job. 
No words can be found to say how well you have done it over the years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1975 

1114 
 

Mr. Thibault: — . . . and so that you can remember me - and I am going to tell you many reasons why I 
want to remember you - you were my first seatmate when I came here in 1959 and you taught me so 
well that I was able to top the Liberals all this time and I’m still here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Here you are, if you will just take them over to Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You should knit a pair of socks for Dave Steuart, he gets cold feet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: —I want to say that when I first came here, the first Sunday that I stayed over the 
weekend, you know I was a little boy that wasn’t away from home very much and to spend a weekend in 
Regina, it’s quite lonesome. Mr. Speaker, you were the Member who invited me over for the Sunday 
meal. I am going to tell you, you just don’t forget these little things. So I could go on and on and say 
many kind words about you, but I hope that when you wear the mitts that you look at the golden cuffs 
and the rest is knitted in brown. You can use your imagination about that. So, so much about the mitts, 
now I should like to say a few words about the budget. 
 
I want to say that when I first came here in 1959 the budget was $130 million. You know we have gone 
a long way, now it is over a billion. A lot of progress has been made and I just want to mention one 
thing that the Liberals are beefing about. It is the Land Bank. When I look at the Mickey Mouse Show 
that they have on television it is an insult to the intelligence of the voters of this province. I am going to 
tell you I feel sorry for the Opposition, two of their best Members have left and two of the ones that are 
in this House, the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) and the Member for Whitmore Park (Mr. Grant) are 
retiring. The kind of noise that the Member for Lumsden (Mr. Lane) makes, he’s going to scare the rest 
of the Liberals away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Mind you, I had a convention last night in Wakaw. That community bragged about 
the Liberal convention a few weeks ago, they said they had a big crowd. Well I’m going to tell you how 
that convention went last night. With the Premier speaking they filled all the chairs that were in the 
auditorium, then they went over to the Legion Hall and brought the benches in. After that they went over 
to the lumber yard and brought some more planks in and they sat on planks because there wasn’t any 
room left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Then we told the rest of them, well boys it is just too bad you’ll just have to go home 
and trust in the Lord we 



 
March 20, 1975 

1115 
 

are going to do the best we can for you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: —However, Mr. Speaker, everything that has been said about the budget has been dealt 
with lengthwise, crosswise, upstairs, downstairs, but I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan not to 
trust the Land Bank in the hands of the Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thibault: — Leave it in the hands of the people that brought it into being, just like when they 
brought in medicare. The people of the province trusted the Liberal Party with medicare and you know 
what happened to it. They said, no, no give it back to the hands of its mother. The hospitalization was 
the same thing, they talked against it and then after it got working they said, it’s good, it’s good. But 
keep the Land Bank there, people of this province, for at least another four years so that little baby will 
have a chance to grow. They are trying to smother it before it is born. Give it a chance but give it a 
chance with the Blakeney Government, that’s what we want. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, that is all I want to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly am very, very pleased to associate 
myself with the remarks of my colleague here on the Front Bench, the gentleman who just spoke and 
congratulated you on your performance. You entered this House, I think some six years before I did . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): —Why didn’t you let him run again? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Well I think those choices were up to him, but anyway the Member for Milestone has 
two ears and one mouth and I wish he would use them accordingly. 
 
You know when the Member for Melfort-Kinistino was speaking about the mitts and the knitting, all of 
a sudden it made me think of the Leader of the Opposition and a couple of them over there. None of 
them have much wit but I think one thing that you have to admit is that our Leader of the Opposition has 
a fair bit of native wit. It always amazes me how he weaves and threads his little stories, prevarications, 
misrepresentations into the whole thread of his program and his actions. You know I was just thinking, 
Mr. Speaker, and the Member for Kinistino, that the Leader of the Opposition is truly a well-knit wit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance (Mr. Robbins) for the 
tremendous budget that he has brought forward. Certainly that could not be done, Mr. Speaker, without 
the able leadership of the Premier. And certainly it 



 
March 20, 1975 

1116 
 

could not be done unless it was by a party that was dedicated to bring programs to people. In any case, 
and in spite of the Leader of the Opposition and the Members of the Opposition lighting up the smudge 
pots and throwing up their smoke screens as usual. Spending literally hundreds of thousands of dollars 
by trying to once again scare the people, the old fear tactic, they will be unsuccessful. These people are 
scared to death. Mr. Speaker, these people are scared to death. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — They don’t really know what to do about it. They know that Mr. Lang and Mr. 
Trudeau are having quite a time convincing the people of western Canada that they have any right 
whatsoever to be the government or that they can trust them at all. So here you have it, as it has always 
been. There was a time, Mr. Speaker, when the people opposite, were a little refreshing. There was a 
voice over there at one time that would stand up and say to Ottawa . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Who won North Battleford? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Who won North Battleford! Nobody. They sent a veterinarian down there by accident 
and nobody needed a veterinarian more than Pierre and Otto Lang. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — I don’t think that anybody . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . take a walk . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — When they get elected . . . I’ll send you . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let’s have a little more quiet. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — They consider they elected somebody when they get elected with 34 per cent of the 
vote. I suggest to you that I was elected in the Battlefords with 64 per cent of the votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Next time . . . you keep saying that, you’ve been saying that for 20 years. 
 
Mr. Lane: — That’s the first time . . . 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Right on. Well, Mr. Speaker, when Pierre’s puppets and Lang’s lapdogs get through 
interrupting, I’ll get on with my speech. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Well, when are you going to start? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Right now. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to speak in this House and support the 
budget, to be associated 



 
March 20, 1975 

1117 
 

with its benefits for our Saskatchewan people. To be associated with a Government that chooses to put 
people first in its priorities and in its planning. As part of that concern for people, Mr. Speaker, my 
Department wishes to see the total transportation picture in our province balanced in such a way as to 
provide maximum mobility of people and goods, no matter where within our province. We intend that 
our Department provide a network of safely designed, carefully maintained roads along the routes most 
used by our people and by our commercial traffic. We intend that other modes of transportation such as 
air transport and urban transit be placed in a position where they can offer maximum service to the 
people and communities they serve. And we intend, Mr. Speaker, that all these good things be provided 
in an orderly manner at the least possible cost. We plan our transportation program carefully in order to 
provide the best use of our tax dollar and maximum benefit to Saskatchewan people. 
 
The program, Mr. Speaker, which I will table at the end of my talk, outlines what I believe is an 
excellent approach to meeting the immediate transportation needs of our province and its people, as well 
as an excellent return for our dollars. 
 
The Department of Highways and Transportation, acknowledges its responsibility to provide the people 
of our province with the opportunity for maximum mobility. And with its forward-looking program we 
display our intent to carry out this responsibility to our citizens. 
 
Each of us Mr. Speaker, knows only too well the effects of inflation over the last year or two. Inflation 
effected our Department as much, or more than others, since construction costs are one of the chief 
components of that inflation. So we have our largest budget ever, Mr. Speaker, a leading budget, more 
than $109 million. But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the programs for people proposed by our 
Department, we feel that the taxpayer is indeed getting value, good value, for every dollar spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will proceed with my summary of the highlights of this year’s Highway program. I will 
show that the program indeed takes into account this Government’s concern for people, that there is 
orderly planning and construction to meet their needs, and that we are continuing our efforts to provide 
the wisest possible management of our facilities and resources charged to our responsibility. 
 
The largest item in our ordinary expenditures this year is the $25.5 million we plan to spend on 
maintenance and repair of existing highways and bridges. Almost a quarter of our total budget, Mr. 
Speaker, is allocated for keeping our existing highways in good repair, for making what we’ve got to 
last as long as possible. We see this budget increase as being good stewardship of past and future tax 
dollars used in highway construction. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, dollars spent on maintenance are dollars retained within the rural economy, a 
goodly portion of our maintenance staff is stationed in smaller communities. They live there, they work 
there and they spend their money in those smaller communities. With the extension of our oil programs, 
more and more of these maintenance crews will be needed and several new depots and maintenance 
sections will be opened up 



 
March 20, 1975 

1118 
 

this year. 
 
We have these new miles and many of them, I’ll go into that later, and that does put a tremendous strain 
on the work force that we have at the present time, especially, Mr. Speaker, when there is a real shortage 
as there was last year, a real shortage of help. 
 
Our Department has been charged, Mr. Speaker, in recent days with allowing the highways of our 
Province to deteriorate, and with being unconcerned about their safe and efficient operation. That, I 
submit, is completely false! 
 
It is no secret that 1974 gave us some very difficult times. If I were able to credit the Members across 
the house with sufficient ability, or witchcraft, I would almost say they had the bad weather 
made-to-order for us. 
 
The construction industry, on whom we rely to a large extent, was plagued by a shortage of workers and 
trucks. While it is heartwarming, Mr. Speaker, to have such a high rate of employment in our Province, 
having more jobs than people caused problems last summer. We began a new series of training 
programs for heavy equipment operators, to ease our own labour shortage. 
 
These programs gave our Department the drop on International Women’s Year . . . we graduated several 
young women from those heavy equipment courses last fall. And they do a fine job. Little things happen 
occasionally. One of the girls thought she was going to be a cat skinner and brought a knife. One of 
them . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — . . . one of them brought a bowl of milk. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who brought milk? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — You’ve got to give them a carrot, bring a carrot for the people opposite. You know, it’s 
no wonder, I really don’t know what they’re going to do across there, Mr. Speaker, when they lose their 
last veterinarian, because those braying donkeys surely need one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What good would it do when there are not going to be any around? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Spring flooding throughout our Province. 
 
Mr. Lane: — What will you do when there’s no emergency service? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Oh, we’ll get to you, Gary. Spring flooding throughout our Province taxed the 
Department’s resources to the limit. Almost $l million was required to combat the flooding, not 
including the $611,000 spent in our all-out effort and successful effort to save the town of Lumsden last 
spring, in April. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1119 
 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Yes, you know, Mr. Speaker it was wonderful . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was not! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — It was wonderful to see the activity, the activity that went on there. Every available 
machine was running. Private contractors, Department of Highways, the local people, everything was 
running, everything was loaded and moving. The only think that was running empty was the Member for 
Lumsden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — What was he packing around, his mouth wouldn’t hold water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — You know, he was tearing, he was tearing back and forth, Mr. Speaker, across the 
dikes with his ruby lips flapping in the wind. And trying to make an impression. Somehow or other he 
was trying to be associated but he didn’t quite know how. After he went by one old timer who was busy 
filling sand bags, said, “You know, if that young feller could suck as good as he can blow, we wouldn’t 
have a water problem.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ah, they read you pretty well, down there in Lumsden. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — After a half an hour you finally got a laugh! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Despite the problems, eh, it’s only ten minutes. Despite problems like these . . . 
 
Mr. Lane: — Tell them about how you ran after me to get into the picture. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Despite problems like these . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — . . . our Department managed successfully to complete a large portion of our 1974 
highway program. We moved crews from wet areas to dry ones; we coped with too much water and too 
few people; we dealt with equipment and material shortages. In short, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
commendable, a commendable total effort on the part of my Department’s staff. I’m proud of my staff, 
from the newest recruit to the most seasoned veteran. Their dedication will continue to be a significant 
factor in this year’s highway program. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1120 
 

Our program this year, Mr. speaker, will follow our Government’s policy of orderly development of 
existing systems to meet the needs of our people, continuing to meet the Department’s philosophy that 
all areas and people of our Province are entitled to travel on roads of a good standard. A total of $69.5 
million has been allocated to capital construction in our budget. 
 
The figures I have just given, Mr. Speaker, propose a 15.5 per cent increase in paved mileage and an 8.7 
per cent increase in oil-treated surface within our total provincial highway mileage. We are responsible 
for more than 12,500 miles of highways in this Province. 
 
Of this mileage, Mr. Speaker, some 11,600 are in our numbered provincial highway system. Fully 
one-third of this mileage is paved, and 44.4 per cent is oil-treated, providing 9,000 miles of dust-free 
driving surface for our Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan commerce. 
 
As a point of interest, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has only 5,160 miles of dust-free and secondary roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has improved a great deal lately. They’ve had a good Government over there for 
the last six years and they are improving, but they are, without a doubt, still some 4,000 miles behind 
Saskatchewan, despite a larger highway budget. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Thanks to Ross. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Well, that’s just, look at the history, we’ll give it to you, the statistics don’t show it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba is making tremendous headway, it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . Ross. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has made tremendous headway, particularly since they kicked 
out that Libera1-Conservative coalition. You never could tell just what it is there. They have doubled 
their budget. I think that with the kind of budget that we have compared to Manitoba’s, that we’ve done 
a tremendous job. And I’m not discrediting theirs. I say that there has been a good consistent highway 
program throughout, throughout the last 20 years. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Ever since 1964. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Well you get, you . . . Mr. Speaker, I wonder who has the floor here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, who the people opposite are, they continually like to compare 
us when they can find something that is a little under the door. They like to do this when they find 
something a little better. They go across, when it suits 



 
March 20, 1975 

1121 
 

them, to Alberta, they go across to Manitoba. It’s interesting to note that Alberta, with three times the 
highway budget, over a period of years, what do they have for oiled surface? Well, they’ve got, Mr. 
Speaker, 6,529 - still 2,500 less miles of oiled surface roads compared to Saskatchewan, in spite of 
tremendous budgets. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — But they are good. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Well, so are ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — I think you had better get back to the Regina Inn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Well, whatever, it’s a little less than . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! There’s just a little too much crossfire going on. A little bit adds a little 
spice but too much pepper in the soup. 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The remainder of the total mileage consists of gravel and earth highways in the province, service roads, 
northern tributaries, industrial access roads and stub connectors for which we are responsible. We also 
dust-treat over 80 miles of internal park roads, maintain 66 miles of various camp, picnic, historic parks, 
weigh scale and airport sites. 
 
This year’s program continues our past policy of emphasizing construction of two-lane highways. We 
plan to spend nearly $30 million to extend and improve this network of safe roads for our people, for our 
tourists, and our commercial traffic. We are concerned about safety, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue our modest program of four-laning on highways where traffic volumes require it for 
safety. And we will continue to make use of existing highway surface for this program, in order to 
provide the most four-lane mileage for the least cost. This will take four-laning this year from Moose 
Jaw to Swift Current and it won’t be stopping somewhere along the road at the ranch gate. 
 
It is of interest perhaps, to note that in 1961, when the first four-lane, since 1961, when the first 
four-lane communication was opened in this Province, that construction has averaged 23 miles annually. 
More than 100 miles have been opened to traffic in the four years since this Government took office, 
Mr. Speaker, an average of 25 miles per year added to the safer four-lane highway mileage. 
 
To make transportation safer and more efficient for our northern residents, to encourage the 
development of tourism and the use of our natural resources, we are this year allocating $8.2 million for 
the construction of northern two-lane highways. Under the program, we will continue approximately 54 
miles of 



 
March 20, 1975 

1122 
 

paving on Number 2 highway to La Ronge, and a portion of Number 55 highway between Green Lake 
and Meadow Lake. 
 
We plan to oil-surface a total of almost 80 miles of highways 106, 163, 155 in the north of 
Saskatchewan and grade 18 miles of highway 55 in northwestern Saskatchewan. There are many other 
smaller projects which are too numerous to mention. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan is important and our construction program is evidence of that fact. We cannot 
and will not throw away vast sums of public money on roads to nowhere, on roads that serve no 
communities, that lead to empty holes in the ground, Mr. Speaker. I think the folks across there know. 
Situations like this are not unknown but Mr. Speaker, they are an inheritance, an inheritance from the 
previous Liberal administration who built roads not for our people, but for their friends in big 
corporations in eastern Canada, the kind who take our resources and run. That kind of stewardship our 
Province can do without. Mr. Speaker, those, they will never forget. The people of northern 
Saskatchewan especially will never forget. Roads starting nowhere, ending nowhere, some built for a 
big publicity stunt for industries that never come about like the Primrose Pass, the Anglo-Rouyn road 
where literally millions of dollars were spent. They weren’t satisfied, Mr. Speaker, to give our resources 
away, they had to build a road for nothing to Hudson Bay to allow them to haul it out. 
 
The traffic count, the traffic count on that road today is down to practically nil since . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — How many rabbits? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — . . . there, there’s . . . I heard you were out there lately and you couldn’t find a single 
rabbit track. That’s about the only thing you haven’t chased, is rabbits. 
 
Anglo-Rouyn monuments, Primrose Pass, monuments of Liberal inefficiency. Both of them monuments 
of inefficiency. All of them, Mr. Speaker, and there are scads and scads of others, scads of others. 
 
Somebody said that I shouldn’t be dredging that up. It’s amazing, it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, $90,000 
spent. They spent more than $5 million on a road to haul that rich copper ore out to Flin Flon and we got 
$90,000 in royalties back for the copper of the province. 
 
The empty hole the peop1e of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan were left holding the bag 
and these people over here lecture us about good business. They dare to stand up here and lecture us 
about how to run business, to say nothing about Davy’s Big River sawmill and a few others. The sodium 
sulphate that was given away at Snake Hole Lake and Alsask. Given away and the corporations, the 
socialist corporation that is going to net us a profit this year of $2 million on an original investment of 
only $250 and they lecture us about business deals when they indulged in nothing but giveaways. 
Nothing but giveaways during their regime and why did they indulge in those giveaways? I’d like them 
to tell us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we consider it important that people travelling our northern roads, in search of new 
resource or recreation 



 
March 20, 1975 

1123 
 

areas, are fully aware of the potential of our vast northland. Under our signing program we are erecting 
northern regional map signs at key points on roadways penetrating our beautiful northland. They show 
route information and list general recreational facilities available. In areas where a large number of 
northern outfitters operate the area map and directory of outfitters and services are supplied. These will 
all be shown at strategic points. That’s our concern, Mr. Speaker, concern for people from our own 
province and elsewhere will use this area and concern for the citizens who make their living by 
providing the services. 
 
Other new signing programs are being introduced this year under the $400,000 allocated in tile budget. 
City entrance map signs will be erected on turnouts on city outskirts. They will show routes and points 
of interest in the city. Indeed, we have already installed one of those at Yorkton. It was erected in time 
for the official opening of the Saskatchewan Yellowhead Route in Yorkton last year. Incidentally, that 
was attended by delegates and visitors all the way from Prince Albert, British Columbia and Winnipeg, 
Manitoba. 
 
Other programs we have introduced for the travelling public as well are the regional campground and 
campground services signs. Nor does our concern end with the required traffic and information signs, 
but extends into traffic safety. This year, our Department has allotted a great deal more than $1 million 
to improving traffic safety in our province. That includes things like our “Please Join Us” signs, 
promoting the use of seat belts in automobiles. Since the beginning of this particular promotion the use 
of seat belts by the travelling public has tripled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being at a Ministers’ Conference at Winnipeg, when safety seat belts, 
weights and measures were all being discussed. The problems were raised, even those problems of 
pollution devices. We pointed out, the Saskatchewan delegation pointed out at that conference, that one 
thing that the federal people could do, and the federal representative was there - was to make, if they 
want people to wear seat belts as Mr. Lalonde suggests, then for heaven sake have then give us a 
uniform seat belt that works. They keep changing those as often or oftener than the people across the 
way change their shirts. This is a complete “schmozzle”. Last year Chrysler put out a product that you 
couldn’t get tied unless you were a magician, they will change it again next year. First they are on one 
side then on the other side. If we are going to have people have confidence in seat belts, I am suggesting 
that there should be one uniform type and every company should have the same type of seat belt so that 
when you reach for it in an emergency you know exactly where it is at. This was agreed on and I hope 
that by next year that they will be moving in that direction. 
 
This year our Department has allocated a great deal more than $1 million and we hope that the voluntary 
use of seat belts will increase. I don’t think that there is any way that you are going to pass legislation to 
force people to use their seat belts until you have a majority of the people wanting to use them and 
having confidence in them. Our program has met with success. The use of seat belts this year, 
fortunately has tripled in Saskatchewan and I am sure that it is one of the reasons that our accident rate 
hasn’t been even higher than it was. $250,000 of this year’s budget has been allocated for signalization 
at 



 
March 20, 1975 

1124 
 

railway crossings and $100,000 has been set aside for roadway illumination at critical locations. And 
that is not enough, we should have more. 
 
Even more safety measures, Mr. Speaker. Installation of guard rails; intersection treatments, such as 
channelization, rumble strips and turning bays; flattening side slopes and approaches. These all are being 
done just as quickly as we can find the men and the material to provide this service. All safety 
improvements have a high factor return in reduced accident rates for the amount of investment involved 
and are being looked at. We are proud that our Traffic Safety Branch, established last year is providing 
considerable input to the department’s traffic safety efforts, as well as assisting and co-operating with 
other agencies in the field. Incidentally, that again was a first for Saskatchewan, the first highway traffic 
safety division that was established by any provincial government in Canada. Since that time I believe 
five other provinces have come in with us. We have had our Western Ministers’ Conferences and I 
believe now that all the four western provinces have set up highway safety traffic divisions and I am 
sure that these will bring results when you have people who are specialized and whose job it is to seek 
out the danger areas; to find out what the cause is and do something about it. 
 
In 1974 there were 23,776 traffic accidents in Saskatchewan which accounted for a loss of 318 lives and 
9,839 injuries and a recordable, identifiable loss of $46.5 million. This, Mr. Speaker, is an astonishing 
figure. It is a figure that we should not really have to face, but that is the cost of accidents. These are 
regrettable losses and the doubled budget this year for safety is at least, I hope, a part of the answer. 
 
It is worthy of note, Mr. Speaker, that 46 per cent of these accidents occurred on urban streets; 27 per 
cent occurred on municipal roads; only 19 per cent on our provincial highways. Two years ago, when I 
asked for these figures, the estimate by the Saskatchewan Safety Council was 28 per cent of the 
accidents were occurring on highways. I know that statistics may be faulty but it seems that we are able 
to bring the accident rate down. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that money should be provided somehow, liaison 
should be provided somehow, so that municipal governments, urban and rural, and our traffic safety 
division should be liaisoning more and more with the Saskatchewan Safety Council to reduce this 
ever-increasing accident record and the loss of life and injury to people. 
 
It is worthy of note, Mr. Speaker, that these figures have changed drastically in the last two years. 
Another factor that I want to mention that has certainly lent itself to more safety consciousness was the 
Legislative Committee on Safety, chaired by Mr. Thibault and with Members from both sides of the 
House making their contributions. I believe that that, too, certainly has had a tremendous effect and I 
believe that the advice that we got from that Committee has been invaluable. 
 
Other special programs within the comprehensive transportation picture are included in this program 
document and under the urban transit assistance, again initiated by this department last year, another 
first. We provide financial assistance to cities with operating transit systems, the program currently 
provides the following major items: 75 per cent toward the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1125 
 

cost of transit facility construction; 3 cents per passenger carried; 50 per cent of the cost of new busses. 
 
I hope that this will encourage somehow and by advertising and through persuasion, we can get more of 
our people to use the transit system. I believe that the congestion, the parking space, all of those things 
that we find almost intolerable and annoying downtown could be solved if we could popularize the use 
of transit service. There is no reason at all why as many cars should be going downtown every day as 
there are when they have good, safe transit service. 
 
These are good programs, Mr. Speaker, but there are other persons who need equal opportunity in 
transportation. This year again, for the first time, transit systems for handicapped people will receive 
assistance under an extension of our urban transit program. These people have a special mobility 
problem and they have a right to transportation. We will underwrite 50 per cent of the operating deficit 
and 75 per cent of the rolling stock purchase - that is the purchase of busses - for special transit systems 
for the handicapped. This new program, with a budget of $555,000 is designed to fill this important need 
in the lives of our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Other assistance planned for cities under the urban transportation assistance program will include $4.5 
million for construction and improvements of the highway connector streets, also, arterial collector 
streets within our cities. And $200,000 has been earmarked to meet the present commitments for 
transportation studies in Saskatoon, Prince Albert and North Battleford. These studies will take the same 
form, I hope, and provide more information than the Regina Transportation Study did that was tabled 
two years ago. I believe that we can learn something from that. I hope that the answers which these 
urban areas get will be even more useful than that one. 
 
Airport assistance, another transportation mode we are concerned with, and, Mr. Speaker, our airport 
assistance program will provide assistance for the construction, operation, and maintenance of 
community airports. Our program is designed to complement the existing federal assistance policy. 
Several Saskatchewan communities are now participating in this program and we have a request from 
many more communities. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan air transportation is a vital element of the total transportation picture. Nearly 
$2 million has been allocated for construction, additions, and improvements to key northern airports, 
which will become bases for water bomber operation. 
 
The Department of Highways has undertaken construction of the Meadow Lake airport, the La Ronge 
airport is being built in co-operation with the Ministry of Transport. We are pleased to share in this step 
towards protection of Saskatchewan’s resources. It also improves the potential for air transport in all our 
northern communities. Northern people rely on the plane for supplies, travel, and emergency aid, much 
more, Mr. Speaker, than those of us who have access to provincial highways and municipal roads 
themselves. 
 
This year will see the completion of our Operation Open Roads and Operation MainStreet program. You 
will recall, Mr. Speaker, when this program was announced in the House in 



 
March 20, 1975 

1126 
 

1972 that our goal was to provide dust-free roads to every community with a population of over 100 
requesting this assistance. Smaller communities were served if they were within three miles of a 
provincial highway. Also, this provided 70 per cent of the construction costs and 50 per cent of the 
maintenance costs to oil surface the main streets of these communities. We accept the full responsibility 
and have taken more than 500 miles of these access roads into the highway system. 
 
By the end of the 1975 construction season, nearly 500 communities will have participated in this 
popular program. Another program for people, Mr. Speaker, one Saskatchewan can be proud of. 
 
Further to improve rural living in Saskatchewan, my department is now undertaking a highway 
extension program. Nearly $2 million has been allocated this year to incorporate high volume traffic grid 
and connector roads into the provincial highway system. There are two objectives in this program. First, 
to provide safe, dust-free surfacing and adequate maintenance for safe use by the travelling public and 
second, to relieve rural municipalities of the excessive maintenance costs of heavily travelled 
through-traffic roads. Already in 1974 over 270 miles of grid roads were added to our highway system; 
by June 1st, another 185 miles will have been added and another 175 miles by year end. We anticipate 
doing work on many miles of these additions this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the fact that since I have been Minister of this Department more than 1,000 
miles have been added to the provincial highway system, removing that burden from hundreds of 
municipalities as well as assisting smaller communities with their main streets. This once again, is 
another program for people, a program that keeps faith with the people in rural Saskatchewan. Compare 
this then to the Liberal-Lang program of rail line abandonment, which is designed and deliberately 
designed, to destroy the small communities to the advantage of the Canadian Pacific Railway and the 
foreign grain buying cartels. 
 
Mr. Lane: — You abandoned more than any other government in the history of Canada 
 
Mr. Kramer: — I am sure that you were abandoned when you were born! Mr. Speaker, would the 
Member please ask his question after I am through. He has that privilege. 
 
Access to resource areas, to parks, historic sites, to scenic spots enjoyed by our own people and by 
tourists, these are the object of a $1.4 million allocation in this year’s budget as well. 
 
All the programs that I have mentioned we see as a part of a comprehensive transportation picture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see the 1975-76 highway program contributing to our provincial economy as well. Most of the new 
construction and the building of highways is done by private contractors. Maintenance dollars stay in the 
rural communities. Signing programs encourage both our Saskatchewan travellers and our tourists to 
stop and investigate our small communities, on spend dollars in 



 
March 20, 1975 

1127 
 

our province rather than speeding through as they have done in the past. We believe that we have many 
places of interest to offer the tourists of Saskatchewan and we have provided the means, to tell them 
where it is at. 
 
Our northern program is forging ahead, providing good quality roads that will provide access to markets 
for our lumber, fishing, fur, and mining industries. During 1974-75 our department completed a 
285-mile winter road from Turner Lake northwards to Uranium City, providing a land link for that 
community and its people. Literally thousands of tons of machinery and materials have already been 
trucked over this road to Cluff Lake and Uranium City. But even more important we feel is the feeling 
of isolation experienced by these northern citizens, and this is being altered by the opportunity to have 
and use a land link with the rest of our province, even for a short time. 
 
We are including more than $3 million in this year’s budget for our bridge construction. The Maymont 
Bridge will be completed and opened to traffic this year. Nearly $1 million is provided in the budget for 
the commencement of the Maidstone Bridge. These two major bridges in north-central Saskatchewan 
will provide year-round crossing facilities in that area - a level of service and safety unapproachable 
with summer ferry service and winter ice crossings. Upstream releases of water on the river above 
Edmonton have created, over the last few years, serious conditions and they have spurred our efforts to 
provide safer crossings as soon as possible. 
 
Cost sharing programs - the Department of Highways is concerned that Saskatchewan residents get 
maximum value for every dollar spent on transportation. For that reason, the department actively seeks 
to use every cost-sharing program available. Under the previous administration, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan wrote a poor track record of seeking Federal Government assistance. You may rest 
assured that this Government works very hard to get its share of whatever federal funds may be 
available for our projects. I believe, Mr. Speaker, we got less out of the total federal assistance until 
1971 than was available to Saskatchewan and under their leadership received $9 million less than 
Alberta and it didn’t get its share. It all went to Quebec and to the Maritimes and to Ontario and a little 
to British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have already signed agreements and received from the Federal Government some $4 
million under the highway strengthening program. We anticipate some $6.5 million in revenue from 
them this year. The goal of this program is uniform load standards across Canada. We recognize the 
value of the program for interprovincial commerce, so far we have co-operated in this program. But let 
no one forget, Mr. Speaker, that this is only on the primary system and Saskatchewan is getting less than 
our two sister provinces again. For what reason I don’t know. As I say we do the best we can. We have 
received $21 million and we have 2,000 miles of primary system compared to Manitoba’s 1,300. Some 
Lime ago one of the people opposite said, “What are they complaining about.” Let us remember the 
reason we are getting this is to accommodate trans-Canada commerce. Some of these trucks owned by 
the CPR which are moving back and forth across the country and why I don’t know when these people 
have rail lines, but they insist on doing this and there are a great number of these that are CP Transport. 
Don’t for one minute forget that the only thing that we can do with this $4 million a year is to add to the 
existing pavement 



 
March 20, 1975 

1128 
 

that we already have. Not one yard of dirt not one bit of widening on any roads that are in need of 
improvement or construction. This is only a drop in the bucket as far as the real needs of road 
improvement, as far as trans-Canada traffic is concerned. 
 
Some of our secondary highways are capable of taking increased load limits but at the cost of reducing 
the designed physical life of the pavement. This does not make sense for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
Because a reduction of a road’s physical life reduces its economic life and brings forward future costs of 
resurfacing or reconstruction, thus, increasing the annual capital road costs. No cost-sharing programs 
that are in sight can take care and put up that kind of money. 
 
Additionally, costs involved with upgrading oil surfaced roads and low strength pavements to the 
primary systems standards would be prohibitive and could not be supported through vehicle and fuel 
taxation by the people of this province. We are concerned that allowing higher weight limits on the 
whole would put a pressure on the provincial network and would further encourage major shifts in 
commercial traffic from rail to truck transport. And that is the last thing we want to do. This would have 
a serious and costly implication for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In concluding my remarks, Mr. Speaker, may I repeat that I am indeed proud of what this Department 
has accomplished. In spite of the serious weather problems, in spite of the shortage of personnel, 
materials and trucks, the staff of the Department of Highways has put forth a commendable effort 
towards the accomplishment of the 1974-75 goals. The contracting industry has also done and made a 
tremendous effort under great difficulty in many cases to bring about the culmination of a good program 
last year. The spirit that prevailed among those who worked night and day last April to protect the town 
at Lumsden from a river gone mad, the spirit that drove men and machines over 285 miles of frozen 
muskeg, forest and over ice-covered lakes to Cluff Lake and Uranium City, the spirit that worked hard 
and long hours to make up for lost time in last year’s program, this is the spirit, Mr. Speaker, that will 
make and achieve the goals and make those goals a reality for 1975-76. This program is for the people, 
this is a program which we all should be able to support. 
 
The highways budget I have outlined to you, Mr. Speaker, is only a portion of this year’s total budget 
which meets the needs and aspirations of all the Saskatchewan people through every department. The 
budget brought forward by the Hon. Wes Robbins is one that I am pleased to support and which the 
people of Saskatchewan, I am sure will all be proud. 
 
Before I table this program, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention to a couple of things. There are some 
errors, there was a misprint, it has been changed. I am tabling this document but I want to make it very 
clear that this document is an outline we hope to meet. There can be extenuating circumstances which 
may not allow us to go ahead with every program that is mentioned in here. I say this because of 
situations we got into last year. We had contracts called, tendered on Highway No. 1 east; the contractor 
after looking the situation over for a fairly long time, two contracts, decided that inflation had robbed 
him of any possible profit that he might make and left his deposit on the table. He left $24,000 on the 
table and walked away 



 
March 20, 1975 

1129 
 

from a successful bid, because he felt that inflation would not allow him to complete those contracts. 
Those kinds of things can happen. We can call for tenders, Mr. Speaker, as we have done and when too 
high, we will not accept them. This will not allow us at times to carry out some of the programs. That is 
why I warn the House that this program is not a complete commitment; we will do our best to meet the 
programs that are outlined here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am simply saying this in tabling this document. I don’t want somebody coming along 
next year and telling me that I didn’t do this or I didn’t do that. I am sure that more than 90 per cent of 
this will be carried out but there are extenuating circumstances. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Moose Jaw): — You won’t be here next year! 
 
Mr. Kramer: — Just like Roy did, just like Jim Mauher didn’t; just like Alf Dyck did; and who was that 
other fellow. Oh, yes, he is a senator now, Senator Sparrow - the bird brain. He is going to peter out just 
like the rest of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to simply point out in tabling this that there are a couple of minor errors, I have 
marked them. There is another item that could be misunderstood. I have been talking about a $75 
million budget - at one point in here we refer to a capital budget of $69.5 million. That $69.5 million 
does not include the urban capital assistance that goes to the cities; that brings it up to the $75 million. I 
should like the people of the press to note that, please, because I don’t want to be accused of giving two 
different sets of figures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion, I will not support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — After 15 years in the legislature I never thought I would have the 
opportunity to follow a speech like we have heard here this evening by the Minister of Highways (Mr. 
Kramer). I have heard a great number of Minister of Highways from both sides of the House. We have 
heard them give their program in honesty and without the side quips and the additional remarks which 
were prevalent here this evening. But I never saw a man stand in this House and present a highway 
program with the apologies that we have heard here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — First of all he wouldn’t . . . You know there has never been a Minister of Highways who 
has not presented his highway program to the Members on both sides of the House, before he delivered 
his speech. But tonight he was afraid to give his program to us so that we could follow it. I found it 
rather amazing that he never went through the program and said this is what we are going to do for this 
highway here or this highway there. He hadn’t the courage to provide a program and he hasn’t got the 
courage to stay in the House, it looks as if he is going to leave now. Never has there been such a terrible 
performance. I saw the Premier sitting there with his back to the Minister, 



 
March 20, 1975 

1130 
 

with his head in his hands and I couldn’t help but think, that he was thinking back to the day four years 
ago when the Minister of Highways crawled down the corridor and begged to be put into the Cabinet. I 
thought then, that the Premier must have said, why did I let myself into this in a weak moment? Why 
didn’t I stand strong and say, we don’t need him in our Cabinet? I noticed that both the Premier and the 
Attorney General were in the Assembly when the Minister of Highways started his speech, five minutes 
later they were both gone and then the Premier came back because he understood that the Minister of 
Highways was going to speak for 25 minutes. When he came back in he thought it would be over but he 
went on for 45 minutes, he kind of underestimated. 
 
I knew when I came in here this evening and saw the Minister of Highways that we were going to get a 
speech. That is the only time the Minister of Highways appears in the legislature when he is going to 
make a speech. The rest of the time he is out auctioneering. 
 
He mentions about the hundreds of thousands of dollars of advertising but I will tell you one thing, the 
Liberal Party pays for their advertising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — They don’t have Service Printers, the printing company owned by the NDP taking the 
taxpayers’ dollar and paying for their advertising. The Liberal Party is too straightforward and honest for 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — We don’t use Service Printers, we don’t use the Commonwealth to build up the election 
funds for the coming election campaign. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They won’t let us! 
 
Mr. Guy: — I think the Minister of Highways should recognize that. 
 
Then the Minister of Highways went on to make some remarks about the Legislative Secretary to the 
Minister of Transport in Ottawa. I will tell you, he can say what he likes, but the majority of the people 
of Saskatchewan are proud of Cliff McIssac. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — He made a great contribution in this legislature and he was one of the first MPs elected 
who was immediately appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary in Ottawa. They recognized his ability. 
And a two-bit politician from North Battleford says, well you know he is a vet by accident. I will tell 
you that the provincial Member for North Battleford had a job to do after the last federal election, his 
requirements as an auctioneer all of a sudden were in great demand. He had to auction off a lot of 
defeated NDP candidates. And there was only one buyer, 



 
March 20, 1975 

1131 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan bought every one of them! They were all losers and the 
Premier and the Front Benches bought them all. John Burton, Bill Knight, you name them, all working 
behind the scenes now. I am sure, because I will tell you one thing that I have learned in politics and the 
Members opposite I am sure have learned it, that if you can’t win as a candidate, you will never run a 
campaign for winners from the backrooms. You will never win it from the backrooms. Then we have the 
Member for Watrous, no, I don’t know . . . I don’t think he knows. I tell you he doesn’t know a daffodil 
from a tulip, so I don’t know how he would know what constituency he runs in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Then the Minister of Highways had some disparaging remarks to make about the Member 
for Lumsden. He said, you know what he was carrying along the trenches wouldn’t hold water. I think 
that he is probably an authority on that, being full of it, he should know. He went on about the 
tremendous highway program and how good the highways are, although there has been more criticism 
of the highways system in the last year than we have had in the last 20 years. But I really don’t take 
exception to his remarks because I have to recognize that there was a period of time when he didn’t have 
the privilege of travelling the highways of Saskatchewan and therefore he sort of lost count of what was 
going on, on the highway system of the province. 
 
Then he made a safety speech. I found his safety speech was rather interesting from a man who said we 
are not going to reduce the speed limits in Saskatchewan, no way. I think the Minister of Highways had 
better go back to John Burton or Bill Knight or whoever it was who wrote his speech, tell him to write 
another one. Not only write another one in content but write another one in four-letter words he could 
read, that we wouldn’t have to listen to him fumble through it the way we did the last 35 minutes this 
evening. I will tell you then he went on to the La Ronge airport and he says we are sharing it with 
Ottawa. I don’t know whether the Press or whether the people of Saskatchewan know what the sharing 
is but I will tell you what it is. We are sharing it on the basis that the province is spending a few 
thousand dollars to clear the area, and Ottawa is spending a few million dollars building the airstrip. 
That’s the sharing of the airstrip at La Ronge, yes, one horse and one rabbit. Otto is pulling a pretty 
heavy load when he has to pull the Minister of Highways behind, that’s a pretty heavy load. 
 
Then. he mentioned northern roads to Uranium City and I thought, Mr. Speaker, that he would never 
mention that in this House. There were near tragedies in the North this winter because of the Minister of 
Highways. For political expediency he announced the highway to Uranium City was completed and 
ready for travel as early as the end of November. Well everybody knows that you don’t travel across 
Lake Athabasca at the end of November. But there were people in the south who didn’t recognize the 
problems of northern transportation and they listened to the Minister of Highways. He said we have 
completed it, we have only got one more ridge to cross - it didn’t matter whether that ridge was 40 miles 
of open water. We had near tragedies of people who tried to use that road because they believed the 
Minister of Highways. Not only didn’t the Minister of Highways know whether it was open, he didn’t 
even know what was happening to his own crews that were building that 



 
March 20, 1975 

1132 
 

road. If it hadn’t been for some good citizens in Uranium City one of his camps on the south shore of 
Athabasca would have been in real difficulty. They were without fuel, they were without food, without 
propane, without a car or a vehicle to get out of there. People hired their own airplanes and came across 
from Uranium City to save the highway group because the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) didn’t 
have any concern for them. He put them up there and said, you have to get this road built for political 
expediency. I’ll tell you that road to Uranium City, this fall, was the biggest disaster under the present 
Minister that has ever been seen in this province. We all know that to build a road to Uranium City in 
the winter time is a hazardous job, but an honest government would recognize this, will admit it. The 
Minister would not take that position, he said, oh, no, we are building it. We have to finish it. The people 
tried to use it and as I say we had some near tragedies as a result of the advertising and political 
expediency of the Minister of Highways. 
 
Well, I was going to go for an hour half tonight but after the Minister’s speech, I am afraid that I am 
going to have to go for two hours and a half. However, we will leave the accident from North Battleford 
and proceed to some of the other issues that need to be commented on about the budget. 
 
After listening to all the Members opposite, Ministers, the backbenchers, there is only one conclusion 
that I can draw from this budget and that that it is a budget of disaster for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Every speaker spent 25 minutes saying what they did in the last four years and then they spent five 
minutes saying what they are going to do in the next four years. They haven’t any answers for the future. 
The Premier’s option is out the door, it is gone, it is an option that the Saskatchewan people want no part 
of. I’ll tell you, when they took five minutes to speak on what they would do in the future that is only 
because they were slow talkers. I could have given the same thing in 30 seconds. 
 
Mr. Messer: — What’s your answer . . . 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, I listened to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer), one of the biggest farmers in 
Saskatchewan, one of the wealthiest, one of the men who if they ever limited the size of the farms would 
be the first to scream. I should like to see the Minister of Agriculture be the first one to stand up in this 
House and say, I’ll have my farm limited to two or three sections or even ten sections and throw in a 
construction company and a few others at the same time. No, I am afraid that if there is one man here on 
the Government benches who won’t be back it will be the Minister of Agriculture. I am going to be 
sorry because I enjoy him, I enjoy the way that he manipulates the truth. I don’t think there is a better 
manipulator of the truth in the Front Benches other than perhaps the Premier and the Attorney General. 
Oh, the Minister of hogs doesn’t even come into the game, the Minister of Agriculture has it pretty well 
tied up! 
 
You know the Opposition didn’t say that the promises of the NDP were pie-in-the-sky, all they did say 
was that once this budget is taken to the people of Saskatchewan you are acing to end up with egg on 
your face, because your budget doesn’t solve the problems of the people of rural Saskatchewan today. 
You stand up and say that this is the biggest budget that 



 
March 20, 1975 

1133 
 

Saskatchewan has ever had. I want to tell you tonight that size is no criterion as to whether budgets 
satisfy the needs of the Saskatchewan people. It is true that it is a big budget, largest in the history of the 
province, but what isn’t true is that it is in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is hard to believe how easy the backbenchers have fallen into the pattern of mimicking what they hear 
in the front benches - that’s why I suppose they never get into the front benches because they have no 
new ideas. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thanks, Al! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, now there is just an example of what I was going to say in my next sentence, not 
only the backbenchers can’t pronounce 1.1 million, they can’t even count that far. 
 
The other disappointing thing that we have to recognize - I didn’t want to be political tonight, but I can’t 
help but say it - I hope that the front benches continue the speeches they have been making for the last 
week, or two weeks, or three weeks, because I tell you that the misleading comments of the Ministers 
opposite will do more to elect the Liberal government on June 18th or 25th, than anything that we could 
do out in the country. Because I tell you that they are causing concern. 
 
I am sorry that the Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) isn’t here because I always enjoy his 
speeches. Sometimes you can believe him and sometimes you can’t, but at least he provides a little 
humour, he provides a little interest. He is always confused, but we expect that. But what I was 
disappointed in this time, because I have always had a great deal of admiration for him because I always 
believed that he tried to tell the truth. But this time he didn’t even try to tell the truth. He said that the 
buoyant Saskatchewan economy was due to NDP policy. Yes, and you clapped then when he said it, but 
then he went on to say, “But we recognize that world shortages and demands for farm and resource 
products really created it.” And you clapped again! That shows what the backbenchers are up against 
over there. 
 
I found out one thing that the computer centre has done a good job. They programmed the backbenchers 
and when they say zip, you clap; when they say Crow’s Nest rate you clap; when you say oil, you clap; 
when you say budget, you clap. The computer centre has done one job for the people of Saskatchewan, 
it’s got the Government backbenchers all clapping together which never happened in the past. 
 
You know as well as I do that the financial picture of Saskatchewan has nothing to do with what the 
NDP has done, it is the efforts of the Federal Liberal Government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Clap, Clap! Oh, pardon me, I didn’t say Crow, so they don’t clap. 
 
And it is the world demand that has created the demand for our new raw materials that provided the 
economy of Saskatchewan with the buoyancy we have. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1134 
 

Then the Minister of Education went on to say, we are not really interested in money. 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Even George doesn’t believe you! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Oh, George does. George believes me very well. He saw you clap when the right word was 
said. 
 
The Minister of Education went on to say, social prosperity is as important as economic prosperity. You 
know when I heard that I had to sit back and think because there was a Minister in charge of an agency 
that had the greatest potential of providing social justice to the people of Saskatchewan and that was the 
Human Resources Development Agency. What happened to that agency? He destroyed it! He fired the 
people, he cut the budget. This year they are really going to put it back on the track. So I looked at the 
budget and what did I find? The budget has been reduced by $1.8 million. This came from a Minister 
who said he wanted to put the social aspect, the social prosperity ahead of the economic prosperity. He 
was the one man in all those benches; the Minister of Agriculture didn’t have that opportunity; the 
Minister of Health had it but didn’t accept it; but the Minister of Education had that possibility and that 
responsibility through that agency and he cut the budget $2 million. He has taken away the possible 
dignity and the opportunity for the people who were involved by the actions of that government, they 
have now lost complete hope. 
 
He then went on to say that the NDP believed that taxation is based on the ability to pay. They nearly 
gave $100 deduction to those earning $50,000; he gave $100 deduction to those earning $1,000 and he 
calls that justice. I call it political expediency, I don’t know what the Member for Buena Vista would 
call it, but I think he would call it political expediency too. 
 
I’ll tell you what worries me more than anything about this $100 and this worries me more than anything 
else. It hasn’t been legislated. Now maybe they will legislate it before the end of this Session and I hope 
they will, in fact I encourage them. In fact I dare them to do that, because you know what this reminds 
me of? It reminds me of 1960, 1964 and 1956 - every year before the election they cut the hospital tax 
and then the year after they were elected, they raised it. Now they have abolished the premiums for 
which I give them full credit, but now they have found a new gimmick. Now they say, before the 
election we will give $100 off your income tax, but wait until next year if they should ever be back, 
which they won’t be, but what they have in their little minds is - we will give you $100 now and we will 
take $200 later on. The people of Saskatchewan have seen through this and you will never have that 
opportunity. Then they take the sales tax off the people who are dining and dancing, but they won’t take 
them off the people who have to buy their clothes and their household utilities. They don’t have any 
concern for them. And then they take the tax off those who are buying Penthouse, Playboy, and Playgirl, 
but I don’t think that is going to help the families that are going to have to buy clothes and shoes for 
their children. You might even call it a pornography tax that they have taken off. 
 
You know the thing that bothered me more than anything about the Minister of Education’s speech . . . 



 
March 20, 1975 

1135 
 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): —His haircut? 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, that didn’t even bother me, but it was when he told a - oh, we have the Speaker in his 
Chair, I can’t say it - I was going to say lie, but I can’t refer to it in any other way than that. And the 
Premier can say, Oh, if he likes, I will come to his comments in just a couple of minutes too. 
 
But he stood in this House and he said that the Liberal Government sold out to the potash companies to 
1981. Well, now the Premier sitting in the seat that is more in keeping for his position than the one that 
he usually occupies - and the Minister of Education knows that this is a downright misrepresentation of 
the truth, Mr. Speaker. He knows absolutely that that agreement was made by T.C. Douglas and the CCF 
kept it; the Liberals kept it, but who broke it? The NDP broke it. Premier Blakeney broke it, that is who 
broke it. 
 
And that is the most disappointing aspect of the speech made by the Minister of Education, that he told 
an absolute complete untruth. 
 
Then I picked up the paper tonight and I was disappointed again and I was disappointed even more 
because this man who disappointed me is the Premier of the province. 
 
The Premier was in Saskatoon last week and he heard Otto Lang say that the Crow’s Nest rates would 
be protected for as long as the farmers wanted it. If the Press know it, the people of Saskatchewan know 
it, everybody in the Convention knows it, and then here is a man who is going to the people in probably 
six or eight weeks or whenever he gets up his courage, and he is going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, ‘look I am a credible man, the things I say are true!’ And what did he say last night up at 
Wakaw? Here is what he said. 
 
Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — What was he doing there? 
 
Mr. Guy: — I don’t know, but he did a pretty job. He got my friend nominated and I am glad of that. 
This is what the Premier said, “The Federal Government is determined to abolish the Crow’s Nest Pass 
freight rates, Premier Allan Blakeney charged at the NDP meeting at Wakaw Wednesday night.” 
 
All right, Mr. Speaker, that is fine but I just hope that the Premier of Saskatchewan goes to every 
constituency in this province and makes that statement. I hope that the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek) 
and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Messer) will do the same thing. I hope that the backbenchers will, 
and I think they will, if they have been programmed to clap, they can be programmed to make this 
statement. But I’ll tell you that by election day if the Premier of Saskatchewan continues to carry on this 
complete absolute misrepresentation of statements made by the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board, 
we will sweep this province and there won’t be one Member sitting on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — You know, Mr. Speaker, politics is politics and we all make the odd misrepresentation at 
times. I will tell you 



 
March 20, 1975 

1136 
 

one thing, there is a difference between weaselling on this issue and coming out and calling a Minister 
of the Federal Government a liar - a Minister who is held in the highest esteem in this province, 
probably of any Federal Minister - and that is what the Premier called him last night in Wakaw. He said 
that the Minister of Justice, the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board was a liar. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He didn’t say that! 
 
Mr. Guy: — That was his intent. He said that the Minister wanted to destroy the Crow’s Nest rates. The 
Minister, one week before, had categorically stated his position that he would not change the Crow’s 
Nest rates under any circumstances as long as the farmers of Saskatchewan wanted them. 
 
But as I say let the Premier who is trying to create the image of credibility by carrying to this whole 
province that story. Just let him try it! Let’s let him try it! In fact I challenge you to carry this message 
through the whole campaign. I challenge you, Mr. Premier, on every platform that you stand on in 
Saskatchewan during the election campaign to say that Otto Lang is going to destroy the Crow’s Nest 
rates. I will tell you that you won’t be back and all these other images along the front row won’t be back 
and there is no need to say what will happen to the flood of backbenchers who will be going out the 
back door. 
 
I tell you that the people of Saskatchewan are not naive when it comes to what is the truth or what isn’t. 
When a man of the stature of Otto Lang has made a statement in honesty, then to have the Premier of a 
province go out and say that he is a liar, I tell you that won’t go over among the people of 
Saskatchewan. And there will be very few of them back after the next election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal more to say, but I am going to leave out some of it because I think that 
maybe the Government Member wouldn’t understand it even if I did tell you about it. But there are a 
couple of things that I want to refer to. 
 
One of the things is the way that they have handled this budget and I could go into the details of how 
much it was compared to the other budgets and so on. I think that there is one thing here that concerns 
the people of Saskatchewan more than anything else, the question of Supplementary Estimates. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, the basis of democracy is the Legislature having a right to approve the spending 
Estimates of the government in power; it dates back not to when the NDP were elected or the Liberals or 
the Conservatives, it dates back to the days of the Magna Carta. Kings were hung or executed or 
whatever they did with their neck because they didn’t submit to putting their rights of taxation and so on 
before the people over which they ruled. And I’ll tell you we are coming very close to that situation 
today in Saskatchewan. I would suggest that the present Treasurer isn’t here tonight because he is afraid 
that he might get hung, because I’ll tell you he has eroded and trampled on this basic right of parliament. 
You know, no one suggests that budgets will not be overspent by several million dollars, quite a number 
of million dollars some years, due mainly because of physical phenomena, floods, fires, 



 
March 20, 1975 

1137 
 

forest fires, you name it. There are always contingencies that come up. No one can estimate the cost of 
it. But I suggest that outside of these natural causes, that any responsible government should be able to 
produce Estimates close to the actual expenditures. The present NDP Government has failed to do so. 
 
I want to look at the Liberal record on Supplementary Estimates. We had seven budgets and the 
Supplementary Estimates totalled $107.1 million, an average of $15.3 million a year. The highest was 
$28 million. The NDP record, four budgets, totalled $238 million of Supplementary Estimates, the 
average $59.6, almost four times that of the Liberal years. The highest was last year of $34.6 million and 
this year $85.7 million. In other words in two years, the Minister, the present Minister of Finance has 
spent $180 million without the consent of this Legislature. The Premier, I know, is going to get up and 
say, well you are going to have the opportunity to vote for that money after it has been spent. But that’s 
not the principle of democracy, the principle of democracy is to approve the Estimates before it is spent. 
I’ll tell you that this is a disgrace to the province and the people of Saskatchewan. It is contempt of this 
legislature to go out and deliberately spend in two years $180 million without the consent of this 
legislature. Not only in contempt of this side of the House, it is contempt of the backbenchers. In fact, 
that is one area where you did get some programs, you had better get the computer working again. I’ll 
tell you, you have gone too far, the people of Saskatchewan now say, the Government is spending 
without any authorization and it is true when you look at $180 million spent without the authority of the 
legislature to back it up. It is the principle of a dictatorship, shows complete control over the people of 
this province. 
 
You know, as I mentioned earlier, I could go through these supplementary Estimates and point out the 
ones that I consider as being unnecessary and I’ll tell you where they all lie. 
 
Mr. Cody: — Snow removal. 
 
Mr. Guy: — No, they don’t lie in snow removal. If there is increased snow removal I don’t argue with 
that. I’ll tell you where, I wasn’t going to read it to you but the Member from what used to be Watrous 
wants to know. Most of it is in administration, that’s where the overspending is, administration in 
Consumer Affairs $224,000, the original estimate $124,000. Well now, surely to goodness a government 
with the number of planners that they have across the way could come closer to what Consumer Affairs 
administration is going to spend than almost double the amount they estimated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Guy: — And this goes on and on. I don’t know whether there is anything for Co-ops. Yes, Co-ops 
administration $24,000 extra. Boy, here’s a good one. Executive Council, who is in charge of the 
Executive Council, that wouldn’t be the Premier and his staff I don’t suppose? I’ll tell you what they 
overspent, $148,000. Well now, surely the Premier, even though he is from Nova Scotia, should be able 
to come closer to what he is going to spend in his Executive Council than he did in that one. An 
additional $148,000, I wonder what those extra 



 
March 20, 1975 

1138 
 

people are for. I wonder if anybody would have any ideas. I don’t suppose they would have any ideas of 
what that might be. Government Services. 
 
Government Services, that’s another one, that’s one of the Ministers from Saskatoon who won’t be back. 
Administration $270,000 in Supplementary Estimates. There again surely to goodness in an area of 
administration there are no natural causes that would create an overexpenditure on the budget like that! 
You know, this goes on and on. It goes on and on. Mineral Resources, Administration, $105,000. 
Labour, Executive Administration, $130,000. I’ll tell you the people of Saskatchewan are not prepared 
to pay that kind of extra money without having the legislature approve. 
 
Oh, here’s a good one, where is our Minister in charge of the Public Service Commission, he was here 
but he knew I was coming to him and he left. The Public Service Commission, I believe that is the 
agency that hired the 4,000 extra civil servants. Do you know what their Supplementary Estimates were 
for the third year? I’ll tell you how much they budgeted, they budgeted $368,000. But do you know 
what the Supplementary Estimate was, $552,000. I’ll tell you, maybe the cost of taking the blood 
samples to see whether they’re NDP had gone up, because they sure increased their administration when 
it came to hiring people into the Civil Service. You know in all seriousness this has to be incredible, 
they vote $368,000 for Administration, then come in with a Supplementary Estimate for $552,000. The 
people of Saskatchewan are not going to buy that. They are going to say, you’re nuts and they are going 
to have a lot of people agreeing with them. Unbelievable! 
 
Mr. Messer: — What are you talking about? 
 
Mr. Guy: — Well, I’ll tell you I can go back to Agriculture. I’ll tell you about the Minister of 
Agriculture. Do you know what his Estimates are, his supplementaries? Do you know what poor 
judgement he has, well, he is just out by $19 million, that’s all he was out. 
 
Mr. Messer: — . . . buy a little more land. 
 
Mr. Guy: — He bought a little more land than he anticipated! 
 
Well, the Minister of Health, I am glad he is coming back in because I have a few comments I want to 
make to him. I’ll tell you I’ve seen some Ministers of Health in this Legislature, but I have never seen 
one like we have today. He’s a disaster for the people of Saskatchewan, he’s the greatest failure that that 
Government has ever had. You know he talks about having abolished the deterrent fees nine times but 
he hasn’t been able to open the Plains Hospital. He passes legislation for a drug plan 12 months ago and 
he hasn’t got it on the road. He talks about hospitals we closed, talk about hospitals he can’t open one 
after spending $20 million. He fights the doctors, he fights the nurses, he fights the pharmacists. Then I 
pick up a paper the other day and he said, I’ll tell you what I’m going to do about the nurse shortage, I’m 
going to have a study. And the Press ask him, well who are the members of the study board and he says, 
we haven’t appointed them yet. Well, when is it going to get started. Well, we’re not sure, but he is 
going to have a study. I’m telling you he’s studied more things in Public Health and if he keeps on he’ll 
be able to 



 
March 20, 1975 

1139 
 

be a doctor. I’ll tell you there has only been one unfair plan devised by this Minister of Health, even 
though he tried to do others and that’s the dental plan. He stands up in this House and says it is a 
tremendous plan, a tremendous plan. Do you call a tremendous plan one where you have for a six year 
old you get your expenses paid but if you are unfortunate enough to have a five and a seven year old, 
you pay the full shot. Do you call that justice to the people of Saskatchewan. Do you call it justice if a 
man from one side of the street has a six year old and he goes to the dentist and he has a $200 dentist bill 
and Mr. Smishek picks it up. There’s a man on the other side of the street who has a seven year old and 
he has a $300 or $400 dentist bill but he has to pay it all himself. Do you call that justice? Is that a fair 
plan? Is that a plan that you would go across the province bragging about like the Minister of Health? I 
say it isn’t, I say that it is a disgrace. I say it is a disgrace to the people of Saskatchewan in trying to sell 
them a bill of goods. All you have to do is ask the people, ask the people who have children from one to 
five or from seven to seventy-seven and have been paying their own bills, and then you say, but, oh, 
well, we are paying for the six year olds. You’ll get a lot of support for that one. 
 
I was going to say a few words about the Minister of Labour but apparently he is in labour and not here 
this evening, so I’ll leave that one out. In fact I think maybe I’ll . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you sit down! 
 
Mr. Guy: — Yes, I will, I think I will. But I’ll tell you one thing whoever made that comment, I think I 
have pointed out enough tonight to show the people of Saskatchewan several things. First of all, you 
can’t trust the Government. You can’t trust the Minister of Education. You can’t trust the Premier. They 
are just deliberately misleading the people of Saskatchewan. I think I have proved to you that the 
computer centre of the Government has done a good job in programming the backbenchers to talk when 
they are told to do so. But I will tell you one thing where this budget lacks imagination, fails to face the 
challenges of today, there is one area that you have failed to solve any of the problems, and that is local 
government. I am going to have more to say about that at a later date because I’ll tell you that if there is 
one group of people in Saskatchewan today, it is the reeves and mayors and councillors of the towns and 
villages and rural municipalities. Do you know what you have given them as an increase? You have 
given them less than 8 per cent to carry on when inflation is 12 per cent and the cost of construction and 
supplies have gone up anywhere from 30 to 100 percent. We’ll discuss that later on. 
 
So all I can say, Mr. Speaker, is when you’ve got an NDP Premier in the government, they’ve got to go 
and you’ve got to replace them with a group of people who have courage, to look at the Saskatchewan 
option as one of opportunity and challenge rather than one of failure and defeat. 
 
I will certainly support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon City Park): — Well, Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Member for 
Athabasca for the last hour, what appeared like about five 



 
March 20, 1975 

1140 
 

hours, I thought perhaps we should add a bit of sanity and reason to the proceedings of this House, so I 
thought I would say a few words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dyck: — Mr. Speaker, our very capable Minister of Finance should be congratulated for a budget 
that can be described as nothing less than a fantastic document. It is a very responsible document yet 
provides for much needed social programs. It is a responsible budget, as it provides for much needed 
assistance to our senior citizens and as it does so it typifies the present government’s approach over the 
last four years, responsibly responding to the needs of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is quite understandable that the budget would be thus because it was prepared and 
brought down by a most responsible Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, during this term of office this 
Government has been able to accomplish what would appear almost to be impossible. During a time 
when we have seen costs rising very, very rapidly over a longer period of time than in any other time in 
living memory it has been possible to reduce some taxes, while at the same time expand old programs 
and develop an impressive list of new programs. New programs to assist those who need it the most, our 
senior people and others. 
 
There are other reasons why this budget is an important document. The last year the Members opposite 
were in government they derived less than $35 million from revenues from potash and oil. Now I 
recognize that these commodities were at a lower price than they are today, nevertheless they allowed 
the oil companies to rip the province off to the tune of millions of dollars a year to be invested elsewhere 
in the world, perhaps in luxury hotels in the United States or some fancy seaside real estate in the West 
Indies. The potash companies were given a virtual tax holiday during those Liberal years. 
 
One of the main promises made to the electorate of this province in 1971, Mr. Speaker, was to shift 
taxes, to shift taxes off the individual who is least able to pay and on to the resource sector, the sector 
most able to pay. And, this, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we have done. Well, what has been the effect 
of these new tax policies for the city of Saskatoon for example? While costs of education and urban 
government are rising at a cost of 10 and 15 per cent or more per year, there have only been marginal 
increases in the mill rate. Although the city budget has not yet been finalized there is some talk of a 
significant mill rate increase. If this happens I think it is a very serious matter. Certainly costs have gone 
up and some increase may be necessary, but in light of the large increases in grants to the city, a large 
mill rate increase at this time would be difficult for the taxpayers to understand. Why the mill rate in the 
last three years has not gone up dramatically is not difficult to understand. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has not been unfair to the oil producing companies. Through Bill No. 
42 their profits were guaranteed to be at least equal to those in 1973, which was a good year for the oil 
companies. But just as we have been fair to the oil companies, we also have a first responsibility to the 
people of this province who, after all, are the owners of the natural resources. About one-half of our total 



 
March 20, 1975 

1141 
 

production of oil in the province or 40 million barrels is exported annually. The total windfall profit to 
the oil companies would have been at least $320 million as a result of the $8.30 per barrel increase 
multiplied by the 40 million barrels we export annually. Now, not even the oil producers claim that they 
should have all of this increase. They agreed that it should be shared, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan bearing in mind that it traditionally has had control over its natural resources was 
prepared to devise a formula by which the province and the oil producing companies could share in the 
increased value of this resource. But, before this formula could be devised, the Federal Government 
entered the picture and declared that they too had a claim on the increased value of this resource. 
 
In a very short period of time the export tax placed by the Federal Government on oil leaving the 
province rose to $5.20 per barrel - almost two-thirds of the increased world price. 
 
In one fell swoop the Trudeau Government grabbed the lions share of the increased value of our oil on 
export markets and the Federal Government’s position in this regard was that the income from the $5.20 
per barrel tax on exported oil would be used to subsidize the people of eastern Canada who purchase 
their oil from overseas sellers at the world price. 
 
Now let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that our royalty arrangements guarantee that the income of oil 
companies would, in 1974, be at least as great as it was in 1973 and in addition a number of incentives 
have been developed by the Department of Mineral Resources to ensure that marginal wells are kept 
operating. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan dealt honestly with the oil firms but everyone was shocked when the 
Turner budget disallowed royalty payments as an operating expense for income tax purposes. The result 
was to add a large new expense to the operating budget of the oil producing firms. In my view, Mr. 
Speaker, this refusal by the Federal Government to allow the oil producing companies to deduct royalty 
payments made to the province for income tax purposes is unjust and completely beyond reason. 
 
And in my opinion, if there is not a reversal of the attitude of the Trudeau Government at the First 
Ministers Conference on April 8 and 9, then, this will be a major issue in the next provincial election. 
An issue that will not be made by this Government but an issue that will be made by the people of this 
province. 
 
I want to return now to the tax shift that we promised in 1971. Nowhere is this tax shift more apparent 
than in this budget, Mr. Speaker. This budget is nothing less than a fantastic culmination to an already 
splendid record of this Government. For in this budget the people are obtaining over 200 millions of 
dollars from the resource sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $200 million, most of which, under a Liberal Government would have left this province to 
be invested elsewhere. But now, it is going to stay in this province to be used by and for the people of 
this great province. 
 
In recent months the Liberals have mounted a very costly and a very ‘Fancy Dan’ advertising program 
against our party. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1142 
 

Who do you think is paying for these costly advertising programs? I know who is paying and so do the 
people of this province. And should, by some freak accident, the Liberals be returned to office, then they 
would have certain debts to be paid off to the people who are picking up the tab for these costs. These 
debts would be paid off at the expense of the individual taxpayer of this province. 
 
Through the wise tax policy of shifting taxes off the individual it was possible for this Government to 
accomplish what was almost impossible, namely to reduce taxation during a period when all costs are 
going up dramatically. Allow me to list some of these tax deductions. Last May the gasoline tax was 
reduced from 19 cents to 12 cents a gallon - second lowest in Canada. Deterrent fees and medical care 
premiums were abolished at a cost of approximately $20 million per year. The Property Improvement 
Grants have been raised sharply from approximately $12 million under the Liberals to $40 million under 
the New Democratic Party. 
 
Second, we have been able in spite of rapid increases in costs to expand old programs and develop an 
imposing spectrum of new services all accomplished during a period of rapidly rising prices. 
 
I don’t have to spend the time of this House to list these new programs. Chiropractic services are 
ensured, a hearing aid program, Family Income Plan, kindergartens, community colleges and one can go 
on and on and on. When the Liberals were faced with rising costs in education and in health, they did a 
number of things. They increased the taxes by $35 million in the spring of 1968. When that wasn’t 
enough, they used some very strong-arm tactics, deterrent fees, student-teacher ratios, wage guidelines, 
area bargaining for teachers and finally the infamous Bill 2. Well, none of these worked. 
 
What about the grants to schools and municipalities? School grants to the two systems in Saskatoon in 
1971 totalled $7.5 million. In 1976 these grants will be over $17 million, an increase of over 100 
percent. 
 
In 1971 the grants to the City of Saskatoon were about $300,000; in 1975 they will be well over $4 
million. It is not hard to visualize what would have happened to property taxes in this city had these 
grants not gone up. 
 
I am pleased to point out here that Saskatchewan is going through its most prosperous period in its entire 
history - population up 6,000. While almost every other province in Canada is having trouble, 
Saskatchewan stands alone with the lowest unemployment rate in Canada and a rapidly growing 
economy. The labour force in 1974 grew by 17,000 workers, many of them 25 years of age and under. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has seen a goodly number of new industries develop in recent years and business 
is good. I don’t have to tell the people of Saskatoon about those years from 1969 to 1971 - when 
business firms were closing and people were leaving the province. This, Mr. Speaker, has been changed 
and I hope changed for a long time to come. 
 
In light of these developments, it is hard to understand the Opposition’s accusations about driving 
business out of the province. But, if there are difficulties in some of the 



 
March 20, 1975 

1143 
 

resource industries, then the fault must be laid squarely on the doorstep of the Federal Government. The 
Trudeau Government and, more specifically, the Turner budget of November 18 is, Mr. Speaker, the 
root cause of the difficulties. This budget says to the people of this province that they can no longer 
control their natural resource development. A right clearly given to the provinces. And, if I may 
reiterate, Mr. Speaker, unless the Trudeau Government reverses its position on the resource taxation it 
will be a major issue in the next election and it won’t be an issue made by the NDP. It will be an issue 
made by the people of this province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of constantly seeing the wealth of this province drained 
away to eastern Canada. Eastern Canada already has the industry. But that doesn’t satisfy them. They 
want more. They want our oil for a song. For every barrel of oil produced in this province, the people 
are losing approximately $5.40. But eastern Canada aided and abetted by the Trudeau Liberals says this 
just ain’t good enough - they want more. 
 
Well, I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have had enough. They are going to say Stop! 
to eastern Canada, and they are going to say it clearly and loudly with their vote in the next general 
election. They are going to say it in the ballot box where it really counts. 
 
I want for a moment to review another area. Since 1971 a number of government offices have been 
decentralized in Saskatoon. We now have in the city a business representative from the Department of 
Industry and Commerce. We have a representative from the Department of Consumer Affairs. We have 
a representative from the Mediation Board. A new bus depot was recently opened in the city. Tenders 
have been let on a new SGIO building for the city. A new provincial office building will be constructed 
during the next few years. This is certainly needed in the city since presently we have government 
departments scattered all over the city. It will establish for the first time a provincial presence in the Hub 
City of this province. Mr. Speaker, this decentralization brings the services of the government to the 
people, right where they live. Like the budget itself, I think this is a step in the right direction. I, Mr. 
Speaker, will be supporting the motion and opposing the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. J.R. Kowalchuk (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to 
participate in this very important Budget Debate, I wish to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of 
Finance for bringing in this budget of fulfilment. At the same time, I want to congratulate this 
Government for bringing forward four balanced budgets in four years. 
 
Before I proceed any further, Mr. Speaker, I think some comment should be made in regard to the 
speech that we just heard from the Member for Athabasca. I really don’t think much could be said about 
his speech, except that I heard something about clapping here and clapping there. All I can say is that I 
have never heard so much ‘clap-trap’ packed into 30 minutes as I heard coming from the mouth of the 
Member for Athabasca. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1144 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalchuk: — I just want to make mention of one point that he brought out and that is the 
statement about interpreting the things that have been said by the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board, 
Otto Lang, and what we are saying and what the Premier has said regarding these statements as being 
lies. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if anybody is a liar it has to be attributed to the Member - the Hon. 
Member in charge of the Wheat Board. When he stood up so bravely in Edmonton and made a statement 
that indeed, it may be a good thing to remove the Crow’s Nest rates and substitute these rates with some 
other form of payment to the farmers. He indeed did say that! If he refutes that statement by saying 
another thing in Saskatoon, then, Mr. Speaker, if anybody has got to be a liar it has to be he and no one 
else. I say, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House believe and the people of Saskatchewan 
believe, the statement that was made in Edmonton is the statement that is going to be believed by the 
people of Saskatchewan. I think in regard to the statement that they the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to say to themselves, “Which one are we to believe?” “Whom do we trust?” And I think that their 
trust and belief is going to be placed, not in Otto Lang but in Allan Blakeney, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had intentions of presenting a general overview of the positive action of the NDP Government for the 
last three years. A summary of what effect the fulfilment budget of 1975 just introduced last Friday will 
have on Saskatchewan, including the Melville constituency. But, Mr. Speaker, because the other 
Members have documented better than I am able, the benefits that the people of Saskatchewan have 
derived since the NDP were swept into power in 1971, and also the benefits that the new budget 
provides, I will not repeat what has already been said, except to say that, whether it is the farmer or the 
labourer, the young people or the elderly, those on earned income and those on fixed incomes, all will 
benefit to some degree from this budget. Yes, the Finance Minister could have called for a deficit budget 
and passed out political goodies as was the custom for the last number of years preceding elections by 
the Liberals, I am proud of the fact that we in this NDP Government stayed on an even and sensible 
keel. We provided the dollars where the need was evident, built programs that offered assistance to 
people who needed it, like FarmStart, housing and senior citizens repair programs and such, and 
generally provided the backing for the kinds of programs that people asked for and that people need. 
That, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion is responsible government. That is democracy exercised by people 
indicating beforehand what they want and need. That, Mr. Speaker, is evidence of a government which 
exercises responsibility, financial responsibility, of weighing and judging the cost of all the programs 
and making the responsible decisions as to what should be done and then proceed on the course to do it. 
The 1975 budget, Mr. Speaker, is a document that is evidence of that responsibility. 
 
I might be accused of being somewhat prejudiced in my thinking, however, as I go on, I feel one of the 
most exciting departments is the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. Since its inception 
less than one year ago, much has taken place and many new initiatives have been launched to 
complement and build up existing programs and policies. In the past the question has been raised as to 
why this integrated program was 



 
March 20, 1975 

1145 
 

taken with tourism and resources. The answer simply stated, it is our belief that the development of a 
viable tourism and travel industry should not take place at the expense or to the detriment of our 
renewable resource base and in the same sense, the development and management of our renewable 
resources should not be carried out at the expense of a viable travel industry. Neither one should receive 
priority over the other but rather be viewed as complementary to one another. 
 
Saskatchewan boasts tremendous potential as far as developing a tourist and travel industry is 
concerned. The province boasts the necessary natural resources as well, to dramatically influence this 
sector of the economy. 
 
Last year, tourism generated over $250 million in revenues to the province, Mr. Speaker, ranking second 
in economic importance with our number one industry, agriculture. From this you can see the 
importance of and the benefits to be gained by further developing the industry. 
 
With the work week diminishing, coupled with increased disposable income, the general public is 
beginning to demand more with respect to tourism and we are committed to developing the necessary 
programs, policies, and facilities to ensure that we are able to receive the maximum benefits from a 
viable travel industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the integration process has now been completed and we are now intensifying our initiatives 
to ensure that our goals and objectives are met. 
 
The general philosophical stance of this Government with respect to decentralization has real meaning 
within my department. In the past year my department established two new regional offices, one in Swift 
Current and the other in Melville. Wherever possible we will continue to encourage and promote 
decentralization of service as a meaningful and very desirable social and economic principle. 
 
We have also emphasized the desirability of public involvement in the formulation of ideas and policies. 
I should like to make mention here, Mr. Speaker, of a release in the Prince Albert Daily Herald a couple 
of days ago. An article which appeared, entitled, “Thiessen Outlines Party’s Proposed Measures.” I think 
it is probably a good thing that someone in the Liberal Party is outlining some kind of Liberal measures, 
Mr. Speaker. This is what he said in part of that release. 
 

A conservation and recreation authority will be established by a Liberal Government after independent 
assessments of the best use of renewable resources in the province. 

 
They are always johnnies-come-lately, Mr. Speaker. They are at it again. The Department of Tourism 
and Renewable Resources has indeed already established an overall authority for the Department of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources in an advisory committee composed of members from all major 
social, municipal, and community bodies who appoint a member to this advisory committee. This 
commission has already been structured with a number of names still to come in. It will be operating 
shortly. This Committee will operate in an advisory capacity to the Minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, once again the Liberals are always either one step one week, or one decade behind, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1146 
 

I repeat what I said before that we have always emphasized the desirability of public involvement in the 
formulation of ideas and policies which will help to develop the establishment of new parks and 
recreational areas. This approach was reflected in the past year when public hearings were held at 
Meadow Lake and Loverin. We anticipate four new reports during the course of the next few months 
which will be introduced to the public. These relate to the development and expansion of the proposals 
from Moose Mountain, Cypress Hills, Green Water and Nipawin Provincial Parks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all aware that there is an ever-increasing heavy demand being placed on our 
resource lands. We have recognized this demand and have launched several initiatives in response to the 
developments which have taken place. Continued emphasis has been placed by my department on this 
vitally important issue and acceptable policy reflecting the concerns of agriculture, forestry, industry, 
mining, and conservation continue to receive priority and consideration. 
 
The Wildlife Development Fund, Mr. Speaker, reflects one positive involvement with my department. 
The Fund has made a better than expected response. Statistics show that over 35,000 acres have been 
purchased at roughly a little better than over $26.8 an acre, almost exhausting the $1 million that was 
initially put into the fund. 
 
Another vitally important resource is our timber and our initiative is consistent with my Government’s 
policy to assure the full utilization of this resource as it is developed. A principle of allocation on the 
volume basis rather than using geographic areas is being accepted and favourable results are anticipated 
as a result of this policy change. We believe Mr. Speaker, the development initiative should reflect 
sound forest management practices by ensuring that the development more positively recognizes the 
advantage of not using all the timber for studs but rather using our good timber for higher value forest 
products such as plywood. This is resulting in a much more acceptable situation. We are receiving more 
money from this resource and at the same time producing more jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Timber contracts are being renegotiated and I anticipate an early agreement between my Government 
and Simpson Timber. 
 
My Government will also continue to negotiate with other interests such as Prince Albert Pulp and 
Domtar to ensure that the agreements which are reached are consistent with the policy of this New 
Democratic Government. 
 
During the last fiscal year the market value of our forest products rose from $59.6 million in the 
previous year to the present year of $74.7 million, an increase of over 25 percent. 
 
Government continued to show leadership as our tree planting program saw our 2.8 million trees 
planted, over 3,350 acres compared with the industry’s record of 1.4 million trees over 1,780 acres a 
year ago. 
 
Our reforestation policy is to ensure that all cut over and burned over Crown land in Saskatchewan is 
reforested to standards suited to the capability of the land. I anticipate an intensification of our initiative 
in this respect in the future. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1147 
 

With respect to satellite nurseries, a program has been developed to have small satellite nurseries 
established in provincial forest areas adjacent to communities where employment opportunities are 
limited. Developmental work will be initiated in two sites this year, as a goal of establishing production 
capacities for tree planting stock of approximately 500,000 at each location. 
 
We will also increase our capacity to protect our forests from fires through the use of water bombers. 
More than $2.7 million has been provided in this budget for the purchase of aircraft and the construction 
of air strips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the level of spending in terms of capital development and new facilities within our parks 
and recreation sites and for tourism will be somewhat modified in the next year due to the escalating 
construction costs. And we propose to defer such major construction projects for the future when the 
employment opportunities and special needs warrant. 
 
Capital spending projected in this budget for my department will be in excess of $2.8 million. This will 
be directed largely to expansion and improvement of existing facilities providing for a number of new 
campgrounds as well as resolving environmental concerns in these areas. For example, increased 
funding will be available for sewer and water projects. The new golf course at The Battlefords 
Provincial Park will be complete this summer and we have started to effect redevelopment of the core 
area at Cypress Hills Provincial Park to allow for increased public use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also directed our efforts towards expanding our winter recreation development. 
As an example we are installing a T-bar at Cypress Hills for use beginning next winter. We acquired a 
snow vehicle rendezvous area near Regina and are negotiating for a similar installation near Saskatoon. 
We are expanding our cross-country ski and snow vehicle trails within provincial parks to round out the 
utilization within these areas. 
 
We have also stepped up activity to provide for improved understanding of our historic and natural 
heritage through the adoption of an historic sites preservation program. We have hired park naturalists in 
the provincial park system and developed an increasing number of interpretive displays for parks and 
recreation sites. One such right in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is an area made possible by the 
donation of a section of land by one of the oldest pioneer families, the Battersbys just a few miles from 
where I live. I sincerely hope that more people will contribute their old homesteads as historical 
heritages. Wherever possible these will be made into sanctuaries for wild life. 
 
Our lifetime angling licence for senior citizens is proving to be extremely popular, with over 10,000 
such licences now issued. Our Camp Call program to better inform residents and others on the 
availability of camping opportunities within the province is continuing to receive priority as well. 
 
This budget also makes provision for an additional $50,000 grants to regional parks. I am confident our 
decision to allow maintenance costs and allow for increased assistance in terms of operating costs, will 
receive wide general support. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1148 
 

My department continues to have a major involvement in terms of the Qu’Appelle Basin Study. Our 
major emphasis relates to tourism and recreational planning and we will be providing substantial 
spending in the Qu’Appelle Valley over the next few years. 
 
The Qu’Appelle Valley study reflects the inter-departmental co-operation and coordination which is 
taking place. While the majority of our initiatives are positive in scope, there are also problems and there 
are forces which impede our efforts at times. 
 
My department continues to have much concern over the Federal Government’s lack of assistance in 
terms of helping us develop our historic resources, Mr. Speaker. When you consider their involvement 
in the Maritimes and Quebec, the deficiency shows very clearly and I sincerely hope that an early 
breakthrough will enable us to take full advantage of the programs we have launched. 
 
In the field of tourism, the lack of a north-south air link between Regina and Saskatoon to bolster 
tourism needs continues to place us at a disadvantage. When subsequent air route agreements are 
negotiated it is our intention to press, very forcefully, for a more favourable consideration from the 
Federal Government. 
 
Another issue of public concern relates to the question of a compulsory hunter safety program. I can 
only say at this time that any future action is dependent upon the final resolve of the current controversy 
relating to gun laws and a federal position is needed before we are in a position to consider action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few minutes I have attempted to give this Assembly a brief overview of the 
involvements of my department. We are faced with many challenges, however I feel we have succeeded 
in responding positively to ensure that our efforts reflect the majority viewpoint. 
 
Public co-operation is essential when new programs are contemplated and we will continue to encourage 
public participation in the articulation of future policies and programs. In the future we will be 
addressing ourselves to many matters. 
 
The adoption of a comprehensive program for wildlife damage beyond that is already in effect, is 
receiving study. The program will be similar to one currently operational in Manitoba, I am sure. Such a 
program would allow for payment of compensation for predator losses and damages sustained from big 
game, such as deer and elk. 
 
We are studying the advisability and practicality of establishing recreation reserves to ensure that 
undeveloped recreation resources will be available to the public in the future and we are also evaluating 
the development of new types of parks. These would be comparable to the Parkway principle suggested 
federally. We envisage these as provincial trailways through various parts of Saskatchewan and the 
adoption of urban oriented parks to provide recreational opportunities to high concentrations of 
populations for short duration use as well as for educational purposes. The adoption of subsidized public 
transportation to existing park and recreational installations is also being studied by my department. This 
is being carried 



 
March 20, 1975 

1149 
 

out in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Transportation Company and is geared primarily for senior 
citizens and students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget enables new directions to be launched. It enables the various departments and 
agencies to deliver the vast goods and services required by the general public. 
 
Our initiative is consistent with our overall philosophical approach to this province and its people. This 
latest budget is further proof of our commitment to Saskatchewan. We have come a long way in less 
than four years and I have every confidence that the people of Saskatchewan, not only recognize the 
extent of our accomplishment, but are prepared to give us an extended mandate which will enable us 
further to develop the economic and social potential of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pride and privilege that I offer my unqualified support to this budget and I will 
not support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, allow me to say a few brief words this evening prior to adjourning 
the debate and carrying on tomorrow. 
 
First of all I should like to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Dave Steuart, for a very 
excellent speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — One can certainly see that from the comments in the press and from the letters and phone 
calls which we have received it has certainly proved to be an excellent speech. One of the major key 
points of whether that speech was good or not was the reaction which we have received from 43 
Members on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — You know it seems strange that if something is bad they won’t criticize it; if something 
is good like the speech that the Leader of the Opposition made, the Members opposite each and every 
time they have spoken have attempted to discredit that speech. That, Mr. Speaker, is a clear indication 
that it was a good speech. 
 
Before I go on to speak about the budget I should like to talk for a few minutes about a very interesting 
Sessional Paper, which was laid on my desk yesterday afternoon. Sessional Paper No. 114 - dealing with 
a question which I asked prior to the adjournment of the House last fall, regarding the allocation of hogs 
to Intercontinental Packers and to Burns Foods Limited. 
 
I am sure that all of us are aware of what is happening to the packing industry in Saskatchewan. We 
know that the Provincial Government now owns a fair share of Intercontinental Packers. We also know 
that Burns Food Limited have had to close down their operation in Regina and are now in the process of 
laying off 300 men in Prince Albert. We have to ask ourselves, 



 
March 20, 1975 

1150 
 

why is this happening? What is happening to Burns? 
 
Burns was certainly a healthy and viable company before the Hog Marketing Commission was 
established. How come, Mr. Speaker, that since that Commission has been established, that Burns now 
finds itself in difficulty? We have to ask ourselves a couple of questions and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan have to ask these questions. First of all, could it be that Burns’ problem is because of an 
unfair allocation of hogs by the Hog Marketing Commission? Or could it be that this Government is 
trying to remove any competition in the packing industry in this province from Intercontinental Packers? 
 
Let’s just go back and see what has happened during the past year. Last year I contracted to have some 
hogs hauled to Regina. We haul them regularly about once every week. It is a requirement that prior to 
taking those hogs to any packing plant that we have to phone the Hog Marketing Commission and ask 
permission if we can do so. We have the option of stating which packing plant we wish to haul those 
hogs to. Now, normally they say, go ahead and take the hogs where you want them. On this occasion 
and on other occasions it was our preference to haul to Burns. Why do we haul to Burns? Because the 
unloading facilities there were much better, because they had the facilities to clean the trucks after we 
were unloaded. So on this particular occasion, as has happened on future ones since that date, we asked 
to have our hogs allocated to Burns. The Hog Marketing Commission told us, “I’m sorry, Burns is filled 
up for this week. Their yards are full, appointments have been made and they cannot accept any more 
hogs. There is room at Intercontinental Packers and we would ask that you take your hogs there.” So 
while the trucker was driving into Regina, he was coming in early, it was in the morning and it was the 
only load he had to take that day, so he said, “Look, I prefer delivering to Burns, I’ll try there first 
anyway.” So he stopped in at Burns about 2:00 o’clock in the afternoon and there wasn’t one hog in that 
yard, there wasn’t one truck unloaded in that yard. Burns Packers said that it was the easiest day that 
they had ever had and yet the Hog Marketing Commission told our trucker to take them to 
Intercontinental Packers and said that Burns was filled up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What happened at Prince Albert, it’s cheaper there? 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Certainly it’s cheap. And then another aspect we have to look at is the allocation of 
hogs. Let’s look at Sessional Paper No. 144. I asked the Minister of Agriculture how many hogs were 
allocated to Intercontinental Packers and to Burns Foods Ltd., from August 1, 1973, to January 31, 1974, 
a short period of time after the Hog Marketing Commission was in operation. Intercontinental Packers 
received 257,000 hogs in that period. Burns Foods Ltd., received 137,000 hogs during that period of 
time. As well, I asked the Minister of Agriculture how many hogs were allocated to Burns and 
Intercontinental Packers from June 1, 1974 until December 1, 1974, a time at which Burns made the 
announcement they were going to decrease or lay off 300 men. It’s surprising, has the allocation stayed 
the same? No Intercontinental Packers has increased by 50,000 hogs to 310,000 hogs allocated to 
Intercontinental Packers. How about Burns, did they stay at 137.000? No, Mr. Speaker, they dropped 
down to a measly 95,000 hogs. 



 
March 20, 1975 

1151 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — No wonder they are in trouble. I don’t want to go on too much further tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, but what I must say is that if what is happening, is an indication of this Government trying to 
steer business in this province through a government-controlled marketing commission to a government 
owned packing plant, then, I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is time for a change in this province and I and the 
people of Saskatchewan welcome the opportunity to make that change available. 
 
I have more remarks to say and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:42 o’clock p.m. 
 


