
























































Hansard: March 10, 1975


 
  
 

654 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

14th Day 
Monday, March 10, 1975 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to the other Members of the Assembly, 26 Grade Eight students who are seated in the Speaker’s 
Gallery from Athabasca School. 
 
They are led here today by their teacher, Mr. Doug Zaitz and I believe have already had a short tour of 
the buildings. I hope that they will enjoy their brief visit to the Assembly and I hope that I will meet with 
them later to discuss any problems they may have. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGE GIRLS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day I beg to inform the Assembly that Roberta Shields and 
Pam Glover will be Pages during the present Session along with the two we had from the previous 
session. We had one Page leave us, Linda left us between the last session and now we have these two 
girls. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NOMINATED MEMBERS OF THE LIBERAL PARTY 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 
students in the east gallery, 26 students led here by their leader, Dave Steuart, who are the nominated 
members of the Liberal Party and have come here to pick out their seats following the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — You will notice that the only seats they can see are the first couple of benches. I don’t 
know if that means anything but, boys, don’t look at those first two rows too closely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Anyway, welcome here . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you promise . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I have already promised them 62 times. I welcome 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
655 

 

them here and I know that it will be very enlightening and interesting. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly want to join with the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming those in the east gallery. I know that we welcome them to the House and they 
certainly should have this opportunity to look at the House. I don’t think they are going to have another 
opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I think they were very wise in sitting in the gallery in which they did, from which 
they can look over at that side of the House where, if they happen to be elected, they will certainly be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

VACANCY IN CONSTITUENCY OF ALBERT PARK 
 

The Speaker: — Following that wonderful introduction . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly of the following vacancy: 
 

In the constituency of Regina Albert Park, due to the resignation of K.R. MacLeod, Esquire. 
 
I would like to read to the House for the benefit of the Members an accompanying letter which was sent 
by Mr. MacLeod to myself on January 23, because he has made compliments to the Members of this 
Legislature. So with your indulgence I will read this letter: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker, 
 
I enclose with regret my resignation as a Member of the 17th Legislature of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. It has been my great pleasure to have served with you and with all the Members of the 
Legislature. I have greatly enjoyed my association with David G. Steuart and the Liberal caucus. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — 
 

I am grateful to the people of the constituency of Regina Albert Park for having given me this 
opportunity of public service. 
 
I wish to note at this time the many courtesies extended to me by the Premier and Members of the 
Cabinet. As a Member of the Legislature I have had numerous occasions to contact or to work with the 
Clerk of the Assembly, the Assembly staff and the public servants in the various 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
656 

 

departments and Crown corporations. I believe we may be justifiably proud of the consistently high 
standard of courtesy and competence of our civil servants and I am thankful for all their help. I extend 
to them, through you and to all Members of the Legislature, the very best of health and good fortune in 
the years ahead. 
 
Thanks, Ken MacLeod. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

GRAIN-HANDLING STRIKE 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier. I wonder in view of the emergency that he obviously has recognized regarding the strike which 
is causing a tie-up in grain handling, would he join me in sending the following telegram? 
 

We, the undersigned, strongly urge your Government to take immediate legislative action to end the 
strike of the Public Service Alliance of Canada. The interests of the public in general and the western 
farmers particularly are being most seriously affected. The strike is costing western farmers millions 
of dollars now and jeopardizing our future grain market. In the interest of all Canadians the strike must 
be ended within 24 hours. 

 
This is to the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada. I have a place for the 
Premier to sign. Signed, Allan Blakeney, Premier of Saskatchewan and D.G. Steuart, Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I would hope that the Premier would be prepared to join with me if this is truly an 
emergency as he seems to think and I agree with him that it is. Let’s take immediate action and ask that 
this strike be ended in 24 hours and not some wishy-washy telegram that might end it two or three 
weeks from now. I wonder if the Premier is prepared to join with me and send this telegram? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether it will be very fruitful to forward it to the Prime 
Minister since I don’t know whether he is in Ireland or on the ski slopes in Italy at the moment. But I 
think that the point to be made is that the Government has recognized the difficulty with which the 
western grain industry is being faced. We have attempted to provide for a debate on this issue. I do not 
think that there is any simple solution to it. I am sure that if the solution were simple enough it would 
have been proceeded with even by the Government at Ottawa. But I think that it really isn’t that simple. 
While I certainly do not wish to say that we are unwilling to join with the Leader of the Opposition in 
this telegram, I think that we ought to see whether or not there aren’t some words which ought to be 
addressed to the Government at Ottawa in the course 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
657 

 

of the debate in this Assembly so that the full concern of the people of Saskatchewan may be made 
known to the Government at Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — A supplementary question. I don’t know whether the Prime Minister is back in Canada 
or whether he is in Ireland, as you say, or France. I know that while this strike was going on the Premier 
of Saskatchewan was basking in the sun in Hawaii and we could have had this House back two or three 
weeks ago if he really thought this was an emergency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I don’t think that the Premier of Saskatchewan need point the finger at the Prime 
Minister of Canada for being derelict in his duties because we could have come back here two weeks 
ago to take some action. And so I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is really ducking the issue by 
refusing to do this. 
 
My supplementary question is, will he reconsider and sign this telegram and if he has something to add 
to it in the debate later on, fine, by all means. But let’s get this down to Ottawa before the closure of 
business today. If you are serious and want to include both sides of the House then we can get some 
action immediately. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

SHIPMENT OF GRAIN FOR EXPORT 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to move 
pursuant to Standing Order No. 17, that Priority of Debate be given to a definite matter of urgent public 
importance. I have given you notice of this . . . 
 
Mr. Malone: — Are they entitled to do this before the Orders of the Day? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Orders of the Day will not be proceeded with until all the matters before the 
Speaker now are dealt with. 
 
Mr. Malone: — The Attorney General is now about to present a resolution to you. I believe there is 
some precedent to the effect that questions of Ministers should be asked before such a resolution is 
presented to you. I am referring to the Debates and Proceedings of 1972 when this particular type of 
problem arose at that time. So I would like to ask a question of the Premier while I am on my feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — There is no written ruling on these oral questions. It would facilitate matters, I will 
agree with the Hon. Member, if our three questions could be proceeded with at one time before we go to 
the next Orders of the Day. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have the floor. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
658 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Attorney General had risen to his feet, had the floor and the Speaker has 
no alternative but to recognize the Members as they rise in their sequence. 
 
Mr. Lane: — On a Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — This must come before Orders of the Day the same as Oral Questions do. Our rules do 
not make provisions for Oral Questions although they have been extended as a courtesy and a practice of 
this House. 
 
Mr. Lane: — On the Point of Order, I might refer you to Priority of Debate by the Hon. Premier in 
1972, February 25, he requested it. The point is that at that particular time, Mr. Speaker, you allowed the 
three questions that the Opposition is entitled to prior to the Priority of Debate and the debate on the 
resolution. We think we should be entitled to ask at least our three questions of the Cabinet Ministers 
prior to the Attorney General’s resolution and the debate on the priority of resolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I appreciate the point the Hon. Member has raised but it is not a Point of Order, it is a 
matter of a precedent that took place at that time. If the Hon. Attorney General is prepared to resume his 
feet again after two more questions I have no objections. But I cannot say that he cannot proceed now 
because Rule No. 17 says that he must rise before the Orders of the Day, notice having been given. 
 
Mr. Lane: — The Attorney General, in light of his speeches in the past, will certainly expedite good 
parliamentary procedure in consistency with the rules and I certainly feel then that the Hon. Member for 
Lakeview (Mr. Malone) should proceed with his question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — On a Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I wonder for my edification if someone would tell me what the Point of Order is 
because there is no Point of Order. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — (Milestone) The Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, is the Attorney General trying to 
choke off three questions of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, after the fact that the Premier has delayed this 
Legislature until the 10th of March, for the longest period in the history of this Legislature and then 
walks in with a so-called emergency debate, I think the Attorney General should withdraw. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! There is no one choking off any questions because when this item is dealt with, 
we are still on Questions of Orders of the Day. We are still on that topic because we haven’t dealt with it 
until I call Orders of the Day. So there is no debate on procedure before the House. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
659 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t think any questions were in mind since the Leader of the 
Opposition gave us two short little speeches. In view of the fact that some of the Members opposite 
again see fit, I think, to put on a demonstration rather than to be concerned about parliamentary 
procedure, I will withdraw at this moment the Priority of Debate and accept the suggestion of the 
Questions to come first. After the three questions are asked, Mr. Speaker, I will get up and go through 
the procedure of Priority of Debate under Rule No. 17. I think that again the Liberals either were 
mistaken on their procedure or either knew the procedure and chose to make an issue of this very 
important matter. Either way we will back down, we will have the three questions and I will come back 
again on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Member can only resume his seat now and rise later by leave of the 
Assembly because it is not a standing rule. If the Members are not prepared to give him leave he must 
proceed forthwith right now, but if the Assembly is prepared, to let him resume his seat and come back 
again. Has the Hon. Attorney General leave to introduce this subject matter later after the questions? 
 
Agreed. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

CONFERENCE IN OTTAWA APRIL 9 
 
Mr. A.C. Malone: — (Regina Lakeview) Thank you for this courtesy. It is too bad he couldn’t have 
shown it three or four minutes ago and we wouldn’t have had to go through all this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier. As you are all aware there will be a very historic and 
important conference in Ottawa, I believe, commencing on April 9 to discuss natural resources, industry, 
taxation and so on. In view of the importance of this conference and the fact that it will affect not only 
this Government but future governments of Saskatchewan on the way of life of this province in years 
ahead, and in view of the fact that we have as a Member of the loyal Opposition a man who is most 
experienced in attending these conferences, I am wondering if the Premier would consider making part 
of the delegation to this conference in Ottawa the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Steuart? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I think that the Hon. Member for Lakeview has indulged in a little hyperbole at one 
point during the course of asking his question. The point he makes is one which I am prepared to 
consider. I may say that I served as Leader of the Opposition for a period of time and did not during that 
period have any invitations to proceed to Ottawa or to anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I’ll take you next year, Allan. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I think that I would need a guarantee somewhat more iron-clad than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
660 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That’s not much of an inducement. But I will consider the point raised by the Hon. 
Member for Lakeview and advise the House. It will be some time but in due course once we have 
considered this matter further. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I appreciate the Premier’s consideration on this. I would ask him though to advise the 
House as quickly as possible because obviously there is quite a bit of work involved if somebody is 
going to attend this conference. If you would let us know within the next week it will certainly be 
appreciated. 
 

ILLEGAL STRIKES BY ESSENTIAL WORKERS 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly hope there would be ample opportunity so 
that alternate means of transportation could be found if the present situation continues. 
 
In light of the present situation and Notice of Priority of Debate has been asked for today, Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). In light of the Federal 
Government’s announcement by the Minister responsible for the Treasury Board that it will prosecute 
all essential workers who strike illegally, will the Provincial Government now take the same position 
and prosecute or announce that it will prosecute all essential workers who strike illegally within 
provincial jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. G. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — I am not sure that the question is deserving of an appropriate 
answer because the Member should be aware of the fact that in Saskatchewan’s labour legislation we do 
not have in Saskatchewan labour law a provision where services may not be withdrawn during the life of 
a contract except as a result of a collective bargaining agreement, where there is a no-strike provision 
during the life of that particular agreement. Accordingly, I would think that the question does not beg a 
reply in light of the fact that there are no illegal strikes in Saskatchewan as defined by Saskatchewan 
law. 
 
Mr. Lane: — As a supplementary question, I call to the Minister of Labour’s attention that these 
contracts have been breached in the past. The public, frankly, is sick and tired of being held up due to 
disruptions and I would urge and ask the Minister of Labour to make a public announcement that any 
illegal strikes under provincial jurisdiction that there will be prosecutions and they will be stopped and 
stopped immediately and that assurance given to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 

CONFERENCE IN OTTAWA APRIL 9 
 
Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier on the same subject as the Member for Regina Lakeview. I am not particularly interested in 
being added to the delegation to Ottawa, but is the Premier at this time prepared to discuss with the 
House and the people of Saskatchewan what will be the position argued by the Saskatchewan delegation 
at this, as the Member said, historic conference? In particular, there are 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
661 

 

repeated rumors that the price of oil is escalating to $8.50, at least a $2 increase per barrel. What is the 
Provincial Government’s position on such an increase in the price of oil and should that come about, 
what would be the distribution of that revenue which would amount, based on 80 million barrels annual 
production, approximately $160 million annual revenue to be distributed in some manner between 
Governments and corporations? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the position of the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to the 
several items which are likely to come up at the Conference in April, has not been finally determined. 
May I say that the agenda for the Conference is not yet finally determined, although it is clear now that 
it will include oil pricing and will, if the Government of Saskatchewan is able to prevail, also include 
related subjects such as resource taxation and resource policy generally. There are a number of aspects 
of this which quite frankly we have not yet resolved in our mind and I am not, therefore, in a position to 
discuss with the House the position which the Government will take at the Conference. A number of 
studies which we have in mind, which we have underway, will have to be completed by our staff before 
I will be in a position to indicate to the House, or to anyone else, what our position at Ottawa is likely to 
be. 
 
Mr. Richards: — A supplementary question. One specific aspect of federal energy policy which the 
Premier has been critical of in the last month, since the last sitting of this House, has been the Syncrude 
deal. NDP leaders met in Winnipeg and denounced it, announcing that there would be a campaign 
launched to educate the Canadian public as to the nature of this deal. 
 
My supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, is: What progress has been made in such a campaign and 
could the Premier give us any details at this stage on what kind of position will be argued, more 
explicitly and publicly by the Premier, by the New Democratic Party, in opposition to the accord 
reached by Ontario, Alberta and Ottawa with respect to Syncrude? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, some of the questions asked by the Hon. Member are not strictly open 
to me to answer; more particularly questions directed as to what will be the position of the Federal New 
Democratic Party to which the Hon. Member referred. 
 
However, to the question which he did address which I think is appropriate: “What is the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan with respect to the Syncrude deal and what public position will we take 
with respect to it?” I will attempt an answer. 
 
The position is, as I have attempted to state it, that we the Government of Saskatchewan believe that 
deals such as Syncrude are, in the longer run, unwise for the people of Canada — deals whereby the 
development of a major resource such as the Tar Sands is left in the hands of a private consortium but 
where a substantial amount of the money to develop it is raised from public sources and where 
handsome concessions, both with respect to the price which the consortium will be allowed to charge 
and the royalties or the taxation on the royalties which the consortium will have to pay, are being made 
by the Government of Canada. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
662 

 

We believe that it is wholly inappropriate to select a consortium consisting of three major international 
oil companies (Gulf, Imperial and City Services and City Services is really effectively owned by Gulf 
and Exxon) that we think it is inappropriate to select that group to allow them to have the management 
of the development of a major resource, to finance a major part of the project from public funds and then 
to provide them with two major incentives which are not offered to other people in the oil industry. First, 
to guarantee that they will be able to sell their oil at prices higher than the oil industry in Saskatchewan 
and Alberta is permitted to sell its conventional oil, and secondly, a guarantee that royalties paid by the 
consortium to the Government of Alberta will be deductible for the purpose of calculating income tax. I 
can understand the latter provision since it is one which we think ought to apply to all oil companies, but 
we think it is wholly untenable for the Federal Government to take the position of giving to that 
consortium of international oil companies, not only financial assistance, but benefits with respect to . . . 
 
Mr. Steuart: — If we can reply to this speech, I would suggest he hand it over to SaskOil and you 
would never have to worry about depleting the resource at all. But surely if he can make a speech we 
can reply. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I might continue my reply? 
 
If there is anyone in this House who appreciates the point of making a long speech and I might say 
usually a very disorganized speech in the course of a question, then it is certainly the Leader of the 
Opposition. But I direct myself specifically to the question asked by the Member for Saskatoon 
University (Mr. Richards) as to what the position of the Government of Saskatchewan will be. And I 
repeat — this is my final statement — it is wholly inappropriate for the Federal Government to grant 
concessions to Imperial, Gulf and City Services, that they are unwilling to grant to the oil industry in 
Alberta and that they are unwilling to grant to the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

RE QUESTION PERIOD 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a question I 
should like to direct to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think we have had our three questions, supplementary questions, plus a fourth one. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I realize with respect to you, Sir, that it has been 
customary in this House to allow only three questions. However, Mr. Speaker, there is no rule that I am 
aware of whereby this is set out either as only three or more or less than three as the case may be. I 
wonder if I could have order while I am speaking to my Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This rule that allows the three questions came into effect many, 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
663 

 

many years ago and it was only through the leave of this House that questions were allowed. That rule 
came into effect, I believe, 20 to 25 years ago and in my opinion and the opinion of the Members that sit 
to your left, is grossly outdated. It is completely inadequate and does not allow for a proper question 
period as is known in other Legislatures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that we can bring this matter to a head is by insisting that we be allowed to 
ask more questions or that some reasonable time limit be put on the question period — 15 minutes, 20 
minutes. So I bring the matter . . . if you would just let me finish, Mr. Speaker, and with respect to you. 
 
I am now asking a fourth question, Mr. Speaker, asking for your ruling on this. If you rule me out of 
order, Mr. Speaker, I will challenge your ruling and hope that we will have a vote on it. May I add as 
well, Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, that the Opposition considers that 15 minutes is not too long a 
period of time each day to ask questions on. If we are not allowed by the Government, in their 
discretion, to ask these questions for 15 minutes, we will take a similar procedure every day until such 
time as the Government gives in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, I will take my seat now if you are going to rule me out of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I may say, for the benefit of the edification of the later Members coming to this 
Assembly though some of them were here at an earlier stage when this occasion arose. 
 
Oral questions were never asked in this Legislature until after the election of 1960. When Mr. Ross 
Thatcher was then the Leader of the Opposition he had the use of the tradition at Ottawa. I was Speaker 
at the time and there was kind of a hodge-podge system of questions. After the election of 1964 my 
predecessor, Mr. Snedker, became Speaker, we had a committee revise the Rules and Procedures of this 
Legislature. The gentleman who is now the Premier of this province, myself, plus our Leader at that 
time, Mr. Lloyd, were on that committee, plus six from the Government of the day. On that occasion it 
was raised that we put a specific time in for oral questions. The majority of that committee turned it 
down. The Speaker of the day said that he would continue to have three questions and no more. 
 
It isn’t a ruling of the House if you want to challenge my ruling. You aren’t challenging my ruling, you 
are challenging tradition of the House, not the Speaker’s, the tradition of the House. I would suggest that 
any Member, and I could maybe agree with some of the sentiments the Hon. Member has suggested for 
different reasons, but I would suggest that a Member should put a substantive motion on the Order Paper 
so that we can debate in the House to make a decision. Therefore, the ruling has been a tradition and a 
custom and it is not in our Rule Book, it is not in Beauchesne. Some of the things that could have 
facilitated it when that report came back from the committee were struck out by the Government of this 
Legislature at that time. I wish the Hon. Members would go back in history a bit. Maybe we could get a 
motion in the House to do the things I think a good many Members wish to do and without putting the 
Speaker on the spot and saying it is the Speaker who prohibits it, when the Speaker 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
664 

 

has no authority only to try to enforce the rules of the House and the customs and traditions. 
 
Mr. Malone: — On a Point of Order again, Mr. Speaker. Again with respect to you, I am not trying to 
quarrel with you, but on the Point of Order. Firstly, if the matter was dealt with by way of Resolution on 
the Order Paper the gentlemen opposite are fully aware that there is something like, I believe, 45 or 46 
Resolutions on that Order Paper. It would simply just not get before the Assembly quick enough to be 
effective, if it got before the Assembly at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I am asking you, Mr. Speaker, in effect to rule me out of order at this stage so that we can have it 
brought to a vote by this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I won’t rule you out of order, because there is no Point of Order. There is no Point of 
Order. The three questions have been asked, the House permitted a fourth question — as they often have 
done — because they have a Member sitting by himself and the customs of this House, I have said that 
through tradition we allowed those questions. If Members wish to make it different let them change the 
rules. Don’t ask the Speaker to change the rules. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I am not asking you to change the rules, Mr. Speaker. I will then try and ask the 
question of the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The only thing I can do if you wish to ask a further question is to ask the House — are 
they prepared to entertain further questions? 
 
The question negatived. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The House will not permit further questions at this time. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

SHIPMENT OF GRAIN FOR EXPORT 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave under Rule 17, that the Assembly give Priority of Debate to 
a definite matter of urgent public importance and, Mr. Speaker, I have given you notice of rules and I 
understand that I am limited at this point to merely stating what I consider to be the matter of urgent 
public importance. I so state it to be as follows: 
 

The urgent necessity for the Federal Government to negotiate an exemption in the shipment of grain 
for export from the present labour disputes which have closed the Pacific Coast Ports, thereby 
resulting in a drastic reduction of exports, possible loss of buyers and a loss of income to the 
Saskatchewan farmers and the urgent necessity for the Legislature of Saskatchewan to convey the 
foregoing request by telegram to the appropriate authorities as soon as possible. 

 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
665 

 

I believe I gave you that notice just a minute or so before 12:00 noon today, Mr. Speaker, and I will now 
forward a copy of this to you pursuant to the rules for your ruling on whether or not it is a matter of 
urgent public importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — A notice regarding this matter for Priority of Debate was received in the Clerk’s office 
at 11:53 a.m. today for which I thank the Hon. Member. 
 
Throughout the years in this Assembly, there have been many rulings by the Chair concerning the 
urgency adjournment resolution or Priority of Debate under Rule 17. I might add that all of the 
precedents have not been entirely consistent. 
 
I do refer the Assembly to the most recent rulings of this Assembly whereby the rules and conditions for 
allowing Priority of Debate are clearly defined. I would ask you to see the Journals of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, November 30, 1973, page 18; March 6, 1974, page 149 and the Votes and 
Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan for Friday, November 29, 1974. 
 
I wish to quote from a portion of the ruling of November 29, 1974: 
 

A motion for Priority of Debate ‘must involve the administrative responsibility of the Government’ 
and it must be so pressing that public interest will suffer if it is not given immediate attention. This 
Assembly cannot give attention to matters over which it has no jurisdiction. 

 
That is from Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, citation 100, page 89. 
 
The matter raised by the Hon. Member pertains to grain-handling facilities on the West Coast which is 
not within the direct responsibility of jurisdiction of the Provincial Government. Although the matter is 
of great interest and concern to the people of Saskatchewan, I do not feel that it can be debated at this 
time under Rule 17. I, therefore, rule this motion out of order. 
 
I should, however, add that this particular matter could be debated by this Assembly if any Member 
wished to submit proper notice for a substantive resolution. Substantive resolutions can cover a wide 
field, but the debate allowed under Rule 17 is definitely to be restricted to matters of an urgent nature 
falling within the provincial jurisdiction. 
 
So for the aforesaid reason, I rule this motion out of order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I accept your ruling. I would have liked to have seen the debate, but 
nevertheless I accept the ruling. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) forwarded over to this side a suggested draft telegram and I 
have a suggested draft wording as well which I hoped would flow as a consequence of the Notice of 
Priority matter, which I stated. It is slightly different from that forwarded by the Leader of the 
Opposition. I wonder, perhaps, if we could leave the matter in abeyance and once we get on to other 
business I will contact my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, and we will see if we can work out a 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
666 

 

combined telegram to send and to report with the consent of the House later this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I wonder, could I accept it as a follow-up to this here, but if the House will agree, the 
Leader of the Opposition made known to the Legislative Assembly certain statements of a telegram he 
wished to send to Ottawa. Will the House unanimously agree that after the two sides of our consultation 
that they can be raised later this day by the Attorney General? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I have no objection to the two of us getting together to see if we can agree 
on a telegram. I think that had the telegram that they wished to send been firmer you may not have ruled 
the motion out of order. Had the telegram suggested some concrete action be taken . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Leader of the Opposition maybe missed the point. I am not 
asking for debate on this, I am just asking if the House will permit it to be raised again, by leave, until 
after the two sides have had a chance to exchange views on it. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, may I speak to your ruling? May I speak to your 
ruling as did the Attorney General, just very briefly? That’s on your ruling of Priority of Debate. 
 
It is customary, Mr. Speaker, I think, on occasion when we have had the discussion as to whether or not 
we should have a Priority of Debate for both sides to speak to your ruling very briefly. I have no wish to 
quarrel, but I should like to say, Mr. Speaker, I regret your decision. I regret it very much because 
Members of the Opposition were very, very firm in their desire to debate the whole issue of the strike 
and we had a very strong amendment, Sir, because this is a very weak . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think the Hon. Member realizes he is not debating any rule, he is debating the subject 
matter. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — No, Mr. Speaker, I will not debate the subject matter. I would just like to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The points you are raising now are the subject matter. The subject matter is maybe 
dear to all of the Members here and I think the Members must get the difference between Rule 17 and 
the subject matter which should be a substantive motion. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to speak to the Priority of Debate. I don’t know if you 
are aware, Mr. Speaker, that there are 33 ships now tied up in Vancouver . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I cannot permit that type of thing, because that is not on the ruling. The 
ruling was plain and clear. The only one alternative of the House is, if they don’t wish to abide by what 
ruling the House has had on previous occasions, to change the ruling and by doing that they don’t debate 
it, they 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
667 

 

just vote to have a different ruling. 
 
It cannot be debated. The Hon. Attorney General got leave to introduce this matter again later today. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House to move the traditional motion of 
condolence. Since we last gathered in this House just a short time ago, two very distinguished Members 
of this House, each of whom had a lengthy and distinguished career in this House, have passed away. I 
refer to Charles Cromwell Williams — Charlie Williams — and George Spence, Dr. George Spence. 
 
I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing since the adjournment of the 
Legislature of two former Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contributions they made to their community, their constituency and to this Province. 
 
CHARLES CROMWELL WILLIAMS, who died on January 31, 1875, was a Member of this 
Legislature from 1944 to 1964 for the constituency of Regina City. He was born on February 9, 1896, 
at Moosomin, Saskatchewan. He went to public school and high school in Wapella and attended 
Brandon College. He enlisted during the First World War in the 217th Battalion, served overseas with 
the 5th Canadian Mounted Rifles, 8th Brigade, and was wounded at Amiens on August 8, 1918. He 
worked as a train dispatcher for Canadian National Railways and was a member of the Order of 
Railroad Telegraphers serving as chairman of the Regina local for six years. He entered civic politics 
in Regina in 1937 and was elected alderman for a two year term. He served as mayor of the city of 
Regina from 1941 to 1843 and again served as city alderman from 1965 to 1973. He was appointed 
Minister of Labour and Minister of Telephones and Telegraphs in 1944. He held the labour portfolio 
for twenty years, which is the longest time that any Member has held one cabinet post in the 
Government of Saskatchewan. In 1948 he was appointed Provincial Secretary and Minister in Charge 
of the Workmen’s Compensation Board, Minimum Wage Board and the Labour Relations Board. He 
has served as a director of the Regina Exhibition Association; a member of the Pioneer Lodge Board; 
a member of the Regina Gyro Club; President of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 
and in several positions with the Regina Labour Council. He was active in numerous church and 
community organizations. 
 
GEORGE SPENCE, who died on March 4, 1975, was a Member of this Legislature from 1917 to 1925 
for the constituency of Notukeu, and also from 1927 to 1934 for the constituency of Maple Creek, and 
again from 1934 to 1938 for the constituency of Notukeu. He was born at Birsay in the Orkney Islands 
on October 5, 1880. He was educated at Sandwich Public School and Leith Technical College in 
Scotland and came to Canada in 1900. He worked in the Yukon for three years, then farmed at Austin, 
Manitoba until 1911. He also worked as an engineer for the CPR for three years. In 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
668 

 

1912 he began farming in the Orkney district of Saskatchewan. He was elected to the House of 
Commons in the general election of 1925 and re-elected in the general election of 1926 for Maple 
Creek. He resigned from the House of Commons and was re-elected to the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly in a by-election in Maple Creek in December, 1927. He was appointed Minister of Railways 
and of Highways in 1927; Minister of Railways, Labour and Industries in 1928; and Minister of 
Agriculture in 1929. In 1934 he was appointed Minister of Public Works, and Minister of Railways, 
Labour and Industries. He resigned in 1938 and became the first director of the PFRA in which post he 
continued until 1947. He was a member of the Saskatchewan Better Farming Commission appointed 
in 1920, served as Managing Head of the Provincial Railroad Organization and was President of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Seed and Co-operative Association Limited. In 1946 he was made a 
Commander of the Order of the British Empire and in 1948 he was awarded an honorary Doctor of 
Laws degree from the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could add a word beyond the formal condolence motion with respect to each 
of these gentlemen. 
 
I knew Charlie Williams very well as I am sure a good number of people in this House did. For more 
than 40 years Charlie Williams was active in the civic and community affairs of this city and no man in 
the history of this city has served in elected office, representing his fellow citizens for as long a time as 
Charlie Williams, both provincial and civic. If my records are right, he was three times elected mayor of 
Regina; five times elected to the Legislature representing the city; 20 years of service in the Cabinet, 
under two Premiers; elected to the city council, I can’t recall all the occasions, but a good number of 
times. His last defeat at the polls was in 1940 and he retired effectively from public life in the 1970s. 
That is a sort of electoral record that many of us would like to emulate. His record as Minister of Labour 
is widely known. Under his guidance labour legislation which was progressive, indeed some respects 
well night revolutionary for the 1940s, was introduced and gradually accepted across Canada. These are 
the cold statistics of the public life of Charlie Williams. I have known him, not only in that role, but also 
as a fellow candidate. I was a fellow candidate of his in 1960 when I first ran as a candidate in Regina 
City — a four member riding at that time — Charlie was one of the candidates. Indeed, he was the dean 
of our slate. He, while he obviously had difficulty with his pupil, taught me a great deal about being a 
candidate in an urban constituency. 
 
Charlie Williams was a person who knew his constituency and knew the city of Regina as very few 
people do. Charlie was a politician who made it his business to know people, know his constituency. He 
had a profound understanding of the ordinary people of Regina, of their hopes and fears. As I came to 
know him I came to understand why he understood what was going on in the minds and hearts of the 
people of Regina. He went about this city in all circles. He and his wife Beatrice were quiet, unassuming 
guests at countless functions, everything from the Chamber of Commerce to the Ukrainian National 
Federation, to 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
669 

 

pick one of the ethnic groups. He had friends and associates in every stratum of Regina society. It 
warmed one’s heart to see Charlie Williams move into a group, almost any group in Regina, and be 
welcomed with open arms, to see the enthusiasm with which he became part of the group, whether it 
was discussing labour legislation or dancing the polka. This understanding of people made Charlie 
Williams a good politician and good in many senses of the word. Charlie’s record in the regard, both at 
the provincial level and the civic level, stands as one which is unlikely to be challenged by many of us 
who are journeymen politicians trying to serve the constituents whom we represent. 
 
Doctor George Spence I knew less well. Of course, he served in this House at an earlier period. He had a 
distinguished career in the House, and served also in the House of Commons. The degree of distinction 
which he achieved is indicated by the fact that he was made Commander of the Order of the British 
Empire and he received an honorary doctor’s degree from the University of Saskatchewan. When I think 
of Dr. George Spence I think of him as one of the pioneers of Saskatchewan agriculture and particularly 
a man who advocated year in and year out the merits of the South Saskatchewan River project when it 
had, on occasion, few friends. He had an unshakeable faith in what could be done with prairie 
agriculture, what could be done through dugouts, through irrigation, what could be done to make this 
great semi-arid land of ours a fertile breadbasket for generations yet to come. He was, therefore, a happy 
choice as the first director of the PFRA and that gospel of making our land productive was one which he 
preached with vigor, knowledge and force. There were many who knew Dr. Spence in other capacities 
who undoubtedly will wish to add a word. 
 
On behalf of the Government and Members of this Assembly I would wish to extend our deepest 
sympathy to Dr. Spence’s daughters and other members of the family and to Charlie Williams’s 
daughters and to other members of that family. 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to join with the Premier 
in seconding this motion and saying just a few words of tribute to these two men. I knew both of them. I 
didn’t know George Spence as well as I knew Charlie Williams, but we are paying tribute to two great 
men of Saskatchewan because they really were, in their own way and in our history, outstanding men. 
 
Charlie Williams, as the Premier said, could walk in any circle and have friends everywhere, not just in 
this city but all over this province. When you think of Charlie Williams you immediately think of a 
warm and friendly and concerned man and if anybody could be described as being the friend of every 
man, I think it was Charlie Williams. It didn’t matter what your station in life or what your political 
philosophy was, you looked on Charlie with respect and friendship. I can remember when I was a new 
Member in this House and I was asking some questions on the Estimates and not really knowing what I 
was asking — I don’t know if I have improved much — I can remember Charlie Williams making me 
feel exceptionally well by saying, “That was quite an intelligent question and I will take it into 
consideration.” I don’t think it was particularly, but I always felt as a new Member sitting in the back 
bench, very warm and a great deal of gratitude towards him. This is the kind of a man he was. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
670 

 

The Premier also said that he did break new ground and blazed a trail for the working people, all 
working people, not just those within the labour movement but outside it as well. He left his mark in this 
city and in this province. It is a privilege to pay tribute to the memory of such a great citizen of this 
province. He was an alderman, a mayor, a Minister of the Crown and one of the outstanding people who 
have ever represented public life in Saskatchewan. 
 
George Spence I got to know after he had retired. He, too, was an outstanding political figure and 
latterly was a great fighter and worker for the basic industry of this province, the agricultural industry 
and for the farmer. Through the PFRA in his own quiet way he advanced the cause of diversified 
agriculture to a tremendous degree all over Saskatchewan. The words the Premier said about George 
Spence in regard to the South Saskatchewan Dam I think are very fitting because I don’t think his 
contribution to this great project that eventually came to fruition has ever really been pointed out and 
been stated publicly. 
 
So I take great pleasure in joining with the Premier to pay a small tribute to the memory of these two 
very, very outstanding citizens of Saskatchewan, to say that this province was greater for their having 
lived here, having taken part in public life in our province and we are all the losers in their passing. 
 
Mr. E.C. Whelan (Regina Northwest): — Mr. Speaker, in joining the other Members of the Legislature 
it is my intention to express to the families and relatives sincere condolences. On behalf of the Regina 
citizens whom Charlie Williams served so well and so long, I should like to record a personal debt to an 
associate, a colleague and a close friend. 
 
During the years that we worked together, jointly we were present at hundreds of meetings and 
functions. Charlie and Bea Williams always made themselves available. They were representatives who 
could be approached at any time by anyone. My association with Charlie Williams over a long period of 
more than 25 years as a fellow executive member in a political organization, as his campaign manager, 
as a colleague in the Legislature and as a political apprentice listening to his counsel, gave me an 
opportunity to know, to appreciate and to estimate his qualities. When I went to see him his door was 
always open; whether you were a citizen, a dignitary or a colleague or perhaps an upset citizen. By the 
time you left his office you knew that he was your representative, that he was humble and that he had 
listened to you and as you left you remembered the last thing he said, and it was always the same, “I am 
glad you came.” Whether it was in a moment of crisis such as the medicare dispute or a moment of 
victory, and Charlie Williams had many of them, he was imperturbable. He was proud of the people he 
represented, but prouder of the fact that he had a clear close communication with them. When he left a 
meeting he offered everyone who was without conveyance a lift home. When he spoke to a meeting, if 
there were young children around, he always recognized them and addressed them as boys and girls. His 
understanding of people was complete. His approach to them was always humble. As payment for their 
efforts on behalf of Charlie Williams the people he conscientiously represented received humility, full 
recognition and appreciation of their efforts on his behalf. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
671 

 

Seldom did Charlie Williams exhibit anger. Often his calm, placid manner solved disputes and dissolved 
differences. But in several areas, Mr. Speaker, he would stand for no criticism of those he was 
associated with and then he did become angry. He was angered when the honesty and integrity of a 
working man was challenged. And more angered if that working man happened to be a railroader, for 
they were his closest associates, the people he knew best. 
 
There was another group that he was proud of and pleased to represent — they were the returned men, 
the men who had fought alongside him in World War I. These are the people he understood, people 
whose loyalty and support he cherished. He would do battle for them and would become angry on their 
behalf at a moment’s notice. 
 
On the 11th of November or when Remembrance Day reunions were held in the city of Regina, Charlie 
Williams was there and the people who supported him understood and appreciated his presence. 
 
Charlie was at home with the Royal Family or with the working people in their halls in Regina. He 
belonged to the city of Regina because he was close to the people of Regina. They understood and that is 
why they always called him “Charlie.” 
 
Always in caucus or in the House, he represented the labour man and the working man. He did it in such 
a way that he won the support of many others because of his sincere approach. He was a champion of 
the city of Regina. 
 
Charlie Williams as a representative of the city was a sincere spokesman; this, people in every walk of 
life and in every political party, thoroughly understood. There was a bond of friendship and a bond of 
integrity between the city and the representative they have lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on my own behalf and on behalf of the citizens of Regina, whom he represented, may I 
extend sincere condolences to the family. 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the other speakers in 
paying tribute to Mr. Williams and Mr. Spence and to offer condolences to their families. I am the 
representative of the constituency which both of these gentlemen lived in in their later years. Although I 
didn’t know either one of them well, I had a couple of personal associations with both of them. In 
particular I can always recall Mr. Williams, the Premier referred to the time that he ran and lost in 1940. 
I believe he ran against my grandfather for mayor, Mr. Grassick, at that time and was defeated. 
However, he turned about with fair play, I guess, because he ran against him in 1941 and defeated my 
grandfather at that time. 
 
I understand that both of those elections were bitterly fought, at least I am told this by my mother and 
other relatives. I think feelings, perhaps in those days, ran higher than they do now about politics. But I 
know as the years passed, both my mother and other descendants of Mr. Grassick came to admire and 
respect Mr. Williams for the great gentleman that he was. In fact I believe the last time he ran for 
alderman of all the times that he did run for alderman he received full support of the members of the 
family because they considered him to be a fine 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
672 

 

gentleman and a great spokesman for the citizens of Regina. 
 
With Mr. Spence, I am afraid the age difference between was such that I really never got to know him or 
he never got to know me. But I always have a fond remembrance of cutting through his backyard as a 
matter of fact when I came home from school when I was much younger. Mr. Spence was a great 
gardener and I believe grew some of the most delicious crabapples and vegetables that were then grown 
in the city of Regina because I can recall on one occasion of helping myself to a few of them and Mr. 
Spence catching me as I was going down beside his house and saying that he really didn’t mind very 
much, that I could do it any time I wanted, but please be reasonable. That was really my only contact 
with Mr. Spence. 
 
His record speaks for itself. He did many things which are not known by the people of Saskatchewan 
especially with water resources. I think prior to his retirement he was regarded as one of the foremost 
spokesmen about water resources in North America. 
 
Both of these people were fine gentlemen, Mr. Speaker. They have lived full lives, they contributed 
greatly to their community and to the city of Regina. I should like to join with the others in paying 
tribute to them and offering condolences to their families. 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to repeat all that was said about either 
one of these gentlemen that we are remembering today. I sat in this House from 1956 until 1964 with 
Charlie Williams. Of course, I had known him through the political organization before that. The thing I 
always remember about him was his jovial nature and his ready smile. He always greeted you as 
somebody said with a warm welcome. His record of service to this city says far more, the years in which 
he was re-elected says far more than anything I might say. 
 
I want to join with all others in giving my condolences to Mr. Williams’ daughters and the rest of the 
family. He is another one of our pioneers of Saskatchewan who has left us. I want to suggest that history 
will record Charlie Williams as one of the great pioneers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I never knew George Spence, but of course knew of him through his work in the PFRA. I remember as 
far back as when I was going to school, and that is getting to be quite a while ago, that we had heard 
about George Spence in those days as a Minister in this House. Anybody who farmed and is as old as I 
am has heard about George Spence and I suggest that the people of Saskatchewan owe a great debt to 
him for the great work that he has done. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to add my condolences to the Spence 
family. 
 
Mr. G.B. Grant (Regina Whitmore Park): — Mr. Speaker, little can be added to what has been said. As 
a long time resident of the city I should like to add my word of appreciation for the contributions made 
by these two gentlemen. I don’t think Mr. Williams or Dr. Spence can be classified as two similar men. I 
always thought of Dr. Spence in the category of Chief Justice Martin and a sergeant of the Regina Police 
Force, Sergeant Logan. The mere presence of these men impressed you. They were tall stalwart men, 
presenting fine 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
673 

 

figures and without even speaking they had an air of confidence about them that made you feel 
confident in what they would do. 
 
The last recollection I have of Dr. Spence, even though he was well advanced in years, was his rugged 
frame progressing down Albert Street because he seemed to defy modern means of transportation right 
from the time he lugged sapling trees into his homestead to the last day that he was able to progress by 
himself down Albert Street. 
 
Mr. Williams was in a different category altogether. I think any of us who have participated in politics 
realize that not very long after you get involved you are accepted in some circles and you are not 
necessarily rejected in others, but you are sort of pleasantly overlooked. I doubt whether there is 
anybody in the present Legislature who has avoided that, but Charlie Williams certainly did. On a good 
many occasions I recall when names of elected individuals would come up for various reasons you 
would hear somebody say, oh, Charlie is a good egg, we will include him. He was a good fellow, 
everybody liked him. Another thing I remember about Charlie. Civic politics was not exactly the same 
as here. We don’t mind giving the Government Members a little bit of advice occasionally. But a mayor, 
particularly, doesn’t appreciate advice from his predecessors and if His Worship was here I think that he 
could vouch for the fact that I haven’t given any advice on that level in his public life. Unfortunately I 
had a couple of mayoralty predecessors who did give me that type of advice and I didn’t appreciate it. 
 
Charlie Williams had the happy knack of being friendly with you and the first thing you knew he had 
given a little bit of advice and you didn’t resent it. This is one of my happier recollections of Charlie 
Williams. Mr. Speaker, I along with others of this House will miss both these gentlemen and I join with 
other Members in conveying my sympathies to the families. 
 
Mr. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words of my own to those 
tributes that have already been paid to Charlie Williams. 
 
I consider myself extremely fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have had the privilege of knowing Charlie 
Williams personally for a number of years. The exchanges of thought and ideas which our relationship 
produced have made me the beneficiary of a good deal of Charlie’s insight into the problems of working 
people together with a range of practical and appropriate solutions. 
 
I suppose in many respects Charlie Williams came about as close as a human being can to becoming a 
permanent institution in our society. I can recall, Mr. Speaker, as a very young man being firmly 
convinced that there had only been one Minister of Labour in Saskatchewan and that there always would 
be. Actually Charlie came into the labour portfolio in 1944 and remained there for 20 consecutive years, 
from then until 1964, which is a record length of service for Labour Ministers in the whole of Canada 
and also I am told the longest period in Saskatchewan history that a Cabinet Minister has occupied one 
portfolio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a record of service of that kind did not happen by accident. It was attributable to Charlie’s 
dedication to his clearly perceived duty, to his unswerving loyalty not just to his political party but to the 
people of Saskatchewan generally and 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
674 

 

to his unerring sense of direction and his immense popularity. 
 
On the latter point of reference could be made to his popularity within his own party organization, with 
his constituents, with the employees of the Department of Labour to whom he provided wise counsel 
over the years on personal as well as work-oriented problems, with the voters and with his political 
opponents also. 
 
The basis of his popularity, I think, was his keen perception, his concern for the individual and the 
moderate low key nature of his personality. 
 
The esteem in which he was held by the electors is reflected in the fact that in 1952 he obtained the 
highest number of votes ever received by a candidate in a provincial election in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. The high regard in which he was held by those of other political persuasions was 
illustrated also by the former Liberal Government in 1964, when it designated a peninsula in the Lac La 
Ronge area to carry the Williams name. 
 
What is particularly remarkable about this combination of popularity and a relatively quiet personality is 
that it was responsible for the creation of an entirely new department of government, the Department of 
Labour in 1944, for the introduction of far-reaching and at that time even radical program direction in 
the labour field. 
 
Charlie Williams was responsible for pioneering and the implementation, even by impartial standards, of 
the most progressive labour legislation in North America, involving measures related to labour relations, 
labour protection, labour standards, apprenticeship training and industrial safety. 
 
Many of the statutes passed during Charlie Williams’ time as Minister of Labour were subsequently 
duplicated by other Canadian provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the passing of Charlie Williams then represents a time of sadness and I should like to 
extend my sympathy to the family. However, it is also a time of warm and grateful remembrance of 36 
years of continuous service in civic and provincial politics, of time with the Armed Services in the First 
World War, of many years as a wage earner and as a unionist, of his role as a generous patron of the arts 
and of a devoted father and family man. Charlie Williams exerted a positive and profound impact on the 
social and economic life of Regina and of this province of which precious few Saskatchewan citizens 
can ever hope to equal. Each of us in this Assembly and our children and our children’s children will 
continue to reap the harvest of his many civic and labour accomplishments in the years directly ahead. 
We give thanks for the life of Charles Cromwell Williams. 
 
Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to express my regrets at the passing 
of Mr. C.C. Williams and offer condolences to his family. Mr. Williams was a native of my constituency 
and over the years he maintained his connections with the people in the Moosomin-Wapella area. He 
loved to come down to the St. Andrew’s picnic near Wapella and he knew hundreds of people in that 
area. You could always tell he was at the picnic because there was a large crowd around Mr. Williams 
and he was talking and enjoying the fellowship of the many friends that he had there. He will be very 
sadly missed by the people in the Wapella-Moosomin area and I should like to express my regrets also at 
this time. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
675 

 

Mr. A.W. Engel (Notukeu-Willow Bunch): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to add a few words of 
condolence to these two men, particularly Mr. George Spence who represented Notukeu-Willow Bunch. 
He was elected to the Legislature the first time some 58 years ago. I never had the occasion of meeting 
Mr. Spence but I do know two people that were good friends of his. I talked to one who is still active in 
business in LaFleche and he said, “I worked for George in the election of 1917, I was a Liberal then you 
understand. He was a fine man.” These are the words he had to say about George Spence. The other 
friend of Mr. Spence farmed south of Meyronne and he said, “There was a man. He said what he had to 
say and he stood by it. He didn’t play politics.” 
 
Mr. Spence never lost an election. In fact he won four elections in a two-year period. He left the kind of 
reputation, Mr. Speaker, that each one of us here today would love to have. And on behalf of the people 
of Notukeu I would like to offer my condolences to his family, particularly his two daughters, Mrs. 
Irwin of Swift Current, and Mrs. Hayward of Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. E.F. Flasch (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I too am one of those who did not know the late Dr. 
Spence personally. I have heard a good deal about him and I have come to know that he had a long and 
distinguished career in politics and in public life. He retired from public life in 1948 which was before 
the time that I actually moved to the area that I now represent. I believe that he spent a total of 
something like 19 years in the Provincial Legislature, alternating his services between Notukeu and the 
Maple Creek constituencies and then for something less than two years he represented the riding of 
Maple Creek in Parliament at Ottawa. He also had a wide range of experience in his personal life. He 
panned gold in the Yukon in the early days. He farmed in both Saskatchewan and Manitoba as has been 
mentioned and he was connected with various farm-related organizations and did a great deal of work in 
the field of agriculture. On behalf of all those people in Maple Creek constituency who knew Mr. 
Spence I should like to join with other Members of this Assembly in expressing condolences to the 
bereaved family. 
 
Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to add a few words if I may in respect 
to Charles Williams, former Member for Regina. I had the privilege of sitting with Charlie in this 
Legislature for eight years and was with him in the Cabinet for two and one-half years. I found Charlie 
to be very friendly, steady, having an unequivocating and honest approach to all of the problems of the 
day. I am sure that he and his wife Beatrice will be long remembered in Regina as a very faithful 
representative of the people of this city. 
 
I should also like to say in regard to Mr. George Spence, he was very well known in the southwest part 
of the province over a long period of time. As Member of Parliament for Maple Creek and as MLA for 
Maple Creek constituency, as these constituencies were then constituted, he represented the people 
whom I now represent in this Legislature as a provincial Member. I am sure that those people would 
want me to stand on my feet at this time and express a tribute to the service that Mr. Spence gave 
through those years — over a long period of time his very able and conscientious service to the people 
of the southwest — not only in 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
676 

 

his term of office as Member of Parliament or as an MLA or as Cabinet Minister but also as heading up 
the PFRA which was a very important organization in the dry areas in the southwest part of the 
province. 
 
I should also like to express condolences to his two daughters, one of whom is Mrs. Hayward of 
Winnipeg and the other Mrs. Dr. Noble Irwin of Swift Current. I am sure as I say the people I represent 
in that area would wish me to do this at this time. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Grant: 
 

That the Resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased Members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Trustee Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I commented on this in the Session prior to Christmas. It 
was the Opposition’s position that the proposed amendments allowing trustees to invest in organizations 
such as the Saskatchewan Development Fund is completely contrary to the intention of The Trustee Act 
itself. The Trustee Act was passed to protect and require trustees to invest in extremely secure 
investments. It was designed to protect children’s investments being held in trust for them or for the 
mentally incompetent. 
 
We think that the proposed amendments go completely contrary to the intent of the Act and it is our 
intention to oppose the amendments. We feel that in addition to weakening the tenor of the Act the 
proposed amendments open themselves to some pretty strong political partisanship on the part of the 
Government. I think it will be quite soon that we will see ads in the Commonwealth encouraging 
trustees to put their money into the Saskatchewan Development Fund, a fund that I understand is 
certainly not making any money, it is not doing any proper investing, it has merely been a token political 
ploy on the part of the Government. The Saskatchewan Development Fund is a bad investment. It is not 
a good investment and trustees should not be encouraged to put their moneys in the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund. It was an unwise investment by the party opposite, the present Government, and this 
proposed amendment encourages bad investments by trustees; it weakens the tenor of the Act and the 
intent of the Act. It is our intention to oppose the amendment. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to spend very much time 
with respect to rebutting the Member’s comment, the Member for Lumsden, with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation. The Hon. Member will know of course that any 
investments which are carried out under The Trustee Act, for that 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
677 

 

matter, any investments carried out under the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation are 
investments which have many safeguards, legally and otherwise with respect to those who should invest 
funds. The Trustee Act provisions are very heavily laced with judicial and other legal requirements. As 
well, the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation, being an institution which operates under the 
generally understood trust conditions of the province, will provide an adequate safeguard to the people 
of the province. 
 
I feel that the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation will prove to be in the months and years 
ahead truly one of the very positive developments of the Province of Saskatchewan. In the beginning 
months the question of the Saskatchewan Development Fund and its acceptance quite obviously is 
something the people of the province will be concerned with. I would remind the Member for Lumsden 
that it hasn’t been a year yet that the Saskatchewan Development Fund has begun operation. It began in 
July of 1974, not quite a year. The current yield I think, this is an estimate which the Minister of Finance 
can confirm in a subsequent debate or in Estimates, the current yield exceeds 11 per cent on an annual 
basis which I think is a very good return indeed. 
 
The investments are handled by the finance and investment section of the Department of Finance. I 
believe that the history of this particular branch of the Department of Finance has proven that the 
investments are competently handled indeed. I think the test in that of course is the rate of return which 
is 11 per cent. 
 
We anticipate losses. This is the case in any type of a financial endeavor of this nature, particularly 
losses in initial years when we are trying to build a portfolio and trying to realize adequate earnings. The 
simple fact of the matter is that on the early performance everything points to the fact that the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund is indeed going to be a successful operation for the Province of 
Saskatchewan. If I may put in a little active salesmanship, I would even commend to my learned 
colleague and friend, a little investment with the Saskatchewan Development Fund. It would be a good 
return. I move second reading. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Would the Hon. Member permit a question? 
 
Are not those very arguments that you have given with regard to the early years and the possibility of 
problems reinforcing the argument that perhaps they should be delayed until some stability is arrived at 
by the Development Fund? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Again this question should perhaps be more appropriately answered at a later date 
by the Minister of Finance. I want to make a disclaimer now that if my opinion is at variance with his 
subsequently, his is the one that should rule, but I believe that all indications show that in the Canadian 
economy the year 1975 as we progress to the latter half, things are going to strengthen very much. In 
Saskatchewan, luckily, we are blessed with a very strong economy and I see no reason for not launching 
the program at this particular time. There has been as I say a very good record and a very good yield. I 
think as the economy does strengthen, as I believe it will in the latter half of 1975 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
678 

 

and the market improves, this is a good time to enter into it. I don’t agree with the suggestion by the 
Member for Lumsden. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 43 
Messieurs 

Blakeney Dyck Meakes 
Wood Smishek Romanow 
Messer Snyder Bowerman 
Kramer Thibault Larson 
Baker Kowalchuk Brockelbank 
MacMurchy Pepper Michayluk 
Byers Thorson Whelan 
Kwasnica Carlson Engel 
Cody Robbins Cowley 
Tchorzewski Taylor Matsalla 
Faris Owens Mostoway 
Gross Feduniak Comer 
Rolfes Lange Hanson 
Oliver Feschuk Flasch 
Richards   
 

NAYS — 12 
Messieurs 

 
Steuart Coupland Loken 
Guy Grant MacDonald (Milestone) 
Gardner Lane Wiebe 
MacDonald Malone Boldt 
 

TELEGRAM — GRAINHANDLING STRIKE 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — If I could beg the indulgence of the House, I have to 
leave to attend a nominating convention. I have this telegram that was suggested by the Government that 
we sign mutually. I am sorry, I must reject this, it does not propose any sound action. The telegram I 
proposed, I am going to hold until 5:00 o’clock. I would hope the Premier would sign it. If he doesn’t, it 
is going out under my signature with the support of the Members on this side of the House, asking that 
the Federal Government take immediate legislative action to put these people back to work and get the 
grain moving within 24 hours. That to me is what should be done, it is what the Grains Council have 
asked, it is what the Wheat Pool of Alberta have asked, what a great many farm organizations have 
asked, for some immediate action. I would hope you would sign that telegram and have the unanimous 
support of all Members of this House to ask the Federal Government to legislate immediately to put 
these people back to work. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to enter a debate and just in response to the Leader of the 
Opposition, we can’t go along with his suggestions that were asked for a number of reasons. First of all 
the number one priority in our judgment is to get an exemption for the shipment of the grain. The Leader 
of the Opposition talks about legislative action or otherwise. Without talking about the merits of that one 
way or the other, the fact is that requires time for legislation, we ask for exemption. We 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
679 

 

have asked that the matter of shipment of grain be specifically exempted from strikes, resulting from 
labour disputes. 
 
Secondly, and I think as important, Mr. Speaker, we cannot sign this telegram by the Leader of the 
Opposition because it is totally deficient. It talks only about the strike of the Public Service Alliance of 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, even if you settled the Public Service Alliance strike of Canada by legislative 
action tomorrow, you would still have the longshoreman’s dispute with the British Columbia-Maritime 
Employers Association. This telegram is totally deficient. The Leader of the Opposition and the Liberals 
have regretfully overlooked this particular fact. I’m sorry they didn’t see fit to take ours, which is 
namely the exemption, a resumption of collective bargaining, bargaining until there is a settlement, 
support the mediator’s efforts on the longshoremen until there is a settlement to make sure that the 
interests of western Canada and the prairie farmers are met. So we will send our telegram, they can send 
their telegram. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to add a word on the telegram. I’d like 
to inform the Attorney General in case he’s worried about the deficiency of that aspect of the telegram, 
we have included the International Longshoremen and Warehouse Union. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — In our telegram which is now being prepared. I just want to inform the Attorney 
General that the original draft did not include the International Longshoremen and Warehouse Union, 
but it is being redrafted. The one at 5:00 o’clock will include this group and I do hope that the Attorney 
General will sit down and re-examine the position of the NDP. As he knows the word negotiate might 
take three weeks. The farmers in this province and the farmers of western Canada want their grain to 
move today or tomorrow, not three weeks from now. This is the kind of telegram that urges specific and 
positive action immediately. This is the one that the Grains Council of Canada, which is represented by 
the Farmers Union, Mr. Roy Atkinson, the Wheat Pool of Alberta, the Wheat Pool of Manitoba, the 
biggest farm organization in Canada, all of them support this particular principle and I do hope the NDP 
will re-examine the position. This is not a political gimmick, it’s not a political stall, like yours is. Yours 
is an attempt, you people are aware of how you solve these things, you did it a few weeks ago. You 
know the importance of an emergency and this is an emergency, so let’s sign that telegram, urge the 
Federal Government to get down to business, get the grain moving again and for goodness sake stop 
damaging our international reputation as a supplier of grain which could have long term effects on all 
the western Canadian farmers. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Married Women’s Property Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, The Married Women’s Property Act I don’t 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
680 

 

think covers the situation very well. I think there are inadequacies for the protection of married women. 
I don’t think there is any question in that as our modern society has changed that there have to be 
changes made in regard to the rights of married women. I don’t think there is any question of this. The 
Bill that is before us certainly does not accomplish all the objectives that are needed. I think the 
Attorney General pointed this out when he introduced the Bill. It certainly covers only a very small 
aspect of the whole problem and I’m not really convinced that a Bill which does so little really should be 
passed in this House. It does not attempt to solve all the problems that are in front of us, and we have 
commissions and so on examining this and bringing forth recommendations and as I say, I’m not sure 
that a piecemeal approach such as contained in this Bill should be passed this Session. There are other 
things that should be looked into and I know that there is another speaker who presently is not in the 
House who wants to speak on this, and at this time I would ask that the debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend 
The Legislative Assembly Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a small amendment to The Legislative Assembly Act which is basically in 
the category of a housekeeping amendment. This amendment is required to allow payment of 
indemnities and expense allowances to Members who will represent the new constituencies of 
Athabasca and Cumberland. Because of an oversight Sections 48 sub (1) and 48 sub (3) of The 
Legislative Assembly Act refer to the constituencies of Meadow Lake, Athabasca and Prince Albert 
East. After the dissolution of the current House the constituencies to which these names refer, of course, 
will no longer exist and the amendment here basically strikes out those descriptions and puts in the new 
descriptions of Athabasca and Cumberland. This Act will come into force on the day in which The 
Representation Act, 1974 comes into force as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 23. 
 
Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I have no particular comment to make on the amendment, 
however I think this is an appropriate time to raise another problem dealing with The Legislative 
Assembly Act and the redistribution of boundaries. I think that all Members are aware that the poll maps 
are not available as of this date. I think it’s rather significant that within perhaps weeks of an election the 
Government has not seen fit to make the poll maps available certainly to Members on this side of the 
House. Now possibly Members on that side of the House have received the maps, because that’s the way 
that the present Government operates. They have a Media Centre for their Members, but they don’t 
make that Media Centre available for the Opposition Members. This is a typical action of the 
Government opposite, to keep the Opposition from being able to fulfill their responsibilities in the 
democratic process. 
 
No one in Saskatchewan is really surprised when we tell them that the poll maps are not available to us. 
Why aren’t 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
681 

 

they available? This Act has been passed for over a year. Surely to goodness with the staff that the 
Government of Saskatchewan have hired in the last three years, some 3,500, that they could get down to 
the job of making the poll maps available for some period of time before an election call is due. I think 
that it’s deplorable the contempt that the Government is showing for the Opposition. We expect it as we 
have been treated this way ever since they took the Government seats over there. We’ve always been the 
object of contempt of the Premier and Members of the Cabinet. 
 
What I’m concerned about are the people in the constituencies who want to become involved in this 
campaign regardless of which party. I’ve had members of the NDP tell me that the poll maps should be 
made available so that everyone can participate and everybody can take their place as a poll captain. 
How can you do that when the polls aren’t even available? There is no excuse. There is no excuse why a 
few days or a few weeks or a few months and we don’t know which it is, why these poll maps have not 
been made available to every candidate, to every campaign manager and organization in this province. 
There is absolutely no excuse for it. I ask the Premier to take this under immediate consideration and 
give some consideration, not only to our Members but to their own Members who I am sure are just as 
anxious to see the poll maps as we are. I understand that in our constituency of Rosthern that there’s not 
even a returning officer. There’s not even a returning officer to date. Surely to goodness you have better 
control and better organization a few days or weeks or months before an election campaign. It just 
shows that the Government of Saskatchewan have absolute contempt for the people and the political 
process in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — I couldn’t help but answer the remarks of my hon. friend for 
Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 
 
Mr. Guy: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meakes: — I know, but I remember that in 1971 I managed to get the poll boundaries of 
Touchwood which had a whole bunch of gerrymanders added on to it, the day after the election was 
called. I made about eight trips down to that room down there and I wasn’t able to get it until the day 
after the election was called. I presume the reason  
 
Mr. Guy: — Is that what you are going to do this time? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Meakes: — Well, if my hon. friend will be quiet and let me finish, I am sure that there was good 
reason for it then and I’m sure there’s good reason for it now. 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane: (Lumsden) — Mr. Speaker, on this particular matter, I think the Hon. Member has 
given speeches in this House that he was going to have a little electoral reform. Seemingly the reform is 
one 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
682 

 

sided. There are maps published by the Electoral Boundaries Commission showing the boundaries of the 
city of Regina which are totally inaccurate and have been given wide publicity in the Leader-Post. I 
think this Bill should be held up until we start getting some poll maps and boundaries. I understand that 
Members opposite have the poll maps, or a lot of them have. I understand that perhaps even my own 
opposition may have some poll maps and have a pretty good idea as to what’s happening and I beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I know it’s the first day of 
the Session and the boys opposite are all revved up because they’ve got their candidates here and all that 
stuff, but may I say, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, this is a two line amendment. The Point of Order 
is that the comments of the Member opposite were totally not related to the discussion of the Bill at all. I 
tried to get that Point of Order but he wanted to sneak out the motion of the adjournment and I’m trying 
to say that all the Bill says is that you have Athabasca and Cumberland as the legally titled descriptions 
in the Bill. It has nothing to do with polls and the whole operation. He’s trying to predicate the 
adjournment on that basis. I say he’s out of order. He should be ruled out of order, he shouldn’t speak on 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s very difficult for the Chair to decide what is in order, when it isn’t on the debate 
and they tie it in by the tail that way, but the Hon. Member has asked leave to adjourn the debate. This 
cannot be debated now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth) moved second reading of Bill No. 17 — 
An Act to amend The Department of Culture and Youth Act, 1972. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it’s with some pleasure that I take this opportunity to speak on Bill 17 — An Act 
to amend The Department of Culture and Youth Act, 1972. I say that because it was our Government in 
that year and the session of that year that established this department along with other departments and it 
was my honour and privilege to be the first Minister of the Department of Culture and Youth, which I 
still am. 
 
Before I make a few comments on the amendment, I believe it would be useful to spend some time 
informing Members of this Assembly of some of the accomplishments of our Government through this 
department in its three years of existence, because all this, Mr. Speaker, is related to what the intent of 
this amendment is. This amendment will greatly speed up the delivery of those services provided to 
various organizations and communities. 
 
The activities and the achievements of this Government department are characteristic of the success and 
manner in which this Government, headed by Allan Blakeney, has moved in the last almost four years, 
our first term of Government. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, let’s spend some time and look around us at what’s happening in the world. Ours 
is an age of monumental, but not unsolvable problems — social, economic and 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
683 

 

environmental problems. An age in which we have a unique opportunity as never before to create a 
nation and a world free from deprivation, not only from hunger and sickness but from economic and 
social insecurity. Never before have we as human beings had the chance to build in our social and 
economic development to go further in the provision of people-oriented services, things which will 
enrich our lives, cultural, recreational and leisure time activities which will give to people a sense of 
fulfilment and meaning. 
 
Our society in particular has seen and experienced the isolation of family life, the fragmentation of 
society, social unrest and economic dislocation. Is it any wonder that in an urban-industrial society 
which values consumption and not conservation of resources that there are those opting out of the 
system? Is it any wonder that more and more people are growing disillusioned with a society based on 
the accumulation of material goods as the ultimate objective in life? 
 
In an age in which change uproots our past, clouds the future and, for many, alienates us from the 
present, many people are turning to human oriented activity, things aesthetic and cultural, things which 
will mean more to them than a two car garage and luxury home and the pace of competing in the daily 
rush of traffic. In Saskatchewan we have not experienced as much of this as would a person in Toronto 
or Montreal which each have three or four times as much population as our province. But we have not 
escaped the mobile society in which some are separated from their families and the communities in 
which they grew up. We have not escaped the personal alienation that reflects itself in despair and 
frustration among people. 
 
Never before has the challenge been as great to provide people-oriented opportunities in a mass-oriented 
commercial culture in which a true meaningful individual identity is being lost. Increasingly, 
government at all levels is becoming involved in the provision of cultural and recreational opportunities 
and Saskatchewan is no exception. 
 
The tasks of the Department of Culture and Youth in its first three years have been great. The needs 
have been formidable and are still. The response to cultural and recreational demands has been equally 
as large in magnitude and success. 
 
The Department is basically broken down into the following components: 
 

1. The Cultural Activities Branch. 
2. The Sport and Recreation Branch. 
3. Services to Communities under the Regional Services Branch. 
4. The Youth Employment Service. 

 
In these areas this amendment to The Culture and Youth Act will facilitate delivery of present programs 
and aid in the new programs that will be provided in the future — activities and programs such as 
provided by the Cultural Activities Branch. 
 
Since this branch was established late in 1972, the scope of activities has been varied. The task of 
rediscovering our past and providing opportunities for the present is not a simple one. The future 
enrichment of the lives of the people in Saskatchewan is not a simple process but it is being achieved. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
684 

 

There are many elements in our cultural identity. Native people who inhabited this land long before it 
became a province; the early settlers who came from other lands with their way of life and a dream for 
the future; a province still young in years but a province keenly interested in gathering history and 
artifacts of its own for future generations; and the people of today searching for meaning and expression 
whether in the established forms of art or the new interpretations as in the medium of film. 
 
For some the involvement in cultural and artistic activity is a passing one, but for others it is a deeply 
rooted commitment. But for both it is an experience which will be of benefit in the years to come. So 
that programs by the Cultural Affairs Division are not superimposing cultural or artistic development on 
the people of the province, effort is given to encourage self-determination of needs at the community, 
regional and provincial levels. 
 
The best example of this is the 1973 provincial conference held on multiculturalism held for the first 
time and sponsored by the Department. The purpose was to give ethno-cultural groups throughout the 
province the opportunity of voicing their opinions and ideas on a provincial multicultural policy. That 
conference was a landmark demonstrating the deep concern of people, and their desire to preserve what 
is rich and meaningful in our diverse cultural heritage. 
 
The importance of language as an agent of communication that gives understanding of the many 
different cultures in our society was discussed at the conference. A recommendation from those 
attending led to the formulation of two language programs, both very well received when introduced. 
 
Last summer immersion programs in a language of choice were promoted in the Summer Language 
Camp program. Formal instruction was given in the arts, cultural, recreational and social activities in the 
camp language. There were 16 such camps that were funded. The languages taught included Ukrainian, 
French, Polish, Romanian and Cree. 
 
The other program, Mr. Speaker, Language Opportunities, was funded to help people gain a better 
understanding of their own cultural background or that of other groups, and it was also very well 
received. Twenty language courses were given, sometimes by groups who had offered these courses on 
their own initiative throughout the years, and sometimes by groups initiating these language courses for 
the first time. 
 
The Multicultural Act, the first in Canada, was also an important response to the Multicultural 
Conference leading to a Saskatchewan Multicultural Council. The nine to fifteen council members will 
help in developing multicultural policies and programs, possibly including the development of 
educational, historical, literary and artistic materials and resources. 
 
The Department of Culture and Youth, as well as sponsoring provincial ethno-cultural festivals in 
Regina in 1973 and Saskatoon in 1974, has, during the past year, attempted to decentralize cultural 
activities through regional multicultural activities. Regional grants have been made available and, to 
date, six of the 18 recreation regions in the province have staged multicultural events in the centres at 
Yorkton, Melfort, Weyburn, 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
685 

 

Wynyard, Moose Jaw and Melville. As well as multicultural regional grants, community cultural grants 
have also encouraged many events to be held at the community level. 
 
Saskatchewan is 70 years old as a province this year which is not very aged in comparison with most 
jurisdictions in the world, but there are still many stories to be told that total up the making of society in 
Saskatchewan. Towards a New Past was established as a program to gather these stories on the people 
who settled this land, formed our social institutions and influenced our way of life. And so, through 
taped interviews, some 550 people have put their early experiences on tape since the program started in 
1973. After transcribing and editing are completed, the tapes will be catalogued for use in schools, 
libraries and museums. 
 
The 1974-75 Oral History program will focus on the history of native people, particularly in the 
Battleford area including the reserves of Sweetgrass, Red Pheasant, Mosquito-Grizzly Bear’s Head and 
Poundmaker. As well, experiences are being documented of early Polish immigrants in the 
Mistatim-Porcupine Plains area; old colony Mennonites in the Swift Current area and Doukhobour 
communal life in the Kamsack-Veregin area. 
 
This past year, Mr. Speaker, a Local Histories program for publishing was also initiated. Grants to a 
maximum of $2,000 have been made available to publish these histories as high quality publications. An 
Advisory and Selection Committee of private and government representatives will encourage authors to 
write thematic works rather than those in a more biographical form. 
 
In carrying out preliminary program planning, rich lodes are sometimes found in this province where 
people and communities have worked on their own to preserve the historical roots of this province. In an 
inventory on museums carried out this past year, there was a most interesting discovery made. There are 
approximately 100 small museums in Saskatchewan with approximately 85 per cent housed in existing 
and now historic buildings. These range from abandoned railway stations, old schools or churches, 
former homes or residences, and buildings historic to a community. During this survey, an amazing 
amount of interest and imagination was found displayed by museum members, private collectors, town 
councillors and by service club workers, all intent on promoting and improving their museum. Many of 
these museums have operated through the years as expressions of the past history of a community, and 
all are a part of a trust fund of Saskatchewan history. 
 
Building on this obvious benefit to the province in many ways, during this part year a $500 Museums’ 
Grant was made available to help each museum’s catalogue program and to administer collections. It is 
a hopeful start that may lead to an exchange program between museums and educational institutions to 
further the historical and cultural knowledge of the people of this province. 
 
Artifacts are important forms of records of our past and are also hot properties in the market today. 
Unfortunately artifacts that have a real meaning, other than as collector’s items, can be lost to the people 
of this province. The example of this, of course, is the diary of Riel which fortunately, ultimately, did 
remain in Saskatchewan. To try to stem the loss 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
686 

 

of what is important to the province, an emergency fund for the retention of historical properties has 
been set up by our Government through the Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
Under the Cultural Properties Fund, it was possible for the Tannahill Collection of old coins, trade 
tokens, and wooden money to be obtained by the Department. This unique collection, valued at almost 
$9,000, has been catalogued and made ready for a travelling display and will remain in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I point these things out because one of the difficulties that the Department has 
experienced in the provision of these programs and services is some of the delays that have happened in 
the processing and the transmitting of the financial assistance, as well as other programs to the 
communities and organizations throughout Saskatchewan. Therefore this amendment to The Department 
of Culture and Youth Act will help a great deal in facilitating that process in order that it will happen 
much more quickly than it has happened in the past. 
 
Now some other examples on how that amendment will facilitate these programs more easily and so that 
organizations can better apply and take advantage of them in other areas in which the Department is 
involved, Mr. Speaker. In keeping with the policy of consultation with people prior to the formulation of 
programs the Government of Saskatchewan will be sponsoring a conference on the Arts later in the year. 
 
At this conference the Government of Saskatchewan will be receiving input from all across 
Saskatchewan on what direction should be taken in the Arts with respect to programming and financing 
by such Government agencies as The Department of Culture and Youth and the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board as well as non-governmental agencies. 
 
I want to say a few words about the Community Cultural Project Grant, a program designed to stimulate 
and assist in the development of the Arts in Saskatchewan. And here is another program, Mr. Speaker, 
which because of the lack of this provision which is now going to be in the legislation with this 
amendment, has been slow in being processed and being delivered to the communities who have taken 
advantage of the Community Cultural Project Grant. Mr. Speaker, this program is a prime example of 
what this Government means by decentralization. Under the program, per capita grants weighted in 
favour of smaller communities are available to local groups and organizations. It is the local recreation 
board however which administers the program within the criteria of the grant structure. We believe local 
people know what is best for themselves in recreational and cultural opportunities and this program has 
been well received. 
 
In an effort to promote performers, a Saskatchewan Talent Hunt was introduced this fall taking 
advantage of the well-known interest of Saskatchewan communities in staging local shows as 
community events during the year. To date, some 72 local talent shows have taken place, involving 
1,250 performers and some 14,000 spectators. Plans are going forward for holding seven or eight 
regional shows as showcase productions of Saskatchewan talent and further exposure at a higher level is 
being contemplated. CBC Radio, commencing March 18, will broadcast the performance of the top 
participants, and awards by the Department of $1,000 each will be presented to five performers on the 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
687 

 

April 8 broadcast. 
 
In keeping with established visual arts as part of the heritage and interpretation of Saskatchewan, some 
64 works of art were received in 1974 by the province. Many form part of our provincial heritage. At the 
present time 59 of these pieces are in the Moose Jaw Museum and one is hanging in the Norman 
MacKenzie Art Gallery in Regina. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, communities and organizations have had to wait for extremely long periods of 
time, in some cases up to eight week, after applying for assistance from the Department. This 
amendment will considerably speed up the process by allowing regulations to be made and to be 
gazetted. It will have the same effect in the sport and recreation field as well as in the areas I have just 
mentioned. 
 
Sports and recreation programs are gaining new emphasis in society with the growing interest and 
concern by the public on the use of leisure time, the relationship between physical activity and health 
and the desire to produce more and better athletes in Canada. Saskatchewan was one of the first 
provinces to see the new leisure ahead, and to recognize the effect of physical activity on the health of 
the people. 
 
Quite some time ago, as far back as the Saskatchewan Recreation Movement, formed as a Government 
agency in the late forties, sports and recreation programs have been an important part of our 
Government planning. The Saskatchewan Recreation Movement is now the Department of Culture and 
Youth as it is today, reflecting the program of steady and sensible growth through the years in sports and 
recreation activities, along with constructive planning, taking into consideration social changes. The 
planning and progress has also included a co-operative partnership involving Government, community 
recreation bodies, sports and recreation associations and, of course, the dedicated volunteer worker. 
 
Our system of grants, Mr. Speaker, which will be affected very importantly and very significantly by 
this amendment, is designed to aid the volunteer and community groups to develop and improve 
administration practices to give a more secure baseline for programming and services. The grants for 
programming, upgrading and services are then more effectively used to stimulate new ideas and develop 
the necessary leadership and training. The structure can then encourage a non-participant to become 
involved, the half-way participant to go farther and the young athletes the opportunity to better their 
skills. 
 
This type of support by our Government through the Sports and Recreation Branch of the Department of 
Culture and Youth is paying off in a new vitality seen in the growing memberships and the growing 
number of provincial sports associations. 
 
The growth can be seen in the move to new quarters by the Saskatchewan Sports and Recreation 
Unlimited Administrative Centre. The Centre was first established in 1968 to give member sports and 
recreation associations space, printing and service assistance, office help and meeting facilities. It was 
found necessary to find new quarters this past year as the permanent residents of the Centre will grow to 
12 resident associations by the end of March, each with a paid administrator. There are also 25 
non-resident sports, recreation and cultural 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
688 

 

associations using the services being offered. 
 
Our Government, through grants and consultative services, has helped the Centre to become established 
and to grow in self-sufficiency. One of the pleasing benefits of the new Centre is the permanent home 
for the Saskatchewan Hall of Fame. The exhibit is more than an acknowledgement of our noted athletes. 
It is also a visible form to stimulate interest in sports in the public at large and in our young athletes. 
 
Some of these young athletes were a part of the Saskatchewan contingent at the 1975 Canada Winter 
Games in Lethbridge, February 11 to 23. To give these young people an opportunity to improve their 
skills, Saskatchewan, through the Department of Culture and Youth, developed an intensive training 
program in two phases. The first session, Mr. Speaker, was in September, and it was very well attended 
by 85 coaches and managers in 16 sports. The second session was held in Saskatoon in late December 
and was the main clinic where the 240 team members of the Saskatchewan contingent to the Canada 
Games were present along with the other young athletes with potential abilities. The full attendance was 
something like 400 athletes and they were given the chance to polish or learn new skills in the best of 
accommodations and facilities, with experts present including many national coaches. The clinic was a 
tremendous success as evidenced by many letters from coaches, athletes and sporting associations. 
 
When the Saskatchewan athletes travelled to the Canada Games, they sported white and green walk-out 
uniforms provided by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The highlight of this year will be the Western Canada Games to be held for the first time in Regina and 
they will take place between August 10 and 17. The Games now fill a gap that existed between 
provincial games and games at the national or international level. 
 
At the regional sports level, assistance is now being given to summer and winter competitions. There has 
been a great deal of response and enthusiasm through zone competitions. The regional sports program 
will add to this climate, and at the same time create initiative, mass participation and fun sports. 
 
The growing awareness of sports and the effects on young athletes and players was acknowledged this 
past year in the Saskatchewan Hockey Task Force Report. I am particularly proud of this report because 
it was not a witch hunt into the sport of hockey, but a more than successful attempt to point the way for 
action to benefit Canada’s national game. There were 53 recommendations made in the report and all 
but two of the recommendations have seen some action taken. 
 
Some of the recommendations were directed to the Sports and Recreation Branch of the Department of 
Culture and Youth, and the Department will be responding in the new fiscal year to those 
recommendations related to funding assistance and sports in general. Announcements are forthcoming 
on these. 
 
A program with some basis in the Saskatchewan Hockey Task Force Report is the Coaching 
Certification Program. It is being jointly developed by the provinces across Canada and Saskatchewan is 
now into developing the provincial program with an overwhelming 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
689 

 

response being received. 
 
Many of the sports governing bodies in the province wish to participate. The University of 
Saskatchewan wishes to include the first level of the Coaching Certification Program in their Physical 
Education course. There is co-operation with Community Colleges and through Community Recreation 
Boards so that the program will be available all across Saskatchewan. By improving the standards of 
coaching, we are contributing not only to the improvement of sports for people of all ages but also 
creating a healthy learning situation for the young. After all the child will become the adult. It is during 
these early years that the foundation is laid for a healthy and active life well into later years. 
 
With the growth in demand for sports, recreation and cultural programming there has been a matching 
demand for facilities. The Department has recently acquired the services of an experienced and 
knowledgeable consultant to provide technical advice to communities and organizations involved in 
renovating, constructing and programming cultural, recreational and sports facilities. 
 
In Saskatchewan rinks are almost second homes to children during the long winter months and their 
parents and other adults are also greatly involved in the popular community sport of curling. As a social 
gathering place rinks rate very high and are the basis of major recreational planning. 
 
Over the years, municipal governments, recreation authorities and operators and users have asked for 
some assistance with their major costs of light and heat. Last October, the Energy Assistance Grant 
program to ice rinks was launched for this purpose. The grants for electrical and heating costs of indoor 
skating and curling rinks have helped to alleviate some of the financial burden of communities. 
Operators can then improve services encouraging more participation by residents thus making better use 
of rink facilities in local communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strongest motivating force for all the programs in the Department is the people of 
Saskatchewan. Facilities can be built and programs formulated and grants can be made available, but 
there is no meaning unless people power provides the momentum for their use. This people power can 
be seen in the communities of Saskatchewan where there is a live vital climate of involvement of people 
of all ages and backgrounds in recreational sports and cultural programs. 
 
It is best seen at the community level where over the past few years community recreation boards have 
grown, mainly at the village, town and hamlet level into 550 boards in this province. As a reflection of 
this development town councils in many of the communities are now treating recreational programs as 
less of the step-sister type in good municipal planning and are including a mill rate assessment for 
recreation in formulating budgets. The community boards have even found that there is more strength in 
co-operating with amalgamation of village and rural municipality boards taking place throughout the 
province. These amalgamations have resulted in making it possible to secure better facilities, more 
participation, stronger leadership and a broader base for programs. 
 
The tremendous involvement of people has even caused a 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
690 

 

change in the field operations of the Department. Therefore last year the 12 recreation regions that 
covered the province were reorganized into 18 regions and the 12 regional co-ordinators of the 
Department were increased to 18 regional co-ordinators. The co-ordinator is one of the most important 
links that our Department has with communities, recreation boards, sports and cultural groups in each 
area and is another example of the philosophy underlining the Government’s move to decentralize 
services so that they are more easily accessible to people in their communities throughout the province. 
 
The co-ordinators are the people involved in community development, helping to establish and maintain 
strong recreation structures at the municipal and regional level more effectively to provide services to 
fill the recreational and cultural needs of our citizens. The regional co-ordinator is familiar with all of 
the organizations in his region, the people, the organizations, the programs and is always available to 
supply resource information, training, encouragement and assistance. 
 
The dedication and work of many staff members associated with government planning has paid off 
through the years, and it is showing in the communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
The increased funding to regional and community recreation associations, work of regional 
co-ordinators, the activity of local boards, service clubs and individuals indicate that the forthcoming 
year will be an exciting and a very active one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to make a few more comments on one other aspect of the Department 
which will be again affected by this amendment which will permit quicker approval of applications by 
associations and organizations. 
 
The Youth Employment Service, Mr. Speaker, was initiated in 1973 after the transfer of the program 
from the Department of Labour. In 1973, 2,230 jobs involving 500 employers were created under the 
Youth Employment Service program and in 1974 2,700 jobs with 600 employers were created. This 
program helped small communities to employ young people full time during the summer months, to 
operate facilities such as swimming pools, regional programs and child care centres. Nursing homes 
were able to provide additional recreation programs and care for the residents. Summer camps were able 
to open facilities and programs to more children at lesser costs, helping those families who in the past 
could not afford to send their children to such camps. 
 
The Youth Employment Service has always had more of a function than being an economic tool, to 
answer the state of employment in the province. It is a training system with some overtones of 
apprenticeship to give practical experience to those lacking it and to create a practical learning 
environment where young people can gain the necessary confidence in entering the normal working 
world. 
 
In summing up, Mr. Speaker, recreation, sports, culture and leisure time carry many definitions based 
mostly in the past when society was less complicated without the stress and the strains known today. 
The meaning of these words are changing almost calling for a new set of words to define a social 
necessity. But the only word that gives a clue to any change of interpretation is the word recreation as 
pronounced in its first established 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
691 

 

meaning and that is ‘re-creation’ of the human spirit and identity assailed by what the world is today and 
will become. 
 
In these comments, Mr. Speaker, I have outlined the type of activities that will be affected to some 
extent by this amendment, which although they may appear small and insignificant as it appears in print 
has far-reaching influence in benefiting the delivery of sports, recreation and cultural programs in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have made reference to a number of these new and exciting programs. So that communities and various 
organizations may better utilize the support programs in existence the amendment will allow regulations 
to be made and gazetted. In this manner those communities and organizations applying for grants will 
experience not a six to eight week delay as is the case now with the route of approving an 
Order-in-Council before payment can be made. The length of time between application and receipt of 
assistance should now be from three to four weeks duration. Applicants in the past have expressed their 
concern about the delay caused by the present system. The amendment will therefore speed up the grant 
process. 
 
With this in mind, I now move second reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I only have a few words. I wonder what the 
Members of this House did for the past two months to deserve that speech? 
 
What the amendment does is to permit the Department of Culture and Youth to make regulations in the 
payment of grants. The Minister takes that opportunity to give a political diatribe, I suppose because he 
thinks there is an election coming. The unfortunate thing, most of it is nonsense, because it was not done 
by that Minister at all. From listening to him, you get the impression that this all began in 1972. I should 
just like to remind the Minister, I hope that he can speak on behalf of his colleagues. Because back a few 
years ago he did away with the recreation board of the CCF, NDP and made the branch called 
Continuing Education which was only interested in adult programs to the great majority of things. They 
turn around and the real thanks for the cultural development in this province is to Mr. Ross Thatcher, 
who took the Arts Board to which the NDP at that time were giving a mere $100,000 or so and made it a 
real and viable operation for the development of culture in the Province of Saskatchewan. Also under 
the leadership of Ross Thatcher the Youth Agency was developed. 
 
When you listen to him, he says regional co-ordinators are a good example of Government’s policy to 
decentralize services. Regional co-ordinators, Mr. Speaker, have been in since 1965 when the Youth 
Agency was organized, the Sports and Recreation Branch was a part of the Youth Agency. He changed 
the name of Teen Power and STEP to Youth Employment Services. 
 
I just wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I am glad that this Minister has some enthusiasm, but please 
don’t suggest that the Department of Culture and Youth was a figment of the imagination of the Minister 
in 1972. The first Canada Summer Games were held in 1968 in Saskatchewan. It was the Youth Agency 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
692 

 

that originated and fostered the first Canada Winter Games in the Province of Saskatchewan. Regional 
co-ordinators were established by the Youth Agency. The grant programs in community activities, the 
recreation boards, the expansion and growth of recreation boards are not a creation of the Minister 
sitting opposite. 
 
I should just like to remind you that if the Speaker is going to permit on this kind of a resolution or 
amendment, which is absolutely nothing to do with future programs, an hour and a half speech on the 
entire Department of Culture and Youth — three quarters of an hour . . . 
 
Mr. Messer: — It wasn’t that long! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Well it sure seemed that long. It started before 4:00 o’clock. Even the Press 
vacated the gallery. That’s how bad it was. The Press vacated the gallery. All I want to tell the Minister, 
I am delighted to see you do this very minor amendment that creates nothing new for the Department of 
Culture and Youth. If it really does speed up grants from four to six weeks, I should like to tell the 
Minister that in my experience the Youth Agency used to give grants in a variety of times, some of them 
two and three, four weeks and it is merely the preparation of an Order-in-Council. 
 
I do appreciate this amendment. I am sure that all the young athletes in Saskatchewan, all those who are 
interested in the cultural development and growth in Saskatchewan will really be tickled to death with 
the fact that the Department of Culture and Youth now has the power to make regulations. We are really 
delighted to hear that great dissertation on the NDP fostering culture and youth in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious that the Member 
opposite has been hurt, severely wounded. Of course his pride is hurt because they don’t like their 
record from 1964-71 and I would be envious too of as energetic a Minister as we have in the Culture and 
Youth department. 
 
Certainly we won’t take a back seat to anyone for our activities in Culture and Youth and we are proud 
that we were the Government to establish it. When I spoke in this House in 1971 on that particular Act I 
said that here was a chance for the people, especially the young people in this province, to obtain their 
fair share, their fair shake of things they didn’t get from 1964-71 when that very Member there was the 
Minister. We know how tough it was to get grants from him and from his government. I should like to 
examine the words of the Member opposite and have more to say on this Bill later. Therefore I beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
693 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 26 — An Act to 
amend The Registered Nurses Act be now read a second time. 
 
He said: The amendments to The Registered Nurses Act being proposed in this Bill have been 
recommended to me by the joint committee on Nurse Practitioner and Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association. The amendments have to do with the Nurse Practitioner demonstration program which you 
may recall was first announced by me in November 1973. Since the nurse practitioner is a relatively new 
concept, I should briefly like to explain the background of the demonstration program which we have 
launched here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1972, officials of the Department in conjunction with representatives of the Medical and Nursing 
Professions began to develop a new type of health worker, nurse practitioner. The idea was to employ 
such new workers in a demonstration project funded by the Government. Basically a nurse practitioner 
is a registered nurse who because of a period of intensive university based training in addition to her 
regular nursing training is capable of providing some services which have traditionally been delivered 
only by doctors. Planning soon involved, in addition to the medical and nursing professions and 
department representatives, representatives of the College of Medicine and Nursing at the University of 
Saskatchewan and of the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association. Representatives of all of these 
groups sat on a steering committee which has been named a joint Committee on Nurse Practitioners. 
 
The Committee has been responsible for identifying the role and duties of the nurse practitioner for the 
training necessary to prepare registered nurses for this new role, for the development of guidelines for 
nurse practitioners in practice and for the selection of committees where nurse practitioners would be 
located for the duration of the two-year pilot project. It has been gratifying to see representatives from so 
many different organizations working together in harmony during the planning of this demonstration 
project. The use of the nurse practitioner has been tested in other parts of Canada and the United States 
and is a useful method of providing primary medical care. We are now testing the concept in a 
Saskatchewan setting. Intensive studies in Ontario have shown that nurse practitioners working in 
conjunction with family physicians can deliver primary health services of high quality. 
 
McMaster University where much of the pioneering work in Canada was performed has been training 
nurse practitioners since 1972. I understand that other jurisdictions are also experimenting with the 
concept of nurse practitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the initial planning for the project was completed by the joint committee it was 
necessary to design a special six-month training course which was offered at the College of Nursing at 
the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. The special training course was designed to equip nurse 
practitioners to provide emergency and first aid services to treat minor illnesses and injuries, to care for 
the chronically ill patients in conjunction with their doctors and to co-ordinate nursing services in the 
home as well as health and social services available in the community. I should emphasize that nurse 
practitioners work in associated relationship with one or 



 
March 10, 1975 
 

 
694 

 

more physicians in the neighbouring communities. The training program was commenced in March of 
1974 and was completed in September of the same year. Four nurse practitioners, three female and one 
male, have been functioning since October 1, 1974 at Maryfield, Leroy, Fox Valley and the 
Beauval-Canoe Narrows areas, north of Meadow Lake. 
 
Preliminary reports from communities in which nurse practitioners are serving indicate that these new 
health workers have been very well received by the community in which they are working. Even at this 
early stage, Mr. Speaker, we are coming to the conclusion that the nurse practitioners could have a major 
impact on the traditional health care delivery system in our province. Working in clinics in our urban 
cities and in rural communities as well, nurse practitioners could contribute significantly to a more 
rational use of our medical manpower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation before you has been recommended to me by the joint Committee on the 
Nurse Practitioner and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, as I have earlier indicated. It 
has also been approved by all organizations represented on a joint committee and it satisfied Federal 
legal requirements. 
 
I want to stress to you that our nurse practitioners are supervised by physicians and the quality of health 
care which they deliver is monitored by the joint committee, which includes physicians amongst its 
membership. 
 
We now require legal recognition of the role and duties which the nurse practitioners have been trained 
to fill. The amending legislation will accomplish three things. 
 

1. It gives legal recognition to the joint committee and defines its responsibilities. 
2. It protects nurse practitioners as long as they function within the confines of the demonstration 
project under the guidance of the joint committee, from potential prosecution under The Medical 
Profession Act. 
3. It allows nurse practitioners to prescribe a limited number of prescription drugs, under close 
supervision and control for their patients, under guidelines recommended by the joint committee. 

 
Mr. Speaker, basically the legislation allows a nurse practitioner to prescribe what is called Schedule F 
drugs, mostly antibiotics. 
 
This legislation provides that nurse practitioner services may be provided only in the nurse practitioner 
demonstration program. This means that we are not putting legislation on the books for all time, but 
simply for the duration of the nurse practitioner demonstration program. 
 
As I have mentioned in public statements on this pilot project it is to run for a period of two years. 
 
We are constantly evaluating the project and when it is over we’ll have more decisions, or make some 
decision on whether the project should be expanded into a broader program. 
 
Certainly, preliminary indications are that the project is being well met by both those 
 



 
March 10, 1975 

 

 
695 

 

working in the program and those receiving the services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks, and presumably the Opposition has now had the opportunity to 
examine the Bill and therefore should not take too much debate, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.F. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, we have had time to familiarize ourselves 
with this Bill and I concur with what is in it and I am quite happy and prepared to lend my support to the 
Bill at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


