
























































Hansard: December 11, 1975


963 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

20th Day 
 

Thursday, December 11, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure on behalf of the 
House and in your name in welcoming to the House 25 students or so from Miller High School. They 
are here with one of their teachers, Garth Schuett. I am sure that the whole House joins with me in 
welcoming them to the Legislature today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Written Questions on Order Paper 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I should like to make a statement that was requested 
by some Members yesterday. A Point of Order was raised yesterday to the effect that written questions 
on the Order Paper not be allowed to stand. I refer all Hon. Members to a ruling from the Chair dated 
February 24th, 1967, which outlines the procedures regarding written questions as follows: 
 

Once the question has been called the Minister concerned will immediately indicate: (1) that the 
question is answered, or; (2) that he wishes it to stand, or; (3) that he wishes it to be changed to a 
Notice of Motion for a Return, or; (4) that he wishes it to be changed to an Order for Return. 

 
The Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, February 24th, 1967, on page 71: 
 

It has been a long standing practice of this Assembly that a Minister may ask that a written question or 
questions be allowed to stand on the Order Paper. This practice has also included the understanding 
that a Minister will not delay the handling of questions any longer than is necessary. 

 
I, therefore, rule that the Point of Order raised yesterday was not well taken. 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly accept your ruling. The 
Hon. Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) suggested that I was possibly putting a little heavy load on the 
Attorney General to say that he was holding up any procedures and I just want 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

964 
 

to make it clear that it wasn’t he whom I felt was holding up procedures, it was the entire group on the 
other side of the House. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Collect Telephone Calls From Constituents 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon-Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to direct 
to the Premier. Is it the practice in the Premier’s office to accept collect telephone calls from constituents 
of the province who have concerns or suggestions? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I do not know with complete clarity what the practice is, 
whether my staff will accept them. They certainly do accept some. If it is a person with whom they are 
familiar and they are a group of people . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Ohhhhhhhhhh! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — What I was saying before the interruptions, is that there are, I regret to 
announce, a few people around the province who will call and call insistently collect and those I suspect 
we decline. But I suspect that for a good number of other people collect calls may be accepted. I frankly 
do not know. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I was in Saskatoon yesterday and had a number of 
people voice concern to me that they had called the Premier’s office with some concerns about the 
potash nationalization and they were told upon indicating what their concern was, that their call would 
not be accepted. Would the Premier care to comment about that? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, I wouldn’t be surprised if that would be the case for Saskatoon because we 
have an Executive Council office at Saskatoon and we have a way by which people can lodge their 
complaints with the Executive Council there. If there is something that needs to be followed up there is 
an open, no-toll line between that office and our office. It would seem to me to be only a simple matter 
of saving public money, that people would use the office we set up in Saskatoon and if something needs 
to be followed up there is a no-toll line there ready and available. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I had a feeling, Mr. Speaker, that that might be the response. I wonder why it is then 
that when those same people after taking that advice and phoning the Saskatoon office are unable even 
to leave a message without being taken through the third degree. They have to leave their names, their 
telephone number, they have to indicate what their occupation is, before anybody is prepared to take any 
information and I wonder . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — . . . I wonder if the Premier 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

965 
 

would care to comment about why that would be the case? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the Hon. Member has possibly conveyed some 
information rather that sought some in his second supplementary question. I do not concede that the 
office asks people for their occupation. Although it may be done on occasion I do not concede that that 
is their regular practice. I do not know, but I doubt it. I further think that for an office to ask a 
complainant what his name and address is strikes me as a perfectly regular and routine proposition. I 
should like to know what the point is of someone calling and saying, I object, my address is. If he had 
sent that in as an anonymous letter I would have put it in the wastebasket. If he wants to make an 
anonymous telephone call I suggest it deserves the same treatment. 
 

Provincial Involvement in Housing 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might direct a question 
to the Minister of Housing about the provincial involvement in housing in the future and that inquiry 
frankly involves some information about the office of the rentalsman. The inquiry, Mr. Minister, relates 
to the potential of investment. 
 
The Premier said on television last night that there was some suggestion that the Government might be 
going into the apartment business as a province and in response to that the Premier said, and I quote: 
 

That is certainly not our wish if we can get the private sector to co-operate. 
 
But he did say that the Government may have to intervene to keep up with the demand. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would indicate whether there are currently any plans to move into 
apartment ownership by government? You, yourself, implied as much in September of 1975 and 
secondly, the words that the Premier used last night, "If we can get the private sector to co-operate," 
sounded to me like the kind of words that they used with the potash industry and I wonder whether the 
Government is considering buying existing buildings or indeed expropriating as they have with the 
potash industry, or are suggesting that they may be doing that? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
Member’s question, I can only say that, as the Premier said, moving into the construction of rental units 
is an area that is under consideration by the Housing Corporation. It is under consideration based on the 
needs that the province will face. At the present time we would see the industry going flat out so far as 
new units are concerned in the province, both ownership housing and rental units, and we would have to 
see whether there is an indication of slowdown and in what area the slowdown is, before the Housing 
Corporation would consider moving in. And if we do we will certainly announce it in plenty of time for 
the Hon. Member to 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

966 
 

make comments. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I suggest that encouraging the private sector 
involved some questions about the office of the rentalsman; whether the office will operate fairly or in a 
biased manner. Also, I wonder if the Minister could indicate - I noticed the ads about the office of the 
rentalsman - at what stage is the formation of that office? Can you indicate whether anyone has been 
employed and can you indicate the name of the man or woman whom you are considering for the 
position of rentalsman? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I can’t respond to that question. The office of the 
rentalsman, in fact the area of rent controls comes under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs (Mr. Shillington). He has not made any report to me, or to my knowledge to Cabinet, on how he 
is making out. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, it may be then that the response of the Minister is similar to this, 
my second supplementary, or it may be that some other Member of the Cabinet can better answer the 
question. I have been asking questions about allaying the fears of landlords and certainly that has a lot to 
do with the Act. The Government has now won a concession to hold the controls by the Federal 
Government to 18 months, will the Government hold your controls under this legislation, the rent 
control legislation to 18 months? I suggest that in relation to the fact that the Bill was brought in before 
the Federal Government conceded on the 18 month rule. I wonder if the Government will consider the 
18 month provision or potential of it in the Bill? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it is fair to say that rent control was a move which the 
Government moved into reluctantly because of the real difficulties which have been experienced in 
making rent control fair and effective and still promoting vigorous house construction or residential 
construction. We are, accordingly, not necessarily convinced that the provisions of the Bill before us are 
the right ones. We think they are our best effort at the moment but we do not necessarily believe that we 
will not change our minds. We will, accordingly, review the Act from time to time and take the 
representations of the Hon. Member into account. He is correct in saying that there appears to be a 
change in the position of the Federal Government with respect to the duration of their control program. 
That may be a relevant consideration. I am not able to announce any change of policy at this time. Any 
changes will be announced in due course. 
 

Fire at IMC - Esterhazy 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister responsible for 
SGIO, I should direct my question to the Premier. Is the SGIO at risk for the damages done during the 
recent IMC fire at Esterhazy? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sorry I am unable to help the Hon. Member on that. I don’t know whether 
we were on that risk in part or in whole. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

967 
 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, surely someone from the Government side should have some 
information with regard to this in view of the magnitude of the money involved in such a loss. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Certainly, if we were on the whole risk someone would know. If we are in fact 
on that risk and have the great bulk of it reinsured so that it would be a normal risk, we would not know. 
It is not the custom of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office to advise the Cabinet of 
individual losses that are losses in the ordinary course of business. If they are extraordinary losses such 
as those encountered last June in the flash flood that we had in Regina, where the loss involves many, 
many claimants and in total a large sum of money, we were advised rapidly. But I just do not know 
whether the fire at IMC involved any significant loss to the SGIO. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, by way of a supplementary. Will this loss mean another increase in 
SGIO rates to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Reasonably, obviously, if we are not on the risk it won’t. If we are on the risk it 
is unlikely that it will since I suggest it is a risk in the ordinary course of business, since we have not 
heard about it. Accordingly, I would be surprised if this had any greater contribution to changes in rates 
than any number of other losses which SGIO might have incurred. 
 
I think Hon. Members will know that the custom of many insurance companies, including SGIO, is to 
write a risk and to accept the first, say, $75,000 or $100,000 of the risk and to reinsure the entire amount 
of the excess, or 95 per cent of the excess. That is a very common practice. With reinsurance treaties the 
companies in effect trade off risks and this is what SGIO does as does every other fire and general 
insurance company. I would, therefore, be quite surprised even if we were on the IMC risk that the net 
loss after reinsurance to SGIO would be enough materially to affect rates. 
 

Restricting the Size of Farms 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Hon. 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding). It has come to my attention that Mr. Dalgliesh, the Deputy 
Minister, has indicated recently that the Government of Saskatchewan may be looking very seriously at 
restricting the size of farms in Saskatchewan. I should like to ask the Minister of Agriculture if Mr. 
Dalgliesh was speaking on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan when he made these suggestions? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that Mr. Dalgliesh, 
when he is on his own time can make his own statements and this particular statement he made to a 
group he was speaking to. He indicated in that speech that he thought it was a matter of discussion 
which farm organizations should be considering and 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

968 
 

should be giving some thoughts on. That was the sum total of his statement. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, in way of supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I should like to ask the Minister of 
Agriculture, is the Government currently considering legislation to restrict the size of farms in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, No. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — A second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Minister assure us that the 
Provincial Government will not legislate a limit on farm size in Saskatchewan? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this Government or any other can predict what might be 
done in the future. I am sure that if there is a consensus in the country which is strong enough which 
would suggest that it is a good policy for this Government to undertake, I suppose we would be looking 
at it. But we would certainly want to be assured of a large amount of popular support on that kind of an 
issue. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Question on Order Paper 
 
MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, a Point of Privilege. On the 15th sitting day during 
a Question Period the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) asked the Minister of Minister Resources (Mr. 
Whelan) the following question: 
 

Does the Minister have any idea what the total planned expenditure for radio, television and 
newspaper advertising for the Government of Saskatchewan or any related agency or Crown 
corporation for the period of October 1st, 1975 until December 1st, 1975, relating in any way to the 
resources of Saskatchewan? 

 
The Minister requested that this question be put on the Order Paper in written form because it was 
detailed and required a great deal of detail, in his words. He suggested it was not of emergent nature and 
yet last night in Swift Current at a meeting I attended the Minister was asked a very similar question and 
his answer was, approximately $20,000. Why is this information available to public meetings but not to 
this House? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — That was a Question of Privilege was it? I am sorry I thought it was a question. 
 
I believe it was framed as a Question of Privilege. I am not sure whether there is evidence there for a 
prima facia case of privilege. I will take it under advisement and attempt to advise the House later 
whether there is, in fact, a prima facie case. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

969 
 

STATEMENT 
 
Special Payment to Saskatchewan by Federal Government Rising Out of 1974 Energy Conference 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a brief statement to the House 
concerning the status of a special payment to Saskatchewan by the Federal Government arising out of 
the March 1974 Energy Conference. 
 
Members who were in the House last year will recall that part of the Federal-Provincial agreement 
which held the price of crude oil at that time to $6.50 a barrel from March 1, 1974 to July 1, 1975 was a 
commitment by the Federal Government to make a special payment to Saskatchewan. This payment 
would be based on 25 cents for each barrel of oil we produced during the 15 month period. 
 
Last week in the House of Commons, the Finance Minister noted that the amount of $21 million 
provided in the Supplementary Estimates for transfer to Saskatchewan and tabled correspondence 
outlining the agreement between the Prime Minister and myself, concerning the purposes for which this 
special payment will be used. 
 
Essentially we have agreed that this sum or a major portion of it will be used by the province over the 
next five years to make capital improvements to the Saskatchewan portion of the Yellow Head highway 
system. The choice and timing of these capital expenditures will be at the province’s discretion and will 
be undertaken as an integral part of our overall highway program. It is also part of the agreement that 
this payment is incremental to any future federal contribution to the provinces for highway 
improvement. This means, for example, that should the Federal Government decide to make payments 
for the upgrading of the Yellow Head route at a later time in the neighboring provinces, Saskatchewan 
will receive equivalent funds for work already completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that this sum of $21 million will, we are advised, be 
transferred to the province as soon as the Supplementary Estimates have been approved in the House of 
Commons. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, if I may reply to the statement 
made by the Premier. 
 
Did I understand it is 25 cents a barrel for every barrel of oil produced in Saskatchewan during a certain 
period of time? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, a 15 month period. 
 
MR. STEUART: — My first reaction is that I am please we have got this $21 million. I think that it is a 
shame that Bill 42 and the actions of the Government opposite have driven a large segment of the oil 
industry out of Saskatchewan and watched our production actually go down. This $21 million could 
probably have been $10 million to $20 million more had the Government 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

970 
 

acted in a sensible, reasonable, decent way with the oil industry, that is point one. 
 
The question of spending it on highways on the Yellow Head, we favor that. We favor the idea of 
developing that second trans-Canada, the Yellow Head route. However, I think it poses a question, will 
this be taken out of the highway budget? Will the highway budget be reduced by this amount of money. 
Another problem this raises is, when is this Government going to announce an overall plan and the kind 
of money they are going to spend for the development of more energy resources. We have got fantastic 
reserves, I think, as yet unknown in the heavy oil area of Lloydminster. Someone is starting to do some 
research on the possibility of oil tar sands on the Saskatchewan side of the border, up by the Cold Lake 
area. Surely the Government may have some plans but they haven’t produced them yet. Surely the 
Government with these huge sums of money can find more important things to do with them than put in 
on a highway. We have got lots of money for highways, should have lots of money for highways. Surely 
this kind of money, the money in the Energy Fund should not be gambled for potash mines, should not 
be used on highways, but in fact should be used to find more energy resources for the people of this 
province. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
ask the Premier a question. Is this an additional amount that the Premier has negotiated from the Federal 
Government for payment to the Province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think the fair answer to that is ‘No’. During the discussions in May of 1974, 
when the western provinces agreed to a price of $6.50, it was generally felt that that was too little for the 
western provinces and the agreement with the Prime Minister was that in addition to this $6.50 there 
would be an additional 25 cents per barrel expended by the Federal Government on projects in the 
producing provinces. The subsequent negotiations discovered that it was very difficult to work out these 
projects and, therefore, eventually it was decided that the money would be paid over to us. It is the same 
money that was talked about in March and April of 1974. The projects are Federal-Provincial projects. 
The Federal Government is, I think rightly, anxious to underline the fact that they are involved as well as 
the provinces. At the time it was agreed that this money would be used on transportation in western 
Canada, because we in western Canada at that time and still, felt that we had grievances with respect to 
the Federal Government on transportation issues. And that was the arrangement made, for good or ill. 
This is the culmination of it. The material was laid before the House of Commons this week and I felt in 
courtesy to this House that I should make a statement here today. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just make this comment. The Premier has given us these 
amounts of money that have accumulated by this special rate that goes beyond the period after March 
31, 1975 and I wonder, therefore, if we can have this information piecemeal in this way, why we cannot 
have the information as to how much has been accumulated in the Energy 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

971 
 

Development Fund to the end of last month? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not clear whether I can answer the Hon. Member’s question. This $21 
million is the figure that the Federal Government says they will give us. Based upon 25 cents per barrel 
of the oil produced between April 1, 1974 and June 30, 1975. That is the bargain, that was the deal and 
that is the figure. I think it is not directly related to the Energy and Resources Fund although some may 
feel that the Energy and Resources Fund is involved. This payment is quite separate and apart from that. 
It is a federal payment from the Federal Government to the Provincial Government for the reasons I 
have previously outlined. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that 
Bill No. 16 - An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 1973 to now read a second time. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before I 
commence talking about Bill 16, I should like to apologize to the Members of the House if I happen to 
collapse from the flu or if the Members opposite should come over here I will soon clear this Assembly, 
with germs. 
 
To start with I realize that really any comments on this particular Bill puts any politician in a no-win 
situation at this time. It has been labelled by the Press and by others and by Members opposite as rent 
control legislation. Any discussion or criticism of this particular piece of legislation may possibly be 
construed as being in opposition to rent controls. 
 
I realize the difficulty of making comments about this legislation but I should like to emphasize our 
position at the outset. We are totally in favor of, as part of the wage and price control legislation from 
Ottawa, rent control legislation in the Province of Saskatchewan. Furthermore, we do not necessarily 
agree with the Members to our right when they say to be coupled with this legislation must be other 
moves in terms of inflation. Because we feel the Government of Saskatchewan has to start somewhere. 
We are pleased to see that the Government of Saskatchewan has taken a start and has taken the first step, 
if you want, in this fight against inflation. 
 
I should like to emphasize here and now, that the Government of Saskatchewan would be very 
short-sighted if it implemented this particular legislation without controlling their own spending, without 
controlling those wages and prices that are under the provincial jurisdiction. And without controlling 
professional fees and other areas of necessary controls that fall within the provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Our greatest concern here is that it seems that party lines or politics seem to be entering into this 
particular piece of 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

972 
 

legislation. It seems that the Members opposite are taking one side firmly and the Members to the right 
seem to be taking the other side very firmly. We would like to see . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Tell us what your position is. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, perhaps if you wait you might get to find out what our position is. I think 
when the Member is on his feet, Mr. Attorney General, he is not catcalling; it is the guy opposite that is 
catcalling. Perhaps that is not true, perhaps that is unfair. 
 
On the other hand I think it would be incumbent upon us as legislators of all political parties to create 
the best possible situation for the Province of Saskatchewan. We do not believe that this Bill as written 
does so, and I was most pleased to hear the Premier comment today that the mind of the Government of 
Saskatchewan is open to suggestions. And it is open to change. 
 
We have three major areas of concern in this particular legislation. One, is the permanence of the 
legislation. The second is that there is no protection in this legislation against landlord bankruptcy. The 
third is that it further enhances the power of the executive and takes away the right of appeal to the 
courts. 
 
We realize and we agree that if you are going to introduce any kind of control legislation that it is 
necessary to obtain the services of some people to implement and administer that particular piece of 
control legislation. We recognize that the Government has done so with its rentalsman and with its rental 
commission. But we cannot understand why the Government of Saskatchewan has withdrawn the rights 
of Saskatchewan citizens to appeal the decisions of that rental appeal commission to the courts and to 
the judiciary. I will have more to say on that in a moment. 
 
In discussing the permanence of rental control legislation, as to whether it should be permanent or 
temporary, I remind the Members opposite that the Minister responsible for this legislation himself said 
that controls are only a short-term solution at best. 
 
What kind of a short-term solution? A bit of information that perhaps the Members opposite are not 
aware of is that controls, permanent rent controls were introduced in Great Britain in 1915 as a 
temporary measure and they have been reintroduced every single year since that time. The standard and 
quality of housing in Great Britain is nothing and pales in comparison to the standard and quality of 
housing in Canada. The standard and quality of housing in Great Britain with permanent rent controls 
since 1915 has rapidly deteriorated. 
 
The rental accommodation in Great Britain has never been allowed to reach fair market value. And 
investment in rental accommodation has been extremely scarce. 
 
Some governments see permanent controls as a cheap way of appearing to do something about poverty 
and housing without imposing additional taxation. This, I think, makes sense only 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

973 
 

if government behavior is construed in terms of maximizing voting support, much in the same way that 
private entrepreneurs maximize profits. Might not the politician who attempts to maximize votes be 
accused of the same kind of behavior? 
 
The Federal Government imposed rental controls during the Second World War and by 1947 they began 
to reduce their role in regulating rents. By 1950 the government decided to terminate its role in 
regulating rentals and is no longer in this particular area. 
 
We are concerned that permanent rent controls will create permanent slums, a la New York, a la 
London. No amount of legislation, no amount of rules and regulations in the Bill can possibly determine 
wear and tear on carpets, can possibly determine the state or extent of wear and tear on refrigerators or 
stoves, or wear and tear on walls, on whether the hinges work properly or don’t work properly. No 
matter how you write the legislation to try and force the landlord or the property owner into a situation 
where he must keep his building up, that property owner will find ways if you have not protected him 
from bankruptcy and from losing money, that landlord will find ways to reduce the service in that 
building. And accordingly create the situation in which the tenants themselves are shortchanged to say 
the least, because of the requirement for governments to be involved in the political arena and to capture 
votes. I should like to cite the example of British Columbia and their particular experience in the last 
two or three years with attempting to get out of permanent rent controls. 
 
Here is an area where I think we should be terribly concerned. The British Columbia government 
implemented legislation very similar to this particular Bill and after they had introduced the legislation 
and enacted it, they asked the Cragg Commission to report to them on what were the effects of the Bill 
and what did they recommend in terms of increases. I won’t bore this Assembly with more statistics than 
enough, but needless to say the lowest rate of increase that the Cragg Commission recommended to the 
Government of the Province of British Columbia, was in the neighborhood of 16 per cent. That was the 
lowest and they said that that was absolutely essential to meet the costs of the landlords in British 
Columbia. The British Columbia Government decided to go on an across-the-board increase of 10.6 per 
cent because it (the former) wasn’t popular and because they couldn’t possibly get it over to the people 
that they should go higher than that level. 
 
If we are dependent on our livelihood, if you want, for votes and we get into permanent rent controls, in 
our view we are going to face a situation in which we’ll never get out. We’ll be locked into them 
forever. Any place in the world where they have been tried, quite frankly they have been unsuccessful in 
providing a high standard of accommodation for anyone and they have added to the burdens and to the 
problems of the creation of slums. 
 
Now, I can understand why the Government of Saskatchewan and the Minister suggested that single 
units be left out of this legislation, because quite frankly, I agree here with the Government that to police 
such a controlled program on single units would require an army of bureaucrats which the Government 
should not be attempting to hire during this period of inflation, because after all the control legislation 
that we’re introducing 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

974 
 

for rents surely, surely is to fight inflation. That’s the job of the rental control legislation. To fight 
inflation in conjunction with wage and price controls that have been implemented by the Federal 
Government. Surely that’s the reason for it and no other. Surely that’s the reason for interference with a 
reasonable rent for a reasonable product. 
 
I think the Government should be stringent and very clear in its statements to the public and to the 
Province of Saskatchewan, that the rentalsman or anyone else responsible for the administration of the 
Act should make it clear that those landlords who own single family dwellings or single units are 
expected to comply with the spirit of the legislation and make it clear that those landlords, if significant 
reports are received by the rentalsman that these landlords are not complying with the legislation that the 
rentalsman will take action in this area. I think if it’s made very clear to these people that they are 
expected to comply with the spirit of the legislation, I think the vast majority of them will do so. 
 
The second major area of our concern is that unfortunately we see no protection in this legislation 
against the bankruptcy of Saskatchewan property owners. I don’t honestly believe that it is the intention 
of the Members opposite to bankrupt Saskatchewan citizens. Now these are not your everyday average, 
normal, multinational corporations that you are fighting here. These are people, these are individual 
citizens in Saskatchewan who maybe had a farm and sold the farm and wanted an investment and 
invested in an eight-suiter or a twelve-suiter or a sixteen-suiter. These are individual citizens that are 
threatened by this legislation with bankruptcy. Furthermore, I don’t think the tenants of this province 
would accept government regulations to bankrupt their landlords. 
 
In that regard I’d like to quote from Mr. Wes Robbins, the Minister for Consumer Affairs in an article in 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
 

The high cost of borrowing money is one of the major villains behind the escalation in residential rents 
in Saskatchewan, Consumer Affairs Minister Wes Robbins said Tuesday. He said, there is little the 
Provincial Government can do to counter that and in fact it would have to pay the same high interest 
rates it was borrowing money to get into the apartment building business, a role some critics have 
suggested. Until the Federal Government does something about the high cost of money this situation 
will continue, he said. 

 
And he went on further to say: 
 

He does not think government construction of apartment accommodation would have much effect in 
lowering the costs of renting, since the Government would have to pay the same interest on the money 
used to finance the building, as any private developer. 

 
I would appreciate, Mr. Speaker, if the Members would hold their applause until I’m finished. 
 
I don’t believe that the Members opposite quite realize what’s necessary in the construction of an 
apartment building or in the obtainance of an apartment building. The prime costs 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

975 
 

of operating apartment accommodation, the prime costs are interest, property taxes and maintenance. 
And maintenance to a far less extent than interest and property taxes. I’m sorry I left out a very key one 
and that’s utilities. Interest, plus property taxes, plus utilities would represent between 80 and 90 per 
cent of the rent paid by individual tenants in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government themselves say that they must increase rates for SGIO, for Sask Power, for Sask Tel, 
that they must increase these rates to accommodate increased costs. These rate increases in SGIO, Sask 
Power and to a lesser extent Sask Tel are to a very large extent responsible for the increase in the costs 
of rental accommodation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Would the Government suggest, would they suggest that somehow the property owner can afford to 
meet the payments to SGIO, to Sask Power, for the property taxes and for their mortgage payments from 
rentals that were too low in December of 1974? Would they suggest that even with a 10 per cent 
increase in rentals that some landlords, and I’m not talking about all landlords, but some landlords who 
have been terribly responsible and have not gouged their rents up significantly in the last six months to a 
year, would they suggest that they should somehow have to dip into their pockets to meet these 
increased expenses? I hope not, and I don’t think so. 
 
I’d like to read to this Assembly a letter which I have received from a Saskatchewan citizen, not a 
corporate citizen, but an individual. I am not prepared to table this document since this person does not 
wish her name known, but I am prepared to take responsibility for its contents. And she says: 
 

I hope that the Government realizes that they will more than likely break a few landlords, myself 
included, if they don’t make certain provisions in the legislation. We purchased a building in July of 
this year and before we could get mortgage approval, the old mortgage was so low we could not 
assume it, we had to agree to certain conditions that the Trust Company stipulated. One of them was 
raising the rents and it was a substantial increase from $125 to $175. The reason for it was to support 
the mortgage payments, expenses and a suitable return on our investment. The building has been sold 
and if the rents were rolled back the people who purchase the building will have no choice but to 
default on their payments and the Trust Company will start foreclosure proceedings. You can be 
assured that the mortgage company would rather have their mortgage payments than a building on 
their hands that nobody wants to buy because it’s a poor investment. 

 
Foreclosure is just one of the possibilities. They could get us involved in a dispute and we in turn 
could involve the previous owner in a dispute. Who will reimburse me for the legal fees charged for 
the purchase of the building, painting and carpeting as well as numerous other expenses? 

 
And she goes on to say as follows, as for the comment made by the Minister for Consumer Affairs: 
 

That the exemption of new buildings for five years is to encourage construction, well it’s just 
ridiculous. 

 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

976 
 

The cost of a one bedroom suite in a new building is around $17,000 and a two bedroom can cost 
anywhere from $18,000 to $19,000. There are several new blocks at present who are charging 
anywhere from $230 to $250 for a one bedroom suite and they are having difficulty in finding tenants 
to rent them. The truth of the matter is that nobody can afford to build a new apartment block anymore 
because costs are so high. If you can find the financial resources to build your rents are so high that the 
suites are unrented. 

 
These landlords or these property owners in Saskatchewan have got a legitimate concern about whether 
or not this legislation is going to be implemented so as to give them no protection whatsoever against 
having to dip in their pockets to meet their expenses. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What about . . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’ll get to that in a moment, Mr. Romanow, excuse, me, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
In conclusion in that area, surely the reason for this legislation is to be fair as suggested by the 
Government. Surely the reason for the legislation is to temporarily control rents as they are going to, as 
they have suggested that the Federal Government temporarily control all other prices and wages in 
Canada. If that’s true, surely it’s not the Government’s intention to bankrupt landlords. 
 
The third area of our concern and perhaps our largest concern is that this legislation exempts citizens of 
Saskatchewan, both tenants and landlords, from the judicial process. Our greatest concern in that area is 
how can the Government of Saskatchewan take away and reduce and diminish both of the other 
branches of government, that is the Legislative Branch and the Judicial Branch, to the ever-increasing 
power of the Executive Branch? The only difference in that kind of society between an all-powerful 
executive and a dictatorship, is name. Unless the other two branches of government, both the Legislative 
and the Judicial have sufficient powers to counterbalance executive powers, there can be no doubt that 
that society is not a free society. 
 
Now the reasons used for eliminating the courts from this process as it pertains to rental accommodation 
is that the tenants don’t seem to like the courts, they can’t afford them, they are too expensive, they have 
to go to lawyers and they have to go through red tape and it scares poor people away. 
 
Well, using that same logic then, you would undoubtedly remove the right of appeal to the courts under 
The Credit Society Act, because the Credit Society and the Credit Unions in the Province of 
Saskatchewan certainly have occasion to use the courts with their members. You would use that same 
logic as it relates to co-operatives in the province. That a citizen who happens to be a member of a 
co-operative would not have the right to go to the courts in a dispute with the co-operative because it is 
too expensive, because there’s too much red tape, because it scares people away. 
 
Now we agree, and I think the questions I had of the 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

977 
 

Attorney General as it pertained to the judicial system and the question from one of the Members, the 
Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) related to the upgrading of the judicial system, to make it 
more modern, to bring it into the twentieth century, to get it away from the process that the Attorney 
General described himself as one with quill pen. 
 
We hope and we had some encouragement from the Attorney General that he was going to work in this 
regard. 
 
But if this judicial process is upgraded and if it’s brought into the twentieth century, surely we must 
have a judicial system that is capable of answering the disputes as between the citizens and 
organizations of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
No one is objecting to the creation of a rentalsman for the purpose of implementing the controls. No one 
is even objecting to the creation of a rental appeal commission for purposes of implementing the 
controls, but surely an appeal should be allowed to the judicial process by those citizens who are not 
happy and who are concerned with the decisions of the rentalsman and the rental appeal commission. 
 
And furthermore, if you are so worried about the fact that poor people don’t want to go because of red 
tape and that it scares them away, why did we create legal aid? We created legal aid so that poor people 
and people without resources would have access to legal help. Therefore, allowing them access to the 
judicial process. To take away the right of the citizen of Saskatchewan for an appeal to the judiciary is 
quite simply a denial of their democratic rights as free citizens of the country. 
 
To continuously increase the power of the executive to the detriment of the legislative and judicial 
branches of government is to lead us towards a situation in which this country will be a dictatorship and 
this province will be a dictatorship with no difference than in name only. 
 
I sincerely hope that the Members opposite will allow changes in this legislation to allow this kind of 
thing to develop the furtherance of appeals beyond the rental appeal commission, if no other reason than 
to convince the people of the Province of Saskatchewan that this Government opposite and the Members 
opposite are not out to control the every day destiny of everybody’s life through the executive branch of 
government. 
 
I believe that what the Attorney General is suggesting in his catcall is that two wrongs make a right. 
Perhaps an improvement in the judicial system, rather than a quasi judicial system might be in order in 
this regard. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Lawyers only judge the law. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — What other law would they possibly not take into account but the right of an 
individual to his home and to quiet enjoyment of his property, and to his house, and to his apartment? 
What more right would the Attorney General suggest should be looked after by lawyers than the very 
right of the place where they live? 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

978 
 

MR. MERCHANT: — Clean up the judiciary! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — The catcall from the Member behind me reminds me of the catcall he made the 
other evening to say that the only reason that we are here, and the prime reason that we are here as 
legislators is to see that money is well spent. I would suggest to the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. 
Merchant) that we are here for a lot more reason than that, and probably more important ones at that and 
that’s to protect the rights of individual citizens of this province. 
 
Now those are the three major areas of our concern; the permanence of the controls, the loss of right of 
appeal to the courts and the failure of the legislation to protect the landlord from bankruptcy. 
 
I shall be proposing some amendments or some suggested amendments that the Government might 
consider in that regard. 
 
One of the implications and the long-term implications of this particular piece of legislation is that it 
does away with the rights of private property, almost totally. As a matter of fact, does away with the 
rights of private property totally as it relates to rented accommodation. 
 
Now what are the rights of private property? Well first, exclusive possession and quiet enjoyment. But 
the landlord gives that up the moment he rents his accommodation. Second, to decide what kind of a 
building he shall develop on his property and to decide what use he will make of his land, but the 
landlord and property owner has given that right up justifiably so, to planning commissions and zoning 
commissions, and that right is no longer the private property owner’s. To decide on what kind of a 
tenant they will have, old or young, male or female, and so on, and that right has been given up 
justifiably so to the Human Rights Commission so that discrimination shall not occur. To decide on the 
level of service, in other words, they charge a low price and give low service. Under this piece of 
legislation that right has been given up. To decide on whether to obtain rental accommodation as an 
investment, as a hedge against inflation. This piece of legislation and all control legislation ends that 
right. And lastly, the right to sell. But if all of the other rights to private property are given up, surely 
there will be no buyers and, therefore, he has given up that right as well. He no longer has the right to 
sell. 
 
If that happens, it is our judgment that no one, if all the rights to private property are given up, that no 
one will be desirous of obtaining private property as it relates to rental accommodation. In other words, 
they can no longer get a hedge against inflation, their rate of return is limited. We agree with a limitation 
of the rate of return for a short period of time, but not in the long run. 
 
If they don’t have the choice as to level of service they will just quite frankly stay out of the business. 
 
What’s the alternative to private property? Well, it’s government housing or government subsidized 
housing. And that’s 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

979 
 

it, really. That’s all there is. Government housing, or government subsidized housing. 
 
How many Members in this Assembly have ever lived in government subsidized housing? Probably 
none. Well, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I have lived in government subsidized housing. I have; when 
we first got married, we lived in low-rental housing in Edmonton, Alberta. Let me describe to you some 
of the problems with government housing and government subsidized housing. 
 
There’s a sameness about government housing that is created out of necessity, it’s created because it’s 
housing created by a committee, not by an individual. There’s a sameness about government housing, or 
government subsidized housing that is brought about because politicians have to be involved in it 
because we are here to protect the public first, amongst other tings. There’s a sameness about 
government housing that is really inhuman and inhumane. Through necessity government housing and 
government subsidized housing develops an officialdom about it, a lack of concern because they’re 
government employees, and because they are related directly to government employees, an officialdom 
that doesn’t relate to a person’s individual needs and tastes in terms of his accommodation. There’s a red 
tape that develops about government housing and government subsidized housing. In other words, there 
is a feeling that develops and has developed in every jurisdiction in the world where government 
housing and government subsidized housing has increasingly grown to the detriment of private housing, 
and that is that it is dehumanized. That it’s dehumanized. Can we not learn from the experience of 
others, can we not learn from the experience of areas like New York, or like London and other areas? I 
sincerely hope we can. 
 
We realize the urgent necessity for strong action in the fight against inflation. We realize that it’s 
necessary to pass this Bill quickly and to pass it now. To get something going in the fight against 
inflation. We wouldn’t have perhaps created the legislation the way the present government did; we 
wouldn’t perhaps have introduced the legislation the way it did, and we perhaps wouldn’t have created 
the atmosphere of mistrust as is presently developing in our province. Perhaps. Well perhaps a 
temporary rent control bill, and perhaps a realization that the increased housing prices in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan are temporary. This is a temporary situation, not a permanent situation. Then what are we 
doing about looking for temporary solutions? What are we doing to help mobile home development? 
What are we doing to help local communities develop mobile home parks for housing that only lasts five 
to ten years? No, we are getting into the business of going into long-term housing solutions to solve a 
short-term housing crisis. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Who said? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, it appears that way, it certainly appears that way to many. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It’s limited to 18 months. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well why not limit the Bill to 18 months then? Why not? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It is. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

980 
 

MR. COLLVER: — No, it isn’t. The permanent controls in that Bill are maintained, it is only the 
number that you have filled in for 18 months, but the rentalsman has the power to control rents at his 
discretion from then on. 
 
HON. G. T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, it might be efficacious for you to direct 
the Member to have him direct his remarks to you, rather than to other Members on this side of the 
House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think that is a Point of Order in fact, and I think when he is making a Point of 
Order, the Member should sit down. I would ask the Member to direct his comments to the Chair. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, there is a lack of understanding on how to relate to 
catcalls, I guess. 
 
We would suggest, therefore, that the Government of Saskatchewan seriously consider amending Bill 16 
in the following fashion: First of all, that the Government allow an appeal from the rent commission to 
the judicial process and to the courts, so that the citizens’ rights in Saskatchewan can be protected, and 
so that they can feel that the rentalsman and the rental commission are totally fair, and if they are not, at 
least they have an avenue through the judicial system. We would further suggest that the Government of 
Saskatchewan amend this legislation with a clause something like this one - not to go back to previous 
months, or to develop a different period of time, because whatever month you pick (as suggested by the 
Members on my right, to go back three or four months), whatever month you pick to establish as your 
base rent month, you are going to have inequities develop. Everyone knows that. But why not an 
overriding clause in the legislation something like this: 
 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the landlord does not, by virtue of the permitted 
rent increase under this Act, realize a return of 12 to 14 per cent on his capital investment, which terms 
shall be defined by regulation, but shall include previous losses realized on the property, together with 
his cost of operation including his mortgage payments, he may increase the rental prorata among the 
tenants on the demise premises to such an extent that would permit him to realize such a rate of return. 

 
Well, the reason, Mr. Speaker, I noticed a Member asking why 12 to 14 per cent - the Minister 
suggested during a radio open line show, that he anticipated that landlords should earn somewhere 
between 12 and 20 per cent on their investment. We are picking the low rung on that investment so as to 
make most meaningful the control program, and to bring this legislation within a reasonable rate so that 
the landlord can be protected against loss of money. No one suggests that he should rip off the 
community, but one does suggest that he might be prepared and be able to make something. 
 
And further, and third, that the Government consider amending the legislation to limit the time limit on 
controls to 18 months, from the date of assent. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

981 
 

MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to speak at any 
length today on this particular Bill. I merely enter the debate for a very few minutes to indicate to the 
Government and to Members on both sides of the House that we have several Members on this side 
within the Opposition, the official Opposition, who have had only an opportunity of a day or two to 
assess the Bill and its implications, to talk to their constituents, and it is their intention to propose some 
very specific amendments. With the intention of trying to cover some of the concerns that the Member 
for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) and the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. Collver) have indicated, are 
genuine concerns, not only of Members of the Legislature, but of the members of the Province of 
Saskatchewan, the general public, and in particular, to ensure that this piece of legislation does not kill 
the goose that lays the golden egg. That it does not destroy the very incentives to solve the problem of 
high rents in the Province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . by destroying the urge of people who will construct and build and provide 
that kind of accommodation in the future. 
 
I have already talked to two different landlords who are in the process today of planning rental 
accommodation in the Province of Saskatchewan, and are now transferring it into the condominium 
concept. And for one very specific reason, because in the condominium concept they can get a return for 
the investment, but if this Bill without a time limit on, is imposed, they may well never get a decent 
return on their investment. 
 
I also want to tell the Government that it is our hope that if they will improve this legislation, and 
withdraw some of the very specific weaknesses that have been pointed out by both parties of the 
Opposition, that we would like to support this Bill, because it is a first concrete step by this Government 
in the fight against inflation. I want to suggest, and I hope it’s only the first, because it is about time that 
we began to see some definite steps by the Government opposite to control the dramatic rise and the 
increased costs of Crown corporation services in Saskatchewan. Some specific actual steps to control 
wages and incomes. We want the NDP to face the responsibilities in Saskatchewan, and how often do 
they turn and point their finger at the Federal Government, yet in the province of Alberta that particular 
government has introduced legislation which has very specific goals and aims to contribute to the fight 
against inflation. 
 
I also want to comment on the Bill itself and suggest to all Members of the House and to the public that 
there is no question that if we want to talk about controlling inflation in Canada and in Saskatchewan, 
there are three areas that we must zero in on: 
 

(i) is energy costs - and we may have very little possibility of controlling energy costs, partly because 
of the narrow attitude of that Government in relation to energy development in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada; 
(ii) is in relation to food, and particularly those grown at a domestic level; 
(iii) is rent and construction. 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

982 
 

Mr. Speaker, I do hope that this Bill will not defeat the very intention of the legislation itself, and that, of 
course, is that by attempting to solve one problem they have created one that is far bigger, that, like an 
octopus, will reach out and cause serious problems in the years ahead, that will now not be able to be 
foreseen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, what really concerns me is that it appears to me that the very 
design of this legislation is to keep pace with the philosophy of the NDP and that is for them to get into 
the construction industry, to get into another business . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . to once again invade the realm of private investment and a chance for them 
to go into the development of rental accommodation, even if it does cost those people in the low income 
groups in Saskatchewan years of high rent because of the fact that they will drive out the private sector. 
 
I want to reiterate once again, the fact that the greatest tragedy and weakness of this Bill, is the fact that 
it does not have a time limit. Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek), I 
have listened to the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) stand up and say the one weakness in the federal 
anti-inflation program is that it is for a three-year period, it should only last one year, or 18 months at a 
maximum, and yet this particular Bill puts no time limit, and you and I know that when you impose 
something in Saskatchewan or any governmental process anywhere in the world, it is very difficult to 
retrace that step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill should be to supplement the anti-inflation program, not to establish 
rent controls. Rent controls should be a part of the anti-inflation program, should not in itself be a 
program specifically designed to do one specific task. Mr. Speaker, rent controls have never been 
successful anywhere. The Member for Wascana, the Member for Nipawin, both have indicated the 
disastrous results and impact of rent controls around the world. Any of you who have ever been to the 
Bowery or the Bronx in New York, and driven down to see the tragic state of accommodation in that 
city, or any other city where rent controls have been imposed, will recognize exactly the dangers of not 
placing a limit on this particular Bill. 
 
I also want to hope that this particular Bill, with its ten per cent and its retroactivity, that somewhere 
along the line the Government has had the foresight to determine whether or not ten per cent is a 
legitimate level. I only have to point to the Mayor of Regina and talk about the increased taxes, 
increased water, power and light, from the Provincial Government, the city of Regina has increased its 
taxes and services beyond any city, perhaps in the Dominion of Canada in the past year. I am not sure, 
Mr. Speaker, whether ten per cent is an adequate level. There is one specific danger also of this 
particular legislation, that when we start to talk about the ten per cent, already planning has stopped in a 
large number of areas. Everyone recognizes the lead time that is required for the development of a 
project, 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

983 
 

particularly of a rental project, an apartment or a multi-dwelling. You and I know that sometimes those 
kinds of projects take two and three years to develop and put together, to gather the finances to develop 
the architectural drawings, to obtain the land, and most important of all, to obtain the finances. Right 
now, planning has stopped in the Province of Saskatchewan until this Government indicates whether or 
not they will put a time-frame on this legislation. Mr. Speaker, why has the retroactivity been included? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal more to say on this particular Bill, as do Members on this side of the 
House, we have several amendments, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 1 - An Act Respecting the Development of Potash Resources in Saskatchewan - be now read a 
second time and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Cameron. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, as I enter this debate, I should like 
to state very clearly the attitude of the Liberal Caucus and the Liberal Opposition, our attitude on Bill 1, 
and in fact Bill 2. 
 
We are Members of the Opposition, and our job surely, is to oppose the Government when we think they 
are wrong . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — . . . to suggest alternatives to policies and Bills that they bring forward. And, 
maybe even more important, to be the watchdog on behalf of the public, watchdogs against the abuse of 
power by the Government, against the limiting of freedom of individuals, of groups of individuals in our 
province and they are doing that. We are here to protect the rights of individuals, whether those 
individuals are formed in unions, or together in corporations, and we intend to fulfil our responsibility of 
the Opposition, if the Government is not prepared to fulfil their responsibility. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We oppose these bills philosophically, we oppose them morally, we think they are 
wrong from almost every angle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We have made some small headway; the Premier has finally given us some rather 
vague outside limits as to how much money they are going to take or borrow or use as the first step in 
taking over all, or part, of the potash industry. 
 
Of course, we can’t be satisfied with the vague commitment he gave informally to this House and 
outside the House; that of somewhere between $500 million and $1 billion. C. D. Howe got 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

984 
 

run out of office eventually for saying, "what’s a million"; the Premier in effect is saying, "what’s $500 
million". Now he has given us half a promise, that he will be more specific at a later time in this debate. 
I presume he is talking about in committee, we hope that not only will he be more specific, but they will 
follow the law of this land and put that specific amount in Bill 2. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — There are a great many more questions we want answered about these Bills, there 
are a great many more things we want done with these Bills. First, we should like the Government to 
reconsider, stop and go back, and negotiate with the potash industry and not go down this road. If we fail 
in our attempts to do that, then of course we are going to propose amendments to try and make the Bills 
more equitable or reasonable and take out some of the risk. 
 
We don’t intend, Mr. Speaker, to play politics with this Bill looking two or three or four years down the 
road towards some election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — If we start in this House as MLAs on either side at this stage of the game, within 
five months of one election, and likely four and a half or longer from another election, start judging 
every action of the Government in saying, shall we back down, shall we go under cover, shall we let this 
slip through because we might be able to use it as a club in the next election? Then, I say we are failing 
in our responsibility as MLAs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The job of MLAs, if they happen to be on the Government side, is to govern the 
province. That’s their job. The job of the people who end up in the Opposition is to face their 
responsibility and fight each action of the Government if they don’t agree with it. If they agree with it, 
their responsibility is to vote with the Government and move the legislation along as quickly as possible. 
Above all, their job is to suggest amendments and to try and make Bills, Acts or policies better and 
fairer and less discriminatory on behalf of the people who we were all elected to represent. That’s our 
responsibility and we in the Liberal Opposition intend to fulfil it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We don’t intend to drag out unnecessarily long debate on either of these Bills. Our 
speeches will be - they may be long; they will, I hope, be relevant. 
 
MR. LARSON: — Long and empty! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well, coming from that member over there, Mr. Speaker, with the head he has, he 
should know about empty, I can tell you that! 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

985 
 

Mr. Speaker, speaking on Bill 1, I should like to remind the Government once again, of the history of 
the potash development in this province. I do that because they seem to have forgotten the great risks 
that were involved in getting that potash, 4,000 or 5,000 feet down beneath the surface of the earth, 
getting it up and making this viable industry. They seem to have forgotten the joy, the happiness, and the 
great optimism, that great wave of optimism that went across this province in the mid-1950s when the 
Potash Company of America finally stated that they had a viable mine and they would be mining potash. 
 
We have known for some time the rough outlines of the potash reserves in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. We received that information as sort of an added value or a secondary value to the great 
search for oil that went down in this province; almost everywhere that they have drilled for oil they 
came up with potash, at varying levels anywhere from 3,500 feet to 7,000 or 8,000 feet down. So we 
know we had a fantastic resource here, but to turn that potential resource into jobs, into revenue, into 
development. 
 
I can well remember the picture of Tommy Douglas in the Star-Phoenix with a miner’s helmet on, when 
they had the official picture that they had finally solved the problem of the flooding of that shaft, and 
they were beginning to take ore to the surface. He spoke on behalf of all of the people of this province, 
when he said how happy he was, how thrilled he was, and what a great future this held for the people of 
Saskatchewan; that at long last we would be able to get off a sort of a single economy based on the back 
of agriculture and start to look forward to becoming a "have" province. That was in the 1950s. 
 
As we all know, to encourage those people in this great risk, the Premier of this province, speaking on 
behalf of the people of this province, gave a commitment, two commitments; one, they didn’t have to 
worry about nationalization, because it was a socialist government and people were worried. The people 
were all aware of the Regina Manifesto that had not, at that time, been taken off the books and replaced 
now with the Manifesto which literally set up the NDP. That Manifesto said no CCF Government would 
rest content until they had eradicated capitalism and taken over government operation, the means of 
production, and the distribution of all the wealth in this province. That was there, these investors were 
worried. So, Mr. Douglas gave a commitment. 
 
Sure, what the Government opposite is doing is saying, we don’t care what commitment anyone else 
makes, we are prepared, and they have showed it time and time again, to act as if we were the first 
Government of Saskatchewan and the only Government of Saskatchewan; we will break commitments, 
we’ll tear up contracts, we’ll smash leases, we’ll break the solemn word given by any government at any 
time, if it suits our purpose. That’s what they are engaged in today, and it is morally wrong, and they 
stand condemned in the eyes of the people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt if anyone could have put it better than the Member for 
Regina South (Mr. Cameron) when he said that government is asking all the people in this Legislative 
Assembly, the Members on that side and the Members on this side, 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

986 
 

all those who support this Bill, to do something as a group, to do something as MLAs that we would not 
consider as individuals, to break our word, to act in a most unfair manner, in a most arrogant and a 
dictatorial manner. Surely as individuals, we wouldn’t act that way. Then what right do they have to 
subject us and ask us to do that together, in the name of a government, to do the very thing that we 
would abhor as individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the Potash Company of America was successful and the giant IMC mine followed, 
then the rest of the potash industry as we know it now, came into Saskatchewan. Shortly after that, as we 
all know, came the slump, overproduction, markets fell, and we had too much production, too many 
mines coming on-stream too quickly. 
 
It is rather interesting to remember some of the speeches made by the Members opposite, talking about 
terrible planning and the future of the potash industry wasn’t nearly as bright as these private 
entrepreneurs of the Liberal Government of that day had painted. In fact, we were taken to task very 
severely by the Members opposite when they sat on this side of the House, for even allowing some of 
these potash mines to come into Saskatchewan at that time. However, in an effort to save the potash 
industry, we put in prorationing and we put in a floor price. The one that hasn’t been mentioned in this 
debate, has been the talk of the need for prorationing to save the mines, there had been the talk from the 
opposition at that time for much of the potash industry. I want to remind the House that we were faced at 
that time in Saskatchewan, with a real and serious threat by the Federal Government of the United States 
of America, in placing an embargo against the potash coming in from Saskatchewan, led by the 
Governor of New Mexico and two Senators from New Mexico. There had been a fight carried into the 
Congress of the United States and the Senate of the United States, accusing the Saskatchewan producers 
of potash, of dumping potash on a depressed market at below market prices in the United States. That 
was the urgency for the action we took in prorationing and in a floor price. Had that anti-dumping 
legislation been put through, and it was real, it couldn’t wait for action from Ottawa or for action from 
anywhere else. Had that happened, we would have had a virtual disaster. There would have been three or 
four mines closed up, at least, and I don’t know whether we would have ever got them back in action 
again, serious unemployment, and a real blow to the economy of our province at that time. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that that threat still exists. The concern of the Government of the 
United States is still real. Right now, in Chicago, there has been a grand jury set up that is meeting right 
at this time, and they are attempting to prove, and they are looking into the question of the prorationing 
put in back in the 1960s by the then Liberal Government and the possible connivance of the potash 
industry in the prorationing and in the floor price. If they can find evidence that, in fact, all or a part of 
the potash industry connived separately or together with the Government of Saskatchewan in a restraint 
of trade, or in putting the price of potash artificially high, then I presume there could be indictments 
against the potash industry, some of whom are located in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that that charge is not true. The potash industry, to my knowledge, and I was the Deputy 
Premier at that time, and I attended many of those meetings, the potash industry did not connive, the 
potash industry - a great many of them were 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

987 
 

reluctant - it was we, the Government of Saskatchewan, that took that action and forced it on the potash 
industry, and we did it not for their benefit, we did it for the benefit of the people of this province. It was 
a sound move, and a good move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — As a matter of fact, I well remember Premier Thatcher ordering at least two heads 
of two potash industries to stay in the room, they came in the Cabinet room, and when they saw the 
general managers or the chairmen of the boards of six or seven other potash mines there, they stood and 
got up to walk out. When asked why, they said, we could get caught in anti-trust legislation in the 
United States of America, and we are not staying at this meeting. The Premier told them in no uncertain 
terms, you are in Canada now, and you are under our laws. He told them, if you walk out of this 
meeting, you might save yourself some trouble in the United States but you are putting yourselves in a 
great deal of jeopardy here. The reason he was able to make that floor price stick, and the prorationing 
stick, is he informed them very clearly that if they didn’t co-operate, they might have difficulty taking 
up any ore from the mines. That is one power that the Government of Saskatchewan has, they can say 
who can, or when they can, or if they can, take up ore from under the surface of the ground here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The result was that the prorationing worked and the floor price worked. I think the point we must be 
concerned about today is that we cannot be sure, we cannot be positive, that the action that the 
Government is taking, will not be taken up by the Government in Washington, and will not affect the 
short-term and the long-term markets that we now hold in the United States of America; 70 per cent of 
our potash production actually, vitally important to the future of this industry in the U.S.A. 
 
I say to the Government opposite, they cannot take for granted, the reaction of the government in the 
United States. In 1971, the NDP were elected and they tightened the prorationing, and they immediately 
began a program of harassing the industry. They were taken to court and they lost. In spite of that, they 
carried on, and they put on tax after tax, regulation after regulation. Finally they put on the reserves tax, 
taking away a fantastic amount, over 80 per cent of the pre-tax profits of this industry; making them the 
highest-taxed industry anywhere in Canada. 
 
Why did they do that? Well, I think people wondered at the time. They knew that the Members opposite 
were not the most experienced businessmen in the world, they knew from their actions with the oil 
industry that they suffered from short-term greed, they knew that the basic philosophy of the NDP was 
to mistrust, and at times, even hate people involved in business and industry, especially if they were 
large and successful and more especially if they happened to come from somewhere outside the borders 
of this country. 
 
But, even when you take all those facts into consideration, it still didn’t answer the question of why the 
Government was taking this action. Why have they singled out this industry? To harass and to subject to 
abuse, abuse through regulation, abuse through legislation and through taxation, and above all, abuse in 
speech after speech led by the Premier and other so-called responsible Ministers of the Crown. They 
were setting 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

988 
 

the stage, as we all know now, to do what they wanted to do from the beginning, to take over the potash 
industry. And we say, and I think with some degree of justification, that they did not bring this forward 
in the last election. They did not make this an issue in the last election. Had they said exactly what they 
intended to do, as they’ve said so clearly in this Bill, I don’t know if they would be sitting there now or 
not. Certainly, their numbers would have been greatly reduced if not completely defeated. 
 
But, I must say this in fairness, had the people of Saskatchewan honestly looked at the program, both the 
program before the 1967 election and the program before the 1971 election; had they looked at it closely 
enough, they could have read very clearly that, although being soft-pedalled before the election the 
intent, the final intent of this Government or that party opposite, was clear. That given long enough, and 
given the right opportunity, they in fact, did intend to nationalize first the resource industries and 
whatever industry strikes their fancy from then on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan take the 
blinders off as far as the NDP are concerned, especially the business community. When I look across the 
aisle at the Members opposite, I never fail to be shocked at some of the people that stand for election as 
NDP. People who have been in business, people who are successful farmers. I’m not particularly 
shocked at some of the school teachers, I’m not particularly shocked at some of the other people. I can 
understand how they can have a philosophy of socialism. That’s their right and their business. But, I 
cannot see how anyone who has been in business, who is engaged as a farmer, after all that’s our basic 
industry, how they can square with their consciences, standing for election and standing behind and 
voting for, and literally working with and being with people whose basic philosophy must be totally, and 
absolutely diametrically opposed to what they have always believed in. Either they were living a lie for 
the ten or twenty years that they built up their successful farm or ranch or business, or they are living a 
lie now. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that the people of the province, especially the business community 
get the blinders off. 
 
You know, the job of the socialists is made easier, it’s made easier because the very people who should 
stand up and oppose them, kind of hope that if they look the other way, or if they don’t rock the boat, all 
this socialism might go away. Well I think it’s time they learned after this election and after this action, 
that it will not go away, that it’s wishful thinking. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — People of this province, the Chambers of Commerce, the small businessmen and 
the farmers should read the writing on the wall very clearly. Housing is next. No question about that. 
The Premier’s not kidding anybody. He’s said it on the television, they say it in the House. I don’t blame 
the NDP particularly, outside of being a little tricky before elections and 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

989 
 

hiding their real intentions under, in page 16 in one line of their program. They have never denied that 
they are socialists, they have never denied that they think a government state should be superior, should 
be more involved in the lives than the private sector. I say that’s their right. Surely it’s the right and 
responsibility of people who recognize that in this nation, under as much freedom of enterprise as 
possible, under keeping the state, under a plan that’s kept the state as a servant of the people and not the 
master, we have developed the highest standard of living coupled with the most freedom anywhere in 
the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Yet people who are in business, people who have enjoyed the fruits, the economy 
and the freedom of this great nation either connive with the NDP because they think it will bring them 
some short-run advantage, some business today or a little contract tomorrow or else they are afraid of 
them and they say if we don’t rock the boat maybe they won’t bother us, maybe they’ll continue to deal 
with us. These people over there are masters and they have been for years masters at spreading just a 
slight skim of fear all over. Masters of letting it be known to people in business that if they don’t rock 
the boat and they don’t say too much they can get along. Masters of the statement, if you go along, 
you’ll get along. Masters of the half-veiled threat that if you dare oppose them and stand up it will hurt 
you in your profession, or your business. Don’t tell me they haven’t, they have spread that kind of fear 
ever since they were elected in 1944. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — And they are still spreading that kind of fear. 
 
Socialism is an ‘ism’ and if you trace most isms, socialism is one of them, they base a great deal of it on 
fear. They base a great deal of it on class hatred. They base a great deal of it on envy. This is what they 
are doing now. Look, people of Saskatchewan! Go in and grab those potash mines, those dirty 
Americans, those dirty people who come in here, they are making all that profit and they are taking it 
away to the United States. We’ll grab those mines, we’ll steal those mines, we’ll take those mines by 
force and you’ll have all the money to yourselves. And there are a certain number of people who fall for 
that and one of them is yakking over there now and fiddling around with his nose. Let him quit doing 
that and fiddle around with his brains and listen to something. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — This is what they base their success on. Fear, envy, socialism is what? It’s the 
philosophy of envy and greed and covetousness. You can’t make it yourself, then take it away from 
those that do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — And when they point to the successful people in their ranks it’s just that they are a 
little greedier than the rest. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

990 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You talk to the big farmers, talk to the successful farmers who are NDP supporters 
and ask them why. Say, do you want to see everything socialized? Oh God, they wouldn’t do it to us. 
Well, they better quit kidding themselves. They have their hand on the farmers’ necks right now in the 
Land Bank and they are squeezing ever so gently. If the farmers of this province don’t think they are in 
the process of being socialized now, they have their heads in the sand. 
 
The insurance agents had better be aware. The housing people had better be aware. The uranium 
industry already knows what is on the books for them. 
 
What have we got? We’ve got Amok uranium development at Cluff Lake. What have Amok done? They 
have already announced that the plant they were going to construct is put off indefinitely. At least until 
next year. Why? I’ll tell you why, because the Government has already announced that they are next in 
line and they are going to get the same treatment as the potash industry. Nick Ediger, the President of 
Eldorado, expressed alarm at the action this Government is taking in regard to the mining industry and 
the finger the Government is pointing at the uranium industry. What’s he saying? He is saying they are 
going to reconsider because the Crown corporation, that Federal Crown Corporation is planning right 
now a new refinery. That refinery will either go in Saskatchewan or it will go to Ontario at Elliott Lake. 
Of course, if the mining development of uranium in this province goes down, if Amok pulls out, if they 
slow down at Uranium City, if they slow down at Gulf, then there is no question. That great 
development that would mean so much to northern Saskatchewan will never come here. It will go to 
Elliott Lake and that’s exactly the game that this Government is playing right now. 
 
That Member who got elected by threats and bullying up in the Athabasca side of that gerrymander, he 
may bully those people up there and confuse them a little and he may have threatened them into getting 
himself elected, but he doesn’t worry anybody on this side of the House, let me tell him that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — What is the rationale, Mr. Speaker, for the NDP seizing these mines and acting in 
this manner, a manner that shocked people all over this province, all over this country? Well, they say 
we need control. We’ve heard them speak, you know, why should control of our mines be vested in New 
York or Dallas, or wherever. I agree, why should it be? How can they stand up and say they haven’t got 
control of a potash mine? 
 
First, I would say it’s pretty good control when they say whether that potash mine can take up a ton of 
potash or not. They have the power right now and always have had the power to close down any mine. 
They control the kind of wages they pay. That’s pretty good control. They control the kind of taxes they 
pay. That’s pretty fair control. 
 
Let me tell you the final control. The final control is 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

991 
 

they say we can walk in and take them over. In this Act they say we can walk in, grab their records, 
seize, do anything we want, make them do anything we want and they say ‘we need more control’. For 
God’s sake how much more control do you want? You’ve got them lock, stock and barrel now. And 
that’s just an excuse. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Let’s question the profits. They say we’re going to make more money. They are 
running around telling the people, not very successfully, that if they just join with them in this steal, if 
they just join with them in this grab, they say don’t worry, we’ll have more power and we’ll have more 
civil service, but you’re going to make a lot of profit, agree. You know, get those Yankees, get that 
profit. 
 
Well, they did it in the oil industry and they just left. So we hear the Premier announcing $21 million, 25 
cents a barrel. It should have been $50 million. But okay, they can’t do it to the potash industry, they are 
there. So are they going to make more profit? Well, they are making $140 million this year if they tell 
the truth, out of the potash industry with nothing invested. They are making far more than the potash 
industry is themselves and they have nothing invested and no risk. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if they say that they are using this nationalization in an effort to maximize the returns 
to the people of Saskatchewan, they are either deluding themselves or they are attempting to delude the 
people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I presented figures to this House about an average potash mine, a potash mine with 
a capacity of 1.5 million tons a year, which is an average potash mine, producing about 1.2 million tons 
a year. The figures indicate very clearly that the Government now is making over $14 or almost $14 
million a year from that potash mine and that if they take it over and they pay normal interest rates, 
they’ll be lucky if they make $8 million for the first twenty years. In fact, if they pay back the loan, 
they’ll have to find $2 or $3 million from other sources for the first 20 years. Now if all goes well and 
they own the mine, after 20 years, of course their profit will increase. But for the next 20 years I wonder 
if the people of Saskatchewan want to see us sending most of that $140 million, or all of it, plus some 
down to those hated Americans in New York or wherever and that’s exactly what is going to happen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — All the Premier talks about, we’ll give them potash. Well if they are stupid enough 
to take potash I don’t know how they got up here and found the potash mines in the first place. Oh, they 
might get away with blackmailing some of them into taking potash. He might get away with 
blackmailing some of them into taking some Saskatchewan debentures, but I’m willing to bet that for 
most of those potash mines and most of the value, he’s going to have to pay hard cash and he’s either 
going to take it out of 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

992 
 

the piggy banks and out of the pension funds of the people of Saskatchewan, he’s going to raid the 
money put aside out of the oil windfall that should be used to develop more oil and more gas for this 
province, or he’s going down to the United States and he’s going to borrow it and he’s going to pay 
record high interest rates of ten and a half or eleven and a half per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Premier Blakeney, after I made the speech where I brought 
these figures out, ridiculed these figures. And he said, I must have been having a pipe dream or 
something to that effect. Yet in the three weeks that have followed, I have yet to see the Premier produce 
one set of figures, any figure, or produce one shred, one iota of evidence that these figures aren’t exactly 
as I presented them, while a little on the safe side, absolutely correct. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We have said all along and it’s been repeated and I want to allude to it very briefly 
now. The question of the markets. 
 
The question of the markets is the long and the short term security of the markets that the potash 
industry in Saskatchewan now has, once the Government moves in and takes over, is questionable. They 
may save them and they may not. They may save all of them and they may not. 
 
Okay, they are talking about expanding. Surely they know, if they are honest with themselves, that the 
cost of expansion today is fantastic. So they know if they take over all of the industry, they are going to 
be talking about $2 billion. If they take over half of it, which they seem to be talking about, half the 
production, they are talking at least $1 billion. 
 
But what good have they done if they do that? They have invested a tremendous amount of money, they 
have risked a tremendous amount of money and if all they do is seize and take over two or three potash 
mines, they haven’t produced one new ton of potash, in fact, they may not produce as much because 
they might not be able to sell it. They haven’t produced one new job, except a few extra bureaucrats that 
they may hire here in Regina or wherever, to run the mines. They haven’t in fact produced any new 
development for this province. So they say, no we intend to expand. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they know, because I think they have some studies, and if they haven’t set down any 
studies it’s a disgrace. The cost of expansion in the potash industry today is anywhere from $150 to 
$200 a product ton. What does that mean? That means if they expand, we’re producing about ten million 
tons now, if they add another two million tons, they are talking of at least $400 million. Three million 
tons, which is not a great deal of expansion about a third, 30 per cent, they are talking about $600 
million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we should let the Premier kid anybody. If he’s talking about moving into 
the potash industry and he is in a serious way, and then expanding, we’re 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

993 
 

not talking about a billion dollars. By the time he gets around and takes it over and starts his expansion 
plans and pays for it, two, two and a half or three years will have gone by and even if inflation is brought 
under control and reduced to six per cent, instead of the 12 per cent we have been facing, we are talking 
about upwards of $2 billion, even to get half of it and expand it. No one should be under any illusion 
that we are talking about less. 
 
So then we come to this point and we’re presented with Bill No. 1. Bill No. 1 contains among other 
things unbelievable powers and I’m not going to deal with those at any great length because they are 
going to be dealt with later by another Member. We know, it has been brought up before, that if you 
honestly read Bill No. 1 and I wonder how many of the Members opposite there (they are going to get 
up like sheep), well I’m sorry you say you have, because I hope then you won’t get up like sheep and 
you’ll vote against it. One of them is a member of the legal profession and if he can get up with a clear 
conscience and vote for article 60, that gives a Crown corporation official, gives the corporation, not an 
elected Member, not any member that’s even directly responsible to the public, give them more power 
than they give policemen in the province, or this nation to hunt down criminals to put an end to drug 
abuse, you are about, if you pass this Bill without amendment to that section going to give Crown 
corporation employees the right to walk in without a warrant, to seize, to do, have almost unlimited 
power with no by-your-leave of the courts, no appeal, no rights at all. Talk about human rights! Again, 
you are giving more power to these people than you would ever dare give to policemen hunting down 
criminals, and you are talking about corporate citizens. People whose only sin was to come in here and 
help us develop our resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Government Members opposite sneer at our concern about the possible abuse of this 
power. They’re laughing now, they are sneering, they say, oh, they can read, I presume, they can read 
the powers that are given. They don’t deny they have given themselves those powers. But they say, we 
won’t abuse those powers, we won’t use all those powers. We have to have them in case anybody balks. 
 
Well, I wouldn’t feel quite so concerned if the track record of the NDP wasn’t as bad as it is in not only 
using all the powers that they are given, but on many occasions overstepping the powers they have been 
given. They are one of the most arrogant, power hungry governments that ever sat in the Treasury 
Benches of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I think every thinking person in this province is concerned or should be concerned 
about the unbelievable powers they are giving themselves in this Bill. If they can do this to the potash 
company, they can do it to anybody. And if they get away with it there are many more people who are in 
line to get the same kind of treatment from this socialist government, which they are now meting out to 
this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of equal concern to every thinking person in this province must be the fantastic lack of 
information that we have been presented with up to this point. Not only a lack of 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

994 
 

information we’ve been presented with, but there has been no indication or no promise that they intend 
to give us any more. 
 
The Government is seriously asking Members of the Legislature to vote on Bill 1 and Bill 2, that will 
give them fantastic powers, that will allow them to go out and raise sums, possibly sums ranging from 
$500 million to $1,000 million and risk it in a venture that’s already here and already producing jobs. 
They ask us to vote this kind of power to them and support this kind of legislation and yet they haven’t 
given us a feasibility study, they haven’t handed this Legislative Assembly, or the people of the province 
anything but some propaganda. They haven’t said, here is a feasibility study, here’s a study done about 
the present markets and our chances to maintain long-term markets, they haven’t handed us any study or 
given us any study about the possible competition from other areas of the world where potash is now 
being produced or could be produced. Areas like New Brunswick. They haven’t done any study, or if 
they have they haven’t given it to us, about what might happen in New Mexico, where they still have a 
tremendous reserve of potash. Granted, not nearly as good as ours, but with the price it is today, looking 
a lot better, especially with what this Government is doing. New sources in Russia. There is clear 
evidence, it’s there for anyone to see that Russia has a fantastic reserve of potash and is already eyeing 
the American market which we depend on. In fact it has already made some deal for one or two years 
down the road. They haven’t shown us any study about the availability of manpower, I mean the 
executive people necessary to successfully operate the huge and complicated venture such as this. They 
announced that David Dombowsky has been made the chairman of the board. Now I worked with David 
Dombowsky and I have the greatest respect for him, but frankly I don’t know of any training or any 
background that David Dombowsky has to fit him to run a billion dollar, complicated world-wide 
development industry like the potash industry. 
 
The Member, of whatever he is over there, says, oh, I’m not sure . . .you tell me, tell me what he’s done. 
Stand up when you speak and list off the successful ventures that David Dombowsky has gone out, 
raised hundreds of millions, put into operation, tell me the payrolls he has met. He hasn’t done it. I think 
he’s a wonderful man. I think he’s a great civil servant. I think if I was finding anyone in that 
Government or in their bureaucracy to have as a liaison between the Government and the potash 
industry, I’d use him. But I would question giving him the chief executive power in a fantastically risky 
and financially high gamble that this is, the one that you are embarking on today. 
 
But where is your study to show the kind of people that David Dombowsky can gather around him? 
Sure, if he goes out and gets enough people who have enough knowhow in mining and in marketing and 
all the rest of it, he can be successful. But surely we are entitled to that study. Surely we are entitled to 
ask you to take us into your confidence and say here’s the kind of people we can get, here’s what we’re 
going to do, here’s how we’re going to get them to Saskatchewan. Surely we are entitled to that kind of 
information before you ask us to vote on these two Bills. 
 
Tell me what studies you have made about the counteractions that might be taken by the potash 
industries that you drive out. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

995 
 

Tell me what your thoughts are and what your studies indicate IMC will do if you force them out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
IMC (as you parroted over there) is a giant corporation, spread all over the world, probably the biggest 
corporation in the world involved in the production and sale of all kinds of fertilizers. 
 
Now, do you really honestly think that IMC, which operates the largest potash mine in the world, once 
you have forced them out, once you kick them out of the province, are going to go quietly away and not 
try to hold that market and divert that market until they can get back in the potash industry somewhere 
else. If you do, you are crazy, you are dreaming and you know better. So you must have done some 
studies to say if they take their market, here’s how we will replace it. 
 
Well, give us those studies, give us those studies or make us aware that you have done the studies. If the 
studies are confidential at least get up and say, we’ve carried out studies by this company or that 
consultant, or this firm, and those people have done this kind of study and they have assured us that if 
we lose this market we will be able to replace it with another market. 
 
What’s going to be the reaction, as I say, of Washington, or New Mexico, and what’s going to be the 
reaction of places like Russia, where they have a great surplus of potash, when this vacuum exists, as it 
will exist when you move in on this industry. 
 
Has the Government honestly, and if they have I’d like to hear about it, have they honestly looked at the 
things that could be done with this money other than intrude themselves into this successful industry 
right now? Surely they have asked themselves the question, and if they have, they should tell the people 
of the province, that they have looked at the $1,000 million, the billion dollars and said, there is no other 
place in which we can invest this money that will do more good. 
 
What about an iron mine? What about farm machinery manufacturing? What about a whole host of 
things that we buy, import into Saskatchewan that possibly with that kind of thrust, that kind of money, 
that kind of action, that kind of risk by the Government. There are all kinds of things we could be doing 
to put a good solid base, industrial and business base, under the economy of this province. If you have 
studied this, if you haven’t, then I say you are not facing your responsibilities of government. If you 
have studied and said the iron mine is too risky, we can’t get people to come in, and basic 
manufacturing, if you have studied it then you have a responsibility to tell us. People are questioning 
right now. Surely there are some other things that can be done, rather than handing this huge sum of 
money over to these people and then kicking them out. On the surface, unless you expand you are not 
going to produce one extra job or add one, not one whit to the economic base of the Province of 
Saskatchewan until you expand. In expansion the basic involvement in this is risky enough, expansion is 
even more risky. 
 
Why haven’t you produced the Bredenbury mine study? We were told very clearly that you’ve had such 
a study. We were told very clearly that that study proves that new mines or 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

996 
 

expansion of mines is going to cost anywhere from $150 to $200 a ton. Surely you have a responsibility 
to inform the people of Saskatchewan about the kind of money you spent and I understand you spent 
considerable money. If you didn’t, I’m shocked but I’m sure you did. Surely you have the right, we have 
a right, and a responsibility to give us the substance of that study. Mr. Speaker, no study has been given, 
no feasibility study, no consultants’ reports, no information at all. Just stark sheer reality of these two 
Bills. 
 
Now if they have studies and they have reports and they don’t give them to us, or give as many as they 
can without revealing some information that they might not want to reveal, that’s bad enough, but what 
could be even worse and what is true I suspect is that they have no studies, that they have done no real 
research, that they are winging into this gigantic risk and they are doing it for what reason, I don’t know. 
Because they are socialist, because they are mad, because they got backed into a corner. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, is it true that they went into this business and they brought these two 
Bills in with so little thought and so little planning? Here are the people who talk about a planned 
economy. If you’ve got the studies then indicate them to us, even if you don’t show them to us. Get up 
and tell us the names of the consulting firms. Get up and tell us the kind of studies you’ve had. Get up 
and tell us the results wherever you can. Because if you haven’t done these kinds of studies and I suspect 
you haven’t, I say it’s shocking, it’s irresponsible and it’s unbelievable. 
 
Let’s take a look at the attitude of the NDP when they were in Opposition. I’m just going to refer very 
briefly to the pulp mill. At that time that looked like a pretty big risk, $50 or $60 million, and we heard 
all about the risk and the gamble and the big Americans and sending the money out, sending the money 
down to the United States. We weren’t talking about a billion dollars and interest at ten and a half or 
twelve per cent, which now you’ll see a $100 or $110 or $120 million a year poured down into the 
United States. Let’s see what the Premier had to say then. 
 
Speaking on the debate on second reading of the Bill to develop the pulp mill, or set up the pulp mill. 
The Premier said this on April 4, 1966. In part of his speech he said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I first said I would want to be shown the studies by independent consultants, which 
studies showed that the particular project was feasible. 

 
That’s what he wanted to begin with, and I think that’s not unreasonable. The Premier then, or the 
middle Leader of the Opposition at that time went on to say: 
 

The Minister advised that a study by Parsons and Whittemore affiliates had indicated that the project 
was feasible. With that I’m unimpressed. I would have been amazed if the persons who had insight, a 
$50,000,000 building contract would not have been able to show the project was feasible. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

997 
 

Just to stop there for a minute. Mr. Blakeney said at that time he would be amazed if anybody gambling 
$50 million wouldn’t have a feasibility study and he demanded to see it. He demanded not only to see 
their study but independent studies as well. I’m quoting Mr. Allan Blakeney, then Leader of the 
Opposition and now Premier of this province. He went on to say: 
 

I believe this government should have turned over the Parsons and Whittemore study to an 
independent consultant for a comprehensive study. The two page letter with attachments from another 
consulting firm on the west coast cannot be classed as a feasibility study or even a check or a 
verification of a feasibility study. 

 
Well, and to finish up on that particular part of the speech, he said: 
 

I don’t say that the gamble will lose, but I say that to the extent that the Government hasn’t checked 
the information they could have checked, the gamble is unnecessary. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if those words were fitting and incidentally he was given those studies and they were 
laid on the table along with all the contracts and all the commitments of the government, laid on the 
table before we asked Members opposite to vote, if what he said then was pertinent and relevant and 
true, how much more relevant is it, how much more necessary is it today when that Government is 
launching on not a $50 million gamble, but on at least a billion dollar gamble and hand us not one piece 
of paper. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I might point out that Mr. Cuelenaere, speaking in that same debate 
before the Premier, had in fact, and it’s clear here in the record, Debates and Proceedings of the Session 
of 1966, given the master agreement and all the other agreements and the two studies, Mr. Blakeney still 
wasn’t satisfied. One study was done by a branch of Parsons and Whittemore and there was another 
independent firm that looked at their feasibility study and recommended to us that it was sound. He 
wasn’t satisfied with that. 
 
Well, if he wasn’t satisfied with that, can you understand or can you really believe how he’d be feeling 
if he was standing here and the Government opposite was asking him to approve a Bill that is not double 
the risk, but is at least ten, 20, at least 20 times the risk of that Prince Albert pulp mill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious that the Premier, the then Leader of the Opposition 
and the Attorney General and the Minister of Industry, acted and talked one way in Opposition and are 
acting in a far different way now that they are in the Government. 
 
I say that never in the history of this Legislative Assembly in its 60 or 70 year history, has any 
government had the gall or the arrogance or the total indifference to public opinion, to walk in and ask 
for anything approaching this magnitude 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

998 
 

without so much as a scrap of paper being presented to the Members of this Legislative Assembly, to 
prove that they have looked into the feasibility of this gamble and found that they are safe on every 
front, that the risk of the people of the province is safe. I say what they are doing, or what they are not 
doing is a disgrace. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, Mr. Blakeney likes to compare this to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Of course, that’s just sheer nonsense and he knows it. The only thing that might be 
comparable is that in the Act that set up the Power Corporation, they did in fact put an outside limit on 
the borrowing. But to compare it with the Power Corporation, of course, is ridiculous. It’s a utility. It’s a 
monopoly. It’s got a captive market and it doesn’t go beyond the boundaries of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. There is no more comparison between the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and its 
operation and the potash industry than there is between wood and apples. There is just no comparison at 
all and he knows it. Why is he doing this? Well, he knows the people of this province like the Power 
Corporation. He knows that the people of this province are very satisfied generally with the operation. 
They aren’t very satisfied with the way you raised the price, and you are gouging them, but we know by 
and large the people are happy with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and they are happy with Sask 
Tel. So he thinks if he can say to them, look what the Sask Power has brought, power to the farmers, and 
it gives this heating to your home, gas to your small towns. This is a similar situation - it’s not a similar 
situation, it’s got nothing to do with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at this from some other angles. What kind of a deal is it? How much will it cost? 
Let’s look at it from every angle. We know morally that it is - well morally it cannot be explained. 
Morally they can’t stand up there and say they have done anything but break the word of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Morally they stand condemned and they should stand ashamed of 
themselves. 
 
What about politically? What they are doing, whether they realize it or not, they are setting up in this 
province a political climate that will deny the people of this province legitimate investment, not just in 
the next three or four years, but I say in the many long years ahead. 
 
It’s a business deal! Why I think enough proof was shown in this House and indicated in this House and 
indicated outside this House that this is a very risky and a very bad business deal. It is going to cost at 
least a billion dollars and they are only going to get half, or less than half of the industry. They are 
already taking $140 million with no risk. They are already at odds, or they are going to be with the 
Federal Government. When they first started out the Attorney General went on the television and he said 
(and he reminded me of the mayor of Montreal who said "The Olympics could no more have a loss than 
a man could have a baby") and the Premier said they could never touch the Crown corporations. The 
Federal Government cannot tax the Crown corporations. Now he is coming on and saying, yes, we will 
be prepared to negotiate, we recognize that we can’t squeeze the Federal Government out, so we would 
be prepared to 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

999 
 

negotiate. Now have they sat down and taken those calculations that I hope they have made about 
whether this is a good feasible business deal or not, and said ‘boys we’ve got to take off the bottom line, 
we’ve got to take off the net profit, you know, five or six million from each mine for corporate tax, tax 
to go to the Federal Government?’ Well I don’t think they have. Or if they have, then let them tell us. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you were out I was challenging you, I read a statement you made in the debate on the 
pulp mill in 1966, where you demanded certain feasibility studies, and you were given certain feasibility 
studies. You said you were very unsatisfied with them. You said - this is a risk of $50 million and I want 
more than this. I think you were right. I think you were right in demanding those studies and you got 
them. Yet, here you are, the same man, seven or eight years later, as the Premier of the province, asking 
us to vote on a Bill that will give the power to enter into a billion dollar business, or more, and you 
haven’t produced one shred of evidence that you’ve done any study. You haven’t tabled a study, you 
haven’t even indicated that you have carried out a study. And I say that you should rise in this debate, 
you should lay on the table every study that you’ve made, not those that you cannot make public 
because they might prejudice your position in dealings with the potash industry, but at least you should 
indicate that you’ve made them. Tell us, tell us, Mr. Premier, that you’re sure you can keep the markets, 
and show us the study. Tell us, Mr. Premier, what reaction you think IMC is going to have, for example, 
when you kick them out. Are they going to go and keep their market, or are they going to give it to 
someone else, or could you wrest it away from them just as you have given yourselves the power to 
wrest away the potash mine in Esterhazy? Have you got the power to go down into the United States, 
grab IMC’s market? I don’t think you have. I know you haven’t. Then tell us please where you are going 
to replace that market. Tell us the studies you’ve done about Russian intrusion into the American 
market. I’m sure you must be aware they’ve already made a deal for a million tons two years down the 
road. Are you concerned? If you’re not concerned tell us why you’re not concerned? You stood up here 
arrogantly in this House, led off by your Attorney General, and in your answers, casual answers, you 
gave under questions before the Orders of the Day, on the television and the radio, you adamantly 
refused to take the people of this province into your confidence, yet you are asking them to support you 
and your Ministers in the greatest risk, not by double, not by triple, but by 10 times or 20 times any risk 
the people of this province have ever been asked to shoulder before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You said continually that you had to do this. You said, ‘what choice do we have?’ 
The potash industry bucked us at every turn. Now I’m not going to go into their right to go to the courts, 
or your rights to take the attitude, I don’t think you’ve got the right, I think you are immoral when it 
comes to this. I think the way you justify it is that to get this great socialist democratic plan into action 
that the ends justify the means and whoever you stamp on, whoever you tread on, whatever word you 
break, whatever contract you tear up, it’s all justified by eventually getting to that great utopia, that great 
socialist utopia where the government controls every aspect of our lives and we’ll all live pretty dull and 
not very happily 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1000 
 

ever after. 
 
You know, Mr. Bowerman, you come from around Prince Albert. If you want to find total socialism go 
to control where they have no worries, where they have everything looked after, drop into the 
penitentiary. That’s socialism, probably at its best. They don’t have a thing to worry about, their life is 
planned and ordered and everything is even and equal. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well anyway, the Premier said we had to do this. And we ask him if he thinks it’s 
a good deal, when the potash industry says they are paying over 85 per cent of their pre-tax profit 
already to the governments, he says in effect they are lying. That’s what he said. He can put it politely if 
he wants, but in effect he says, I don’t believe the potash industry. So the Central Canada Potash tabled 
their figures, they gave him their figures. And what does he say - I’ve got their figures, but I don’t 
believe them. 
 
Well if anything proved that no matter what the potash industry did, first he said - they won’t pay their 
taxes, then all but one paid their taxes. He said they won’t give us their figures, but one gave the figures. 
Now the figures that they gave, I’m told by Central Potash (and you’ve got the figures), indicate that 
86.7 per cent of their pre-tax profits are paid out to governments, you taking the lion’s share. But the 
Premier, or someone on that side said, yes, but they don’t count, they pay a royalty of 12.5 or 15 per cent 
to the parent company, Noranda, and again I’m informed (and if this is wrong I would like the Premier 
to get up and say it’s wrong), in the statement filed with the Government they pointed out clearly that 
these figures did not take that into account, that they in fact have not paid that royalty. You also say, 
well they’ve got a funny little eyeball to eyeball deal where they sell their potash to people that own 
almost half of their company down in the United States. Well, again I’m told (and if I’m wrong I’d like 
you to stand up and say so) that while they give them a discount of 10 or 15 per cent, that it was not 
calculated in arriving at that 86.5 per cent. So again, if the Premier has the right as a responsible citizen, 
as the leading citizen in this province, to call these potash companies, to call Central Potash Company in 
effect, wrong and say he doesn’t believe them, then surely he has an equal responsibility to get up and 
present his figures to show where they are wrong. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how you look at this deal, whether you look at it as I say 
from the moral point of view, allowing people to come in in good faith and invest their money, go 
through the tough years and soon as they get up where they can see some return on their investment, 
abuse them, vilify them and then move in and take them over and bully them and that’s exactly what 
you’ve done and what you’re doing then move in and take them over, attempt to blacken their names 
(that’s what you are doing, you are calling them profiteers, you call them liars, you call them bad 
citizens, you say they are cheating), after you’ve done that, I don’t know why you just didn’t move in 
and take them over. I don’t know why you had to 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1001 
 

justify your conscience to blacken their name before you screwed up your courage to walk in and bring 
in this Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
I think I understand, you wanted to set the political stage so that the people of Saskatchewan would turn 
on these people and you would look like knights on white horses. You would look as if you were saving 
the people of Saskatchewan from these very, very terrible people. 
 
Let’s not have any misunderstanding of what you are doing. In this one action you are risking huge sums 
of money; you are going to swell the bureaucracy of this Government; you’re going to increase your 
power out of all proportion, beyond the power that a formal, decent provincial government should have, 
and you’re going to doom Saskatchewan to continue to be almost a one-cycle economy. You are going 
to doom Saskatchewan to continue by and large to depend on the agricultural economy and we all know 
what’s happened to this economy over the years depending on living off the back of the farmer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have moved an amendment, and as I said, we are going to try to convince the 
Government, but I don’t think with any success, to stop, to go back, to take another look. If they won’t 
do that maybe if they go out and really listen to the people, the people might convince them to stop 
before it’s too late, to take another look. Well, we have put an amendment here and it’s a good 
amendment. It says, set up a committee, an independent committee, with a judge on it. A committee 
with a finance expert on it, a committee representing other people in the province, and let them look into 
every aspect of this before you do it. I don’t know what your rush is. The potash has been there for a 
million years, it will be here for a million years, the market is down right now, there’s all the time in the 
world to go into the potash business. Right now when the price is falling and the market is falling, but 
we know this will pick up again, it will change, the industry will come back, the demand will come 
back, why the big rush? Why call us into fall Session and attempt to ram this through in a hurry, a deal 
that will affect the lives of the people of this province for scores of years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I know why they won’t go out and have hearings. They are, in effect, having some 
kind of a hearing. They went down to Esterhazy and they had a meeting. They had an overflow crowd. 
Now knowing the NDP I know that that crowd down in Esterhazy that the NDP organizers and the boys, 
and the local candidate were on the phone and were working as hard as they could to get the faithful out. 
So that crowd would be a fair mixture including NDP. It would be a fair sampling of the NDP 
supporters. You know that’s what you do and I don’t blame you. But let’s see, we’ve got the front page 
of the Leader-Post. What does it say about that meeting? It says the Premier was laughed at, it said that 
people got up and asked questions like one lady in the audience who said - "money is too important and 
the proposed takeover is a moral and serious issue". She said, "anything could be taken from an 
individual if this takeover is permitted". Another person said Saskatchewan people will soon lose their 
freedom and good living standard. He said the bureaucracy will go out of control through government 
ownership. Another man said he was a war veteran and he told the Premier he had fought in the war for 
four years to defend free enterprise. And he said the present Government’s action was an insult to 
veterans. When the Premier tried to talk 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1002 
 

in technical terms about the potash industry they laughed at him. It also said that every time one of these 
people made one of these points they got a roar of approval from that crowd. Well, what happened? I 
would like to hear what happened in Saskatoon last night. They had a meeting. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — What about your meeting? 
 
MR. STEUART: — We had 80 people out and they were all Liberals, all Liberals, 80 of them and they 
said - keep fighting, keep fighting those socialists, try to keep fighting for freedom, and that’s what we 
are doing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — We have five enlightened Conservatives I’m telling you, so the comeback is on. 
 
But it is very interesting where they held their next meeting. Don’t laugh. It’s going to take us two steps 
to get some of those Members from Saskatoon, but it will take us two steps, but we’ll get them. The next 
place they held their meeting was in the Union Hall in Saskatoon, and they may have had a better 
hearing, but if they did then I guarantee you they packed it from wall to wall with OCAW and IBEW 
and all the faithful who would get up and say - "we shall overcome; and united we stand and divided we 
fall", and whatever other slogan they ran out for the exercise that night. Friends, I tell you why, Mr. 
Speaker, they are afraid to go out to the people, afraid to find out what the ordinary people of this 
province think. We know what the workers think; they took a survey at the mine at Kalium, they took 
one at Esterhazy and the workers didn’t like it. They said if we wanted to work for the government we 
would go and work for the government. Let the government keep their nose out of this business. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — In closing I say this, Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment. It’s the least the 
Government can do, but they won’t do it and they stand condemned on every ground, morally, 
economically. They show themselves, not as an open government, they show themselves as a closed 
government. An arrogant government, totally irresponsible government. What they are doing, they are 
such small men. They proved themselves. They are doing something and I honestly feel they don’t know 
the forces they are unleashing. They don’t know the terrible thing they are doing to the future of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. It isn’t them I feel sorry for, it’s the people of Saskatchewan I feel sorry for. 
 
I will support the amendment and I’ll continue to oppose the Bill with everything I’ve got. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed at 5:00 o’clock p.m. until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1003 
 

MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak on the 
amendment to Bill No. 1. It has been pointed out in this House before that we feel very strongly about 
the Bill in principle. We are as well very concerned about the financial implications of the Bill, and in 
fact, the general implications of the Bill and how it will affect the Province of Saskatchewan. We have 
also echoed in this House that while we feel very strongly about it, we are convinced that a majority of 
the people of this province feel just as strongly about it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — And we have said, introducing the amendment in this House that we feel for that 
reason the people of this province should have the opportunity to voice their concern. They should as 
well have the opportunity to scrutinize the Bill more closely, make representations to a commission or a 
committee which could very easily be established to look into the implications of this Bill. 
 
Now, I’m fairly familiar with Bill 42, the oil bill in this province, coming from an oil producing 
constituency, and I know what happens and what can happen in the Province of Saskatchewan when a 
government is too hasty in introducing legislation, and in fact, running it through in a hurry, which was 
done with Bill 42. You’ve heard in this House, since this Legislature has sat, the implications that Bill 
42 had for the Province of Saskatchewan. It was a Bill to deal with resource development in this 
province, and mild compared to the Bill 1 and Bill 2 that have been introduced in this House. You went 
and rammed through Bill 42 without stopping to discuss it with the people of Saskatchewan, without 
sitting down and sincerely talking to people involved directly and indirectly in industry. You did that 
against the advice of the Members of the Opposition, and I suspect against your own good judgment. 
And now you have come in this House and you have sat here and you have indirectly admitted your 
mistake. You brought in proposed amendments to Bill 42, you’ve said "we’ve made a mistake originally 
on Bill 42; we went out, we put the screws to the oil industry to the point where their activity in 
Saskatchewan collapsed, we cost people in this province hundreds of jobs, we cost oil producing 
communities like Estevan, Swift Current, and Weyburn and Kindersley and Lloydminster, millions of 
dollars of oil-related business". "We caused (you have indirectly admitted), untold social hardship on 
people who were disrupted because of a sudden lack of work, or a severe cutback in the amount of 
business they had to do." We told you before, at least Members on this side of the House did before the 
last provincial election and when you were in such a hurry to get Bill 42, to slow down. We said, aside 
from the fact that we disagree philosophically with what you are doing to the oil industry, we think the 
implications of it will have severe repercussions on the people of Saskatchewan. We showed general 
concern in this House for the people of Saskatchewan and we asked you to slow it down, you refused. 
 
Now you come back in this House and I sit here as a new Member and hear the Minister of Mineral 
Resources, well, we are going to bring in some amendments to Bill 42, we put the screws to the oil 
industry and now we are going to raise their net return from about 14 cents a barrel to what it was at one 
point, if you are optimistic, to about 90 cents to $1.05 a barrel. We 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1004 
 

made that mistake, we realize the hardships we caused and we are going to try to correct them. All right, 
now we’ll be generous, we’ll grant you the one mistake you made. We stood here and you said we made 
the mistake, be man enough to admit it, you brought in the amendments, hopefully you will improve 
things in the oil industry and we can get on with producing oil in the province again. 
 
There was a glimmer of light. Now we come here and you turn around and you introduce legislation that 
puts Bill 42 to shame as far as severe implications to the people of this province go. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Did you learn your lesson? We have said again here, only about ten times as 
often and ten times as loud that we feel this legislation has severe implications for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We say, as the people on this side of the House did on Bill 42, will you slow down, give 
the people of Saskatchewan a chance to scrutinize it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Give the experts in mining development, in potash marketing, in economics, give 
the professionals and people of concern from all walks of life in Saskatchewan the opportunity to study 
it, just as Members of this Opposition said about Bill 42. What have you done? No, you seem to be 
determined to ram the Bill through in a fall Session that is supposedly set up only to introduce 
legislation in the first place. 
 
The sad part of this whole thing is that maybe two years down the road or three years down the road 
when you find that maybe your potash Bill really wasn’t any more successful in dealing with the 
resources than Bill 42, you may find yourself in a position where you are unable to amend the legislation 
and correct a situation that you have put the people of Saskatchewan into, which maybe isn’t in their 
best interest. 
 
All that we do with this amendment is ask you to slow down. People on this side of the House have 
pointed out to you that there is no big rush. By your own admission we have 1,400 or 1,500 years’ 
supply of potash. We are a little concerned as Members on both side of the House are, that we may be 
losing our advantage in potash markets because of expanding demand in the world. That happens to be 
because of the severe taxes you have imposed on the industry in the past two years. We find that 
situation something we can’t correct in the short-run, so we are going to have to live with it while we try 
and at least develop the potash resources to the best of our abilities. Yet, you seem to be so darned 
determined to force this through in a short time, legislation that is 100 more times severe than Bill 42. 
 
Whether you realize it or not, the earmarks of the potash Bill are the same as Bill 42. Already some of 
the things that happened in the oil industry immediately after passage of Bill 42 are starting to happen in 
the potash industry. I have a good friend who happens to be currently being burnt the second time by 
this Government’s lack of patience when it comes to introducing legislation. He was originally involved 
with Tiger 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1005 
 

Petroleums at Coleville, in fact his father owned the business and he was involved in it. At one time he 
employed 60 people, now employing 12. His son is of the opinion that there isn’t much future in the oil 
service field in Saskatchewan and has decided to go back to school. He went to Muenster and picked up 
I believe, his first year university. While he was there he was going to try to work his way through 
school, so he is working for a machinist at Muenster. This fellow does a lot of business with the potash 
industries. He currently has $55,000 worth of work on hold and will probably lay my friend off. If you 
don’t think that sounds a lot like Bill 42, you will have to stop and think again. 
 
It seems to me as well, to vote against this amendment, which I suspect Members opposite will do, in 
fact by not setting up a commission or committee to investigate the implications of this Bill, you are 
saying three things: First, that you are confident that a majority of the people of this province don’t 
support your legislation in the potash field and don’t support the implications of it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You know that despite the fact you soft pedalled the nationalization issue of 
resources in the last election, you still only received 39 per cent of the popular vote. Just sit there and 
think what would have happened if you had pushed it hard. 
 
You are also saying when you refused the people of this province a commission or an opportunity to 
make submissions to the Government or to a commission or an independent committee set up to study 
this, that your legislation is perfect. Or at least so nearly perfect that no one in Saskatchewan could make 
any worthwhile improvements to it. I have long questioned the competence of the Members opposite. 
You said, and Government people in this House have stated, that they had no intention of nationalizing 
the potash industry before the last election or passing expropriation legislation. So I have to hold the 
opinion that you hadn’t sat down and looked at the implications of it, looked at the financial 
arrangements that were going to have to be made, etc. 
 
In other words, if you didn’t do that before the last election, since the last election you have had five 
months at most to sit down and draw up a long-range program for the development of potash in this 
province. You are saying to us that a one billion dollar program and possibly more, of expropriation of a 
highly technical industry that may have severe constitutional problems, that you can sit down in five 
short months and draw up perfect legislation for handling that and you don’t need their advice, thanks. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You are also saying - this point I find particularly interesting - when you refuse 
people and in fact I suggest you will, the opportunity to make submissions to an independent 
commission or committee, you are saying to the people of this province, you don’t think they have 
anything to add. You 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1006 
 

accused us of having no confidence in the ability of people in this province to run Crown corporations. 
We say here is an opportunity, if you are sincere about your beliefs in that respect to let people get right 
in on the ground floor and make suggestions and improvements to the legislation that you have before 
this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Yet, I suggest again you will refuse to support the amendment that is being 
placed before you. 
 
I would hope, being new in the House, I am not really sure how assured I can be of this that the people 
of Saskatchewan will be made well aware of the fact that you had not enough patience with them and 
with the Members of this House who are their elected representatives to stop for four, five or six months 
and say, all right, we have legislation that we (perhaps this is so) sincerely believe is in your own best 
interests. Stop as well and say, there seems to be some opposition to the Bill. Members in Opposition 
who represent 60 per cent of the people of this province seem to be convinced that people they represent 
are opposed . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s more than you do! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — . . .I would suggest to you Members opposite you may be deaf and dumb but you 
can’t ignore the kind of reaction there has been in this province in the last three or four weeks to your 
legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — If you are truly sincere about doing something for this province that you believe 
is in the best interests of the people of this province, that includes everyone, the labourers, businessmen, 
young people, old people, poor people and wealthy people. Stop and give them a chance to look at your 
legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I don’t have much more to say about this. I suspect more Members on this side 
of the House will be reflecting some of the things I have had to say about the proposed amendment and 
indeed many more ideas of their own, and ideas in fact of the people of Saskatchewan. You can be 
aware, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I find it . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! If I could for a moment acquaint the Members - they may be well 
acquainted with it now - I think it wouldn’t hurt to remind the Members that the Member for Kindersley 
had exhausted his right to speak on the Bill, however, he had not 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1007 
 

exhausted his right to speak on the amendment, which he did. As I understand it, the principle of the Bill 
deals with the acquisition of the industry. The principle of the amendment is to refer the matter to a 
special commission. The Member for Saskatoon Eastview, has spoken on the Bill and has the right to 
speak at this time on the amendment. However, since the debate is concurrent he is resuming the debate 
at this time. After having spoken he will not have the opportunity to adjourn it. I just want to acquaint 
the Member with that. If there are other Members who will be speaking later that have already spoken, I 
am calling their attention to the fact that they speak only to the amendment and not to the original Bill. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the Members on this side will restrict their 
remarks to the amendment when they speak. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, if I may have the opportunity to address the House for a few moments 
with regard to the amendment. 
 
I am really quite surprised by the attitude of the Members opposite, in light of all the things they have 
had to say in this House about the Bill, that they would not agree to the amendment. I was out of the 
House yesterday afternoon when my seatmate, the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) put this 
amendment. I think it is an extremely logical position for any government to take, particularly when that 
government has stood in the House and said how assured they are of the support they have from the 
people of the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I am amazed that Members who consider - after all they do have 40.7 per cent of the 
80.3 per cent who voted - they are so confident in what they say that they represent the people of the 
province, that they could even have a twinge in suggesting that they don’t agree to allow some time to 
go by so that the people of Saskatchewan can react to the most significant piece of legislation that has 
been before the Legislature in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I submit, that in saner moments it is really not too difficult, Mr. Speaker, to 
understand that we are still talking about an attitude, an attitude by the Government, that says, it doesn’t 
really matter what anybody else says, because we sit here and we are anointed and we know what is 
best. I think that is the reason, Mr. Speaker, if there is one, why the Government is not prepared to 
support that amendment. 
 
I was rather surprised about another . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They may support it, we haven’t heard from them! 
 
MR. PENNER: — . . .Well judging by the lack 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1008 
 

of talk, I would be surprised if they would. 
 
I was rather interested this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was asking for 
studies that have been conducted, which would indicate that there is some feasibility with regard to 
marketing and with regard to the economics of the situation. I thought back to a question that I put on 
the Order Paper in the first week the House was sitting - a question, a very common question asked each 
year, where I asked for a list of all reports and studies commissioned by the government, Crown 
corporations, boards, commissions or any other, in the time period from November 1, 1974, to 
November 1, 1975. I have the answer from a previous year here, showing all of the studies that have 
been done. I couldn’t understand why it was stood off the Order Paper. I have an assumption that to 
make that kind of information public, would have merely supported the position taken this afternoon by 
the Leader of the Opposition that, in fact, there are no studies to substantiate the potash nationalization. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — That there haven’t been any studies commissioned . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’ll get that down as soon as we can. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well one of the things we would hope, Mr. Speaker, is that the Attorney General 
would support and back up just what he is saying, and get it in here so that we can see it, so that we can 
see some information that, in fact, some studies have been done. 
 
I should like to spend a few moments, Mr. Speaker, giving a report of a meeting that I was at last night, 
it was attended by "hordes". 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Something in the order, I think, of 75 people, or something like that. I am not really 
all that concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the number of people who were there, as I am about the kind of 
feeling that is beginning to be generated around the province, in Saskatoon and in other places. I should 
like to relate to those Members opposite, some of whom are smiling (I am glad to see that), some of the 
questions that were asked last night. Some people, for example, were saying - what is your reaction with 
regard to the question of a mandate? Does the government feel they have a mandate to go ahead with 
this? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What did you tell them? 
 
MR. PENNER: — I pointed out to them, in fact, what I pointed out in the House, Mr. Attorney 
General, that you didn’t ask for a mandate, that you didn’t get a mandate, that in fact, there is no 
mandate. I really had to go one step further, and tell why I felt you didn’t ask for one. It was because 
you knew, as well as we did, that had you gone out in June and in May to ask the people of 
Saskatchewan for a mandate on that question, that you 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1009 
 

fellows, some of you, not too many, but some of you, would be sitting over here, and we would be 
sitting over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Then, there was another question asked at the meeting. The question that was asked 
had to do with the risks. Whether, in fact, there were any risks. I had to reply that in my humble opinion 
there were one or two risks. There certainly is a risk of money, and I understood just prior to the 
meeting, that yesterday in the House, the Premier said it was something in the neighborhood of $500 
million to $1 billion. So there is some money involved all right. I guess it is fair to say that. I think it is 
probably fair to say, if what I read in the newspaper about what the Premier said in New York, and we 
have to recognize the Press may not have quoted the Premier correctly, that there is about $250 million 
around somewhere that could be used, and the borrowing would be on the balance. 
 
So, we talked about the $750 million that would be borrowed at ten per cent over 20 years. And the 
people who were at the meeting began to get some kind of an idea about what kind of money is being 
talked about. 
 
Most of the people there, realized that it was their money that was being talked about, and not 
government money, whatever that may be. 
 
Then we talked about the investment climate in the province, Mr. Speaker. About statements that have 
already been reported in the Press of people who are concerned about future investment in 
Saskatchewan. About the statement that had been made the weekend of the NDP convention in 
Saskatoon by the Hon. Mr. Whelan, that other hard rock mineral concerns . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Going the same way. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, he asked if it was safe to assume that they wouldn’t be nationalized. His 
comment was, that it is never safe to assume anything in the long run. Then there was some concern 
expressed, and I am sure that Members opposite, particularly the Member for Saskatoon-Buena Vista 
(Mr. Rolfes) and the Member of Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) and the Member of Saskatoon 
Nutana (Mr. Robbins) will appreciate this. There were some people concerned about the statement made 
by the Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) about the Board of Trade. And about the fact that 
the Board of Trade should have its money lopped off. No indication at all . . . The Leader of the 
Opposition this afternoon, talked about fear tactics and the Member for Saskatoon-Buena Vista scoffed 
at that. I wonder what the Member for Saskatoon Centre was really getting at when he threatened the 
Board of Trade by saying they should have their grant taken away. No indication at all, Mr. Speaker, of 
the fact that the Board of Trade in Saskatoon went out and sold the city, on the basis of being the Potash 
Capital of the World. No indication at all of the fact that the Board of Trade, if it is mounting a 
campaign, is doing it without the funds given by the province or any money taken by the potash 
industry, but have gone out and raised it on their own, independently. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1010 
 

MR. PENNER: — Recognizing the issue as far as they see it, and as I have had it reported to me, it 
isn’t so much a political issue as it is a philosophical point. Nationalization of the potash industry is a 
bad deal. I don’t think there is any question about that. Then, of course, Mr. Speaker, there were other 
questions raised and I want to point it out because I think it is pertinent to the point, that there are 
questions being asked. There are questions being asked all over the province. I say again to those 
Members opposite, if this is such a good deal . . . 
 
MR. MESSER: — Were you at the right meeting? 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, I am not sure. The Member suggested that I was at the wrong meeting. I really 
don’t think I was. At least at the meeting that I was at, questions were being asked. 
 
MR. MESSER: — What kind of questions? It is the answers we are concerned about. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I am not afraid of the answers I have; that is why I am telling you what I said. I’d 
like to hear the kinds of answers that are being suggested by others. 
 
I want to make it clear again, Mr. Speaker, to Members opposite that people are asking questions. It is 
time that we stop and let them get some answers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — They talked about the nature of the business deal. They talked about the money 
being borrowed. They talked about the $140 or $150 million a year that we are guaranteed now on the 
tax return. They multiplied that out over 20 years, and it comes to something like $3 billion on the one 
hand, against an enormous capital risk on the other hand. There is no question but that they are 
wondering about the economics of the deal. 
 
We pointed out to them that the Members opposite haven’t given any figures yet. But we need to take 
time so that those figures can be made available. 
 
Some questions were asked that the Member for Saskatoon Nutana would be interested in, because he 
has a great concern in pension funds. The question was, if pension funds are used as collateral, how safe 
are they? I often thought it would be worthwhile to hear the former Minister of Finance speak to us on 
his position with regard to using those funds, because we know very well that if what he says is correct, 
those funds are in great danger now. Then there were some questions, Mr. Speaker, with regard to 
priorities. There was someone there who spoke about the need for this province to go out along with 
other provinces, to look for energy. He deplored the fact that at a time in our history when we have got a 
serious energy crisis, that our Government is running off buying a potash industry that is already 
working well, and ignoring the fundamental things that need to be done in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1011 
 

MR. PENNER: — We had a member of the University community, who is an expert in geology and an 
expert in oil, point out very clearly that the reserves that are available now are only going to last about 
50 years. I wonder why it is that at the time when that kind of thing is happening, and the people of the 
province know it, that there is talk about the energy reserve fund being used to buy up potash, when we 
need that money to look for further energy reserves. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Other questions were asked. What is going to happen if we are going to spend all of 
this money on potash? What is going to happen to spending in health? What is going to happen to 
spending in welfare? And in education? And in transportation? We had to give them the kind of answer 
we had in the House. And that was, that there was going to be a slowdown. There were going to be some 
austerity measures taken. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — There’s not going to be a cutback. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well then, if that is the case, then I invite the Members opposite to make that clear. I 
am delighted to hear that. I have an interest in the field of education, and I am delighted to hear that 
there is not going to be any cutback. I wonder why the statement was made in the House that there was a 
possibility that the bridge in Saskatoon may go, because after all, there isn’t enough money to go 
around? 
 
The point still remains, Mr. Speaker, that people have got questions. They have got all kinds of 
questions and they deserve answers to those questions and they deserve better answers than we have had 
in the House. Because, we really haven’t had very many answers to many of our questions in the House. 
 
I want to go back to a couple of things that have been said by Members opposite. Then I should like to 
close. 
 
I think of a statement made by the Member for Bengough Milestone (Mr. Lange) when he stood in 
debate and suggested that this kind of issue deserved long, long debate. I said before, and I will say it 
again, I didn’t agree with very much that he said, but that is one thing that I did agree with. We heard the 
Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), we have heard the Member for Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. 
Messer), talk about how significant an issue this is for the people of Saskatchewan, and I say again, that 
it is only common sense, if in fact it is that critical an issue, not to ram it through in a fall sitting that 
wasn’t designed for that kind of thing initially in the first place, and Members opposite know it. If they 
have any confidence at all in their thinking, in their ability to put forward an idea, then I submit they will 
have no difficulty whatever, Mr. Speaker, in supporting the amendment as I intend to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1012 
 

opportunity to speak on this amendment. 
 
We do not agree that the amendment to this Bill is of advantage to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — We say the Members to our right, Mr. Speaker, say slow down. By this 
amendment and by their own words, they say to the Members opposite, slow down. We say, stop. 
Withdraw the Bill or call an election on this issue. The damage you do to the Province of Saskatchewan 
with this Bill hanging over the heads of the people is beyond comprehension. The threat of nationalizing 
the potash industry, first of all, again, breaks the word of the Province of Saskatchewan. Secondly, 
damages Saskatchewan’s reputation in the investment community. Thirdly, damages the investment 
climate within Saskatchewan. And I am not talking about in the future, Mr. Speaker, I am talking about 
today. And it discourages all private investors today from investing in Saskatchewan today, not a month 
from now or six months from now. 
 
We believe that the commission suggested by the amendment implies that the expropriation proceeding 
is worthy of study. However, I would not want the Members opposite to take comfort from these words 
because it seems to us that unless we support the amendment we do not get an opportunity to tell the 
Members opposite that this Bill is bad and wrong. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, although we do not agree that 
the legislation is even worthy of study . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — . . . and though we think you should take the Bill out now and that you should call 
an election now, we will be supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I expect this is a momentous evening, 
I understand that the election turnout is the largest of any British Columbia election, and I expect this is 
the last time in Canadian history that three NDP governments are ruling in provinces of this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I am pleased to see the sporting approach of the Minister, I trust he knows that 
it is an offence to bet on an election, but it won’t slow him down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say seriously that I am very surprised and shocked, and all Members on this side of 
the House are shocked, to see that the Government doesn’t put up a single speaker to deal with this 
matter, indeed is ignoring entering into this debate as though in some way it will just pass by, that the 
majority opinion of the Province of Saskatchewan will just drift away if they can sit there for a few days. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1013 
 

From whom have we heard? In this debate, a few moments from the Minister from whom control of this 
legislation was taken, the Minister, who in fact, will be handling the Bill; I didn’t think he was going to 
get into the debate, but I noticed he did tonight. He had one loud shout, one little shout, one joke that we 
didn’t hear on this side of the House, a couple of laughs, and other than that he has been signing his 
Christmas cards. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — The Premier said yesterday, that he might well be prepared to give us more 
figures in Committee in March or April. I can only assume that he expects that it won’t be of any 
particular disadvantage to the progress of this legislation or the interests of the Government if the matter 
is delayed until March, or April, or May. If that is the case, I can’t imagine why Members opposite 
aren’t prepared to have some unbiased view taken of this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the thing that is so troubling, is that the Government has maintained extreme secrecy about 
the legislation. They certainly couldn’t let the people of Saskatchewan in on the big secret, they couldn’t 
let their own public service in on it. When the Hon. Attorney General went for legal advice, he had to go 
out of the province. I am surprised he didn’t go out of the country. Had to go out of the province to keep 
the whole thing under wraps, a secret matter. It places the Government in a situation of not having been 
able to consult with others, not having been able to get a kind of broad-based opinion upon which to 
launch the legislation. 
 
By example, because I happen to trust the Hon. Attorney General, I, sitting as an Opposition Member on 
a couple of occasions had asked for his advice about things that might happen in this House. He has well 
advised me, and I have appreciated that. But this Government was incapable, because of the secrecy of 
the legislation, of going to the potash industry, of discussing the matter with people who were in the 
know. Now they refuse though they have indicated in the words of the Premier there will be more 
figures in March or April. Now they refuse, apparently, to have the matter looked at by people who 
don’t have the NDP blinders that the Government has. I can’t see where we will suffer in this province if 
the matter is held up so that some sombre second thought is taken. I can’t imagine how Members 
opposite could justify to the House or to the people or to the Press that they would be disadvantaged if 
the matter were put off for three or four months by the commission having a look at the matter, the 
commission that has been proposed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me briefly say a couple of things about the comments of the Hon. Member for 
Nipawin (Mr. Collver). I am pleased that he proposes to join with the Liberal Party in supporting this 
amendment, regardless of the hoops through which he climbed to get there. We don’t imply, let me say, 
that expropriation is worthy of study. We don’t believe that this is a good Bill either, and we don’t 
believe that this is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — But, if when you have heard from the 61 per cent of the 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1014 
 

Province of Saskatchewan, if when the people who represent that large percentage of this province have 
told you that it is bad legislation, if when you know, and I am sure you now do know, as public opinion 
starts to rise against you, the majority of the people oppose this legislation, if nonetheless, you won’t 
listen to this side of the House, I am hopeful that through a commission you may listen to others. You 
may listen to some less biased view of your legislation, and take a sombre second thought. You have to 
trace, Mr. Speaker, the history of this Bill though it has a short history. First we were told through the 
Press that the expropriation legislation was to be passed by Christmas. Important legislation would 
always be introduced in the fall session and given until the spring session for consideration. That was the 
policy of this Government. But on this, the greatest risk that the province has ever taken, the 
Government decided that they would jam it down the throat of the people of this province before 
Christmas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Now they seem to be backing off that a little. The Premier says that by March 
or April and I suppose by May, in Committee of the Whole, we will have further figures, and they will 
be in a better position to discuss the matter. They may know their plans better than they know them now. 
Indeed, I suspect that the caucus itself wasn’t consulted about this matter until some days before the 
Speech from the Throne. And, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this House, that not sufficient 
consideration has been given, and that a study, an unbiased study, by experts in the field, would 
certainly profit the large-range view of the province, and certainly profit the Government in perhaps 
bringing in better legislation if they decide to go ahead. It would profit the Government and the 
province, we hope, if they discovered that it was bad legislation and that the legislation should not be 
brought in. The people of this province want to be heard and the study that would hear their views would 
be important to the democratic system that should be operating in this province. I take pleasure in 
advising the House that I will be supporting the amendment, and I hope that the Government gives that 
amendment some second thoughts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I too, should like to say a few words in 
support of the amendment that has been proposed by my colleague, the Member for Regina South (Mr. 
Cameron). 
 
I was interested, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) once again follow the 
initiative of the Liberal Party and indicate to this House that he was going to be supporting the 
amendment. The Conservative Party used pretty well, the entire Liberal platform in their last provincial 
election campaign, and I see that they are following our lead once again. But I am rather surprised, Mr. 
Speaker, because the Member for Nipawin, as I recall, said in this House very recently, that he wanted 
this Bill to get through as quickly as possible and through some convoluted type of reasoning he felt that 
this would hurt the Government if the Bill went through as fast as it could. I see now, and I am pleased 
that he has changed his mind and has agreed that the Bill should be delayed as long as possible. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1015 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment for many reasons, not the least of which is 
because the Premier of Saskatchewan (Mr. Blakeney) at one time said that any controversial legislation 
should be placed before the Legislature at a fall sitting, be allowed to be considered by the Members of 
the Legislature and by the public at large, and then be dealt with at the spring session of the Legislature. 
 
It was the Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who decided that this would be a good policy to 
follow, and I believe he did shortly after his election in 1971. But, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, like many 
of the other NDP promises and NDP policies this was changed in midstream because the only two 
pieces of legislation which I feel have been of major controversy over the last two years have both been 
tried to be rammed down our throats by the Government opposite. The first was Bill 42, we all know the 
disastrous results of the legislation. The second one is now Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the public, we often think that the public reacts as quickly as we in this 
Legislature react, and the people in the Press gallery react, and I don’t think that is the case. I think that 
it takes the public a little longer to realize the implications of legislation after watching TV, reading 
newspapers and hearing the local media. And I think just now, the public is beginning to realize the 
enormous cost, the enormous risk of this venture. The Premier in the Speech from the Throne indicated 
that this legislation was a great challenge to the people of Saskatchewan, and I think I commented earlier 
that indeed it was. I think it is a challenge, Mr. Speaker, that they should be allowed to fully realize 
before they decide whether they are going to pick up the challenge or not. I say, if this legislation is not 
held up and put through before the public is really aware of what is happening, for instance, I think the 
public should be allowed to consider just what $1 billion really means, what interest on $1 billion really 
means. I assume that if the Government has to borrow that amount of money, and I believe that the 
Premier, to be fair, has indicated that they hoped they would not go that far, but if he had to borrow $1 
billion to finance this venture, the yearly interest on it would be $100 million, which would not be paid 
to people in Saskatchewan money that is not being used to develop this province or even this country. It 
is being paid to the so-called multinational-international financiers that this Government so despises. 
 
I think the people should be given an opportunity to reflect upon that, Mr. Speaker. I think as well, Mr. 
Speaker, they should be given an opportunity to reflect on the risk involved. The Premier and the 
Attorney General have drawn a very pretty picture. They say, in effect, that the price for potash will 
remain at its current level, at I believe, $75 or $85 a ton. There is no guarantee of that. There is no 
assurance of that whatsoever, and I think that the people of Saskatchewan should be allowed to reflect 
on what would happen if the price of potash went down, went down to previous levels of $40 a ton, $35 
a ton and just what would happen to the Province of Saskatchewan if we had to continue to pay those 
interest charges, if we had to continue to pay back the principal that was borrowed. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, taxes would not only be raised, they would be raised drastically and the whole Province of 
Saskatchewan and the whole social service structure of this province would be put into jeopardy. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1016 
 

I think as well, Mr. Speaker, that the potash companies should be given an opportunity to state their 
position. We’ve heard Members opposite speak about these companies in a manner that borders on the 
slanderous. The Premier, in effect, has said that the potash companies are not telling the truth. The 
Premier has said he doesn’t believe them. By inference one can assume he is saying that they are lying. 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier and the Members opposite feel this way, that they should 
justify their position by putting some evidence of that before this House and before the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think the potash companies should be given an opportunity to state their case. I think 
that they should be allowed to go before a public hearing and say that if they are indeed in breach of 
their obligations to the Government under Crown leases or agreements with the Government, the 
Government can come in and take over those companies. That is one thing the Government has not told 
us about yet, which is a power that they do have if the potash companies indeed are in breach of their 
responsibilities. 
 
It is strange, Mr. Speaker, that we haven’t heard from any of the Members opposite; my colleague the 
Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) remarked on the amazing lack of response we have had from the 
Minister in charge of the potash companies of Saskatchewan (Mr. Cowley) and I see he is not in his seat. 
But one would think that we would have heard from this Minister, Mr. Speaker. When I spoke on this 
matter originally, I expressed the wish that they would not, like they did in Bill 42, hide behind the 
oratory of the Attorney General and the Premier as they did in that case. But all indications are, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are not going to hear from the Minister in charge of the potash companies in 
Saskatchewan, and I think the Press may ask themselves, why? Why don’t we hear from the man who is 
going to be looking after this huge enterprise, if it ever gets through this House? Why is it that he is not 
speaking in this House, he is not leading the Bill through, he is not subject to questioning in Committee 
of the Whole? And I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that we won’t hear from him. We’ll hear him, if I can 
use the expression of the Member for Nipawin, catcalling occasionally, and he is very good at catcalling, 
he is very witty, but I suggest that it is his responsibility to stand up in this House and speak and let us 
hear what he knows about this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — If he is not prepared to do that, he should appear at a public hearing and make his 
views known. 
 
It is very interesting, as well, that the Premier hasn’t spoken in this Debate. He spoke in a very general 
manner in the Speech from the Throne Debate. Since then we have not heard from him. Once again, all 
indications are that we are not going to hear from him. One can only ask, why? Why are we not hearing 
from the Leader of the Province? Why is he not speaking and telling us about the most significant Bill 
that has ever hit the Saskatchewan Legislature? Is it because he does not know what’s involved? Is it 
because he does not really know how much money is going to be paid to take over these companies? I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if we don’t hear from him, one can make that assumption. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there is another Member of the Government that we have not heard from, and if 
we had public hearings, he may well wish to appear before them and make his position 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1017 
 

known, and that is the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek). The Minister of Finance will be handling 
probably the largest financial venture that this province, and probably any province in Canada has ever 
considered or anticipated, has yet to speak in this debate. And one wonders why he hasn’t spoken in this 
debate. In fact, one wonders why he is Minister of Finance at all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that we can - I wish he was in his chair as well. You know, 
when this Member was Minister of Health, he conducted affairs in such a manner that he rapidly became 
known as the Minister of Disease, and that is why he was shifted from that portfolio. He is now Minister 
of Finance. I can think, Mr. Speaker, of only two places in the world where this particular Member could 
become Minister of Finance. One is under the NDP Government of Allan Blakeney, and the other would 
be New York City. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, because we have not heard from these Members because we have not 
heard from the Premier, the Minister of Finance, the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and because it is obvious that we are not going to hear from them in this forum, where 
people would expect they would rise to defend their legislation, I suggest and I challenge them, I 
challenge the Premier that he, with the Leader of the Opposition, have a debate on TV in a public forum 
at any place of his choice. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — If he is not prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Minister in charge of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to meet me in a debate at any place, any forum of his choice; or 
the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Whelan). In fact, Mr. Speaker, I say on behalf of all the 
Members in the Liberal caucus, that we challenge any Member opposite to meet them at any public 
forum, to meet them at any public forum, to debate this issue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — And, I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that our challenge will be met with the usual attitude 
of silence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is being rammed through the Legislature for one reason, and one reason only. It is 
being rammed through because the Government of Saskatchewan does not want the people of 
Saskatchewan to be able to consider the implications of it. They don’t want them to think about it. They 
don’t want them to know what is really happening and that is why they are making this Bill go through 
as quickly as possible, and that is why we are going to hold it as long as we can possibly hold it, so that 
the people of Saskatchewan will be able to consider it and make their views known in due course. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1018 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS L. B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I was very interested tonight in the comments of 
the Hon. Member for Nipawin. I am one of the youngest Members in the House, but yet I realize that in 
a serious debate like this, we don’t have that many alternatives. Unfortunately, at present there are more 
Members opposite than there are here on this side. Not for long, I hope, but I think that rather than 
rashly suggesting that we call for an election, which has about as much chance as a snowflake in July, 
we have instead presented a logical and responsible attitude in proposal . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — . . . when we proposed this amendment, we hoped that the public would, 
therefore, have a chance to comment on this through inquiries which we are proposing, and that 
therefore, the Government perhaps will consider this legislation and give it another thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to speak for the first time on Bill 1. Much has been said about 
this proposal of expropriating and nationalizing the potash industry. Both the Government and the 
Opposition have stated their positions on this legislation, and we obviously have some disagreements. 
 
The Liberal alternatives have been stated well, with sincerity and genuine concern for the Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — I am a little upset that when we have mentioned that because we feel this 
strongly, and we would meet to speak with any of you at any time, that you have accused the Member 
for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone) of running for the leadership. I still make that same proposal, and 
believe me I am not running for the leadership at the present time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Are you . . . 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — At the present time, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
The NDP Government, Mr. Speaker, does not have a monopoly on all good programs, and all good 
ideas for the people. I too, was elected by the hard-working and trusting people of northwest 
Saskatchewan. My constituents know that I ran in the election because I was genuinely concerned about 
them and the people of Saskatchewan, and that I will work to my utmost ability to ensure that they are 
represented well. I am in the Legislature to represent these constituents and will vote for issues that are 
the best deal for them. I find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, however, that since I arrived here, I now, 
according to the NDP support only multinational corporations, big business, and the ordinary citizen is 
forgotten completely. I didn’t know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whom are they trying to kid? My constituents 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1019 
 

and the people of Saskatchewan will not be taken in by these ploys. I have never known a president or 
an official of a multinational corporation, and I wouldn’t know where to go to find one. I would dare say 
that many of the Members opposite would fit into that category, much more than our present Members 
here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — When I speak to this Bill then, Mr. Speaker, I am speaking as a genuinely 
concerned individual and representative of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let us consider the potash takeover, Mr. Speaker. Is it good for Saskatchewan? Do the people of 
Saskatchewan know this? I think not. We have not given them an opportunity to decide for themselves. 
We have asked that they be given time to consider this momentous Bill and its overpowering control. 
 
The Saskatchewan people are being educated to some extent, Mr. Speaker, but I prefer to call it by its 
real name, brainwashing. There is an intense, one-sided campaign, paid for by the people of 
Saskatchewan, to show them that this is another great takeover by the NDP. 
 
Fair is a word that is often heard in this House, Mr. Speaker. Fair prices, fair taxes. Why not be fair and 
give the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to really state their opinion on this Bill? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Why are the NDP in such a hurry? Did you hear them promise to take over in 
the June election? Are they afraid that if the people had time to think, they will be asking embarrassing 
questions? 
 
As a point of interest, Mr. Speaker, why are the Conservatives in a hurry, although they have slowed 
down a bit, although that isn’t the word they used tonight. 
 
Let us look at this proposal realistically, Mr. Speaker. How much will this proposal cost the people of 
Saskatchewan? Who knows, but we are trying to find out. Each year we receive about $130 million in 
taxes and royalties from potash. To take over the total industry will cost approximately $2 billion and 
the repayment of bonds will take $240 million per year. It’s going to get better, Mr. Attorney General. 
Will that leave us as much as $130 million in profits? Will our taxes go up or down? Potash prices 
fluctuate like wheat prices. During 1975 much of the shipments of potash have declined by 24 per cent. 
Can we make enough profit in the good years to make up for the bad years? 
 
The people in rural Saskatchewan know how difficult it is to make a living under these conditions. They 
are independent people, Mr. Speaker. They know what risk and expertise is and how to run good farm 
operations. Do they feel that the Government is capable of such expertise? I think not. 
 
The question here is not whether the people of Saskatchewan are capable of operating a potash industry. 
Our people are capable 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1020 
 

and have always been able to rise to the occasion. But would it not be better to train people in this area, 
without takeover? It’s like deciding to remove the Red Cross from water safety and let MLAs take over 
life-guarding duties, because we are responsible people. Now I can swim fairly well, and likely would, 
with experience, deem to be fairly sufficient, but due to some unfortunate circumstances, if I was 
life-guarding the MLA pool, some of you might lose your lives, or be very well under the weather by an 
unfortunate circumstance or situation. I think the damage and the loss would be irreparable. 
 
Let us examine other considerations. How many jobs will it make? We need more jobs in small centres. 
Will taking over existing mines create new jobs, or will it just create jobs for civil servants? How much 
industry will it bring, Mr. Speaker? If you had a company, would you bring it here? A province where 
you are never sure of your future. Do you think that anyone else would? Does the Government opposite 
expect the taxpayers to pay for everything? 
 
As you may realize, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals of Saskatchewan are concerned that this takeover will do 
irreparable damage to this province. It will probably have damaging effects for Canada as a whole. 
 
Now, I have raised a number of questions that must be honestly answered before this Bill can be voted 
on. Let us look at these areas more closely. As I have mentioned today, the Government gets about $130 
million per year from the potash industry, without any risks. If it takes over the mines, it can get little 
more in good years, but it will get a good deal less in bad years, and might even lose money. Both the 
price and the volume of potash sales can change. In 1965, potash sold at over $37 per ton. By 1969 it 
had dropped below $20 per ton, but in 1975 it had climbed to over $70 per ton. After years of 
prorationing production, the mines finally reached full capacity in 1974. However, the higher prices are 
causing reduction in sales. From June, 1975, to October, 1975, monthly shipments have dropped 24 per 
cent. 
 
Many developing countries are having problems and trouble paying for high-priced oil and cannot afford 
potash. Notwithstanding these problems, Mr. Speaker, mining is risky. The potash mines had to sink 
shafts in the Blairmore formation, which contains water under high pressure. The cost was high. Several 
serious floods have cost millions of dollars. Two of these mines currently have leaks and that could cost 
the owners millions of dollars. 
 
Besides these risks a confrontation with the Federal Government is likely. The Canadian Government 
has said it will not give up its taxes on the potash mines. We have attempted to relay this possibility to 
the Government, Mr. Speaker, and I am glad that the Attorney General has agreed to meet with the 
Federal Government. I would hope that these sessions will be considered with an open mind. 
 
The Federal Government has a perfect right to collect fair taxes. Few people in Saskatchewan realize 
that the percentage from 30 to 45 per cent of the money spent in the province, is received from the 
Federal Government. Unfortunately, the Provincial Government takes over 100 per cent of the credit. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1021 
 

One of the most serious possibilities is, that future development in Saskatchewan will almost certainly 
be severely retarded. If the potash mines are expropriated, other companies will almost certainly avoid 
Saskatchewan. After forcing the oil companies out of Saskatchewan, as was duly represented this 
evening, you will see that no one will want to come into Saskatchewan to try to build up a new industry. 
 
The NDP Government is now trying to entice them back, because it realized Saskoil cannot do it alone. 
Saskatchewan needs jobs, and it needs industry, and it needs the young people in Saskatchewan. The 
Government cannot begin to do it all. Private enterprise is necessary. 
 
Provincial ads that are being presented at the moment, have stated that potash is different. With this I 
agree. Owning a potash mine is very different from a government ownership of a public utility. Utilities 
are monopolies that provide a service to the citizens. If they provide that service at a reasonable price, 
then it is not important to make a profit. This is the difference. 
 
Saskatchewan uses almost no potash, and our production must be sold in world markets at world prices, 
just like wheat. If we do not operate potash mines at a profit, then there is no point in having them. 
Britain is a good example of what can happen when governments nationalize major industries that are 
supposed to be profitable. 
 
Why does the NDP Government want to own the potash industry? The NDP claim that they have to take 
over the industry, because the companies refuse to expand, and are trying to fight the Government 
taxation. When the companies came to Saskatchewan they were promised the right to make a fair profit, 
if they could overcome the risks of mining and marketing. In spite of what the NDP claim, do you think 
the companies would have come, if this were not the case? The present NDP Government has never 
made a proposal to the companies, that their profits should be taxed. Instead they have said that the taxes 
will be so much, and if the companies lose money, that’s too bad. 
 
During the last 50 years, we have come to realize that taxes based on income are much fairer than taxes 
based on property. The NDP have been turning back the clock. The companies have been trying to have 
the courts make the Government act like a responsible government of the twentieth century. The 
Government wants to control the potash industry and have it run by civil servants. They hope to make 
more money by taking all the profit. Simple arithmetic tells you that they will not. 
 
The real reason the NDP Government wants to take over the potash mines is because they believe in 
state ownership. It started with the Land Bank, and now it’s the potash mines. What will be next? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Do Liberals oppose the takeover because they put the potash mines ahead of the 
people, as the NDP would like to indicate? No. We agree with the present opposition to taking over the 
potash mines, but Liberals are not opposed to takeover of companies as a matter of principle. Liberals 
believe that 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1022 
 

businesses flourish when they are run by free individuals and that governments should step in only when 
there is something other than profit required. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — We oppose the takeover of the potash mines, because t will not give the citizens 
of Saskatchewan as much income from their potash as will the tax on the profits. Above all, a takeover 
will discourage free individuals from establishing other enterprises that we need so badly in 
Saskatchewan and in the rest of Canada. 
 
What then are the Liberal alternatives? Liberals believe that the citizens of Saskatchewan should receive 
their rightful share of potash revenues through fair taxation. The NDP have not proposed that potash 
companies be taxed on their profits. Instead, they are currently taxing oil reserves. A type of tax that 
most governments have discarded years ago. 
 
An independent commission should be established with the power to subpoena documents from the 
Government and potash companies, to determine fair taxation levels. Liberals believe that the 
Saskatchewan Government should invest its money in industries that will create more jobs, help people 
to remain in small communities and produce things like gas and farm machinery which are needed in 
everyday life in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — We need gas for heating and gasoline to run our tractors and cars. Right now we 
have gas for winter and most of our gasoline and diesel oil is from Alberta. As Ontario and Quebec need 
more oil and gas, we will have to fight them for our share if we don’t get it from Saskatchewan. 
 
We could put more money into developing oil and gas reserves to supply our needs. Saskatchewan has a 
large reserve of cheap coal. The province could begin to develop a coal gasification plant. It may cost $1 
billion, but it would create 1,500 jobs and ensure that we have gas for decades. 
 
Besides these alternatives, Mr. Speaker, I feel there is one other important question we must morally ask 
ourselves as representatives of the people. Are there things that we need more? Are there better ways to 
spend our money? If the preceding has seemed redundant, Mr. Speaker, perhaps you will forgive me for 
two reasons. 
 
The first, that due to my profession as a teacher, I have the habit of repeating things until students finally 
learn what I am talking about. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Second, is the fact, and you will understand that Hon. Members I am sure, is the 
fact that the legislation is so overwhelming that we must continually get information to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1023 
 

I was pleased to hear that Saskatchewan has a good credit rating, which enables this province to borrow 
large sums of money for good causes. It was indeed due to good government management and 
particularly to the $82 million that was left by the Ross Thatcher Liberal Government in 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I feel that the question now to be considered is that, if 
in this time of inflation we are going to borrow large sums of money, is it in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan to spend it on potash? Let us assume that the amount spent will be $1 billion. 
This is approximately the same amount as our provincial budget. If we were to assume that all the 
programs in our areas were good, then we could say that with the money borrowed, our budget could be 
doubled, and all the programs, theoretically, could be twice as good. Now I am not naive enough to 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that a large number of the programs are as successful as they could be, or that 
doubling a department budget would double efficiency or value. I’m not advising that this money be 
borrowed to double our budget, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest neither are the responsible people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But if we are going to head on into spending and borrowing extravagant amounts of money, surely there 
are better and more needed areas upon which to spend this money. 
 
In the Budget Speech to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 1975, there was quite a selection of 
services to the people. Let me remind the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, of a paragraph under this 
section, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, for the past three years this Government has focussed much of its attention on economic 
development. This is understandable, because imaginative programs for people cost money. Prudent 
management requires the establishment of a strong base to support these programs. 

 
The Government, I suggest, is still focussing its attention on economic development and spending 
money. Their imagination has, however, run away with them. Any prudent management has gone out 
the window. 
 
Let us now look for a few minutes then, at some of the areas that could really use, and deserve this 
added financial assistance. 
 
It is easy to criticize, Mr. Speaker, but I’d like to offer a few positive considerations. Let us look first at 
the needs of the senior citizens. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — How we care for those people who built our province, is an important indication 
of the quality and compassion of our society. Despite the extensively increased revenues, our province 
has received in the past few years, the NDP is ignoring the needs of the elderly. Granted, Mr. Speaker, 
the senior citizens were mentioned in the Throne Speech debate, when it was 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1024 
 

stated, and I quote: 
 

To assist senior citizens in meeting rising costs, you will be asked to amend the Senior Citizens Home 
Repair Assistance Act, 1973, to increase the maximum amount of the grant available. 

 
I agree with this whole-heartedly. 
 
NDP priorities have been such, that to the extent no money can be found for senior citizens, while 
millions of dollars are squandered on other programs such as potash. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — As a beginning, the Government set up a Senior Citizens Benefits program, 
which was implemented in October, 1975, to provide additional income to senior citizens by increasing 
the basic income level for those who are receiving the Guaranteed Income Supplement. 
 
The maximum amount which one can receive after considering the combined Old Age Security and 
Guaranteed Income Supplement, is $20. Twenty dollars, Mr. Speaker. The logical question before you 
start throwing facts and figures around, is to first ask how many senior citizens received federal 
assistance in Saskatchewan. Let me review these figures. Old Age Pensions - there was 98,111. Those 
receiving Canada Pension and Old Age Pensions - 2,843. Total - 100,954. Of that, 56.1 per cent, or 
57,052 are receiving Guaranteed Income Supplement. Of these, 5,752, 22,148 received the maximum 
Guaranteed Income Supplement, and 34,904 received a partial amount. 
 
Let us compare these figures with Saskatchewan citizens receiving provincial senior citizen assistance. 
Remember, the total number receiving some federal assistance is 100,954. I dare say that no matter what 
type of assistance they receive, it is well over $20. In comparison to that figure of 100,954, only 37,932 
senior citizens receiving the Saskatchewan senior citizens’ benefits. The average monthly supplement 
for a senior person is $17.09. It is difficult for some of these senior citizens to believe this. Mr. Speaker, 
I show you this one dollar bill. One senior citizen came to me with a cheque for one dollar. She was 
obviously hurt by the insult that the Government considered she only deserved one dollar. She asked, 
what was she to do. Should she go and collect 50 or 100 of them, so she could make some worth out of 
it. She hinted at another solution, but as she was a stately and a mannerly lady, she delicately stated what 
the Government could do with the one dollar. 
 
There have been many cases where the cheques have been below $10. Our senior citizens are being 
treated like second-class citizens. This is not fair to the people who built this country, the schools, the 
churches and the roads. We are grateful people like you and I, to these senior citizens. Up to ten years 
ago, it is estimated that the pioneers could be credited directly or indirectly, with about 90 per cent of the 
progress in Saskatchewan. You put this on the credit side, do you think that we are treating them fairly. 
Is $20 thanks for all their contributions? I think not. Is this not an area where we could use more of our 
money? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1025 
 

MISS CLIFFORD: — We have suggested that the Government, as a Liberal Government would do, 
guarantee every individual of 65 years of age and over a minimum income of $350, married couples 
should be guaranteed up to $500. Is this not a good investment? Some of this money could be spent to 
provide Level III nursing care as an insured program under the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Program. 
Patients needing these levels of care are required to pay for them or seek assistance from the Department 
of Social Services. This situation gives rise to serious problems, which in some cases patients end up in 
a level of care other than what they really require. Senior citizens and their families tried to get them in a 
different level of care so that the individual’s savings will not be used up. By placing Level III care 
under hospitalization, much of the pressure of the Level IV institution will be relieved. And our 
institutions would be better able to provide adequate services. In short, Mr. Speaker, health care needs 
our help. Basically, understanding by the Government is a real consideration. 
 
We have many dedicated people in our health field. With the Government reluctant to admit what the 
real problems are, their hands are tied. 
 
One solution to this problem is set up in the system of foster homes. To date the Minister of Social 
Services has not answered our questions on how many private homes are now giving care, what 
legislation sets standards for those homes. I suggest that there is no control or guarantee of standards. 
 
Let me also say before anyone jumps to any conclusions on the opposite side, that I feel that nursing 
homes in this province are doing a good job and we should commend them. They too are facing 
increased costs and need fair consideration. The Government should provide more extensive grants for 
Levels I and II institutions and allow more of Saskatchewan’s smaller communities to have Level I and 
II institutions. 
 
Just for a moment let me reveal some of the hardships affecting residents in nursing homes in 
Saskatchewan compared to those of Alberta. My constituency runs along the Alberta border. In Provost, 
Alberta, rates for a double room are $115, while a single room is $130. Besides this, each guest received 
$45 to $50 subsidy and the institution also receives a government subsidy. These are reasonable rates, I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker. When you look at the nursing homes in Saskatchewan, however, the story is 
different. Because 60 miles from that same institutions in Provost, Level I care charges $315 per guest 
and no government subsidy has been given since 1973. Level II care, $430, but a government subsidy 
for $105 really costs the patient $325. Level III is charging $650. The Government however, subsidizes 
$335 and the guest only pays $315. 
 
This is quite a difference, Mr. Speaker. Also only 12 miles from that same institution in Alberta we find 
one in Saskatchewan paying in Level I, $378; Level II, $388 a month. A far cry from the $115 or $130. 
 
Can you really suggest that buying a potash mine is more important? The number of senior citizens in 
Canada is increasing rapidly and will, as estimated, double by the year 2000. This could be an asset 
rather than a problem. But steps must be taken to correct present problems and be prepared to face new 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1026 
 

ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have suggested a number of needs that are critical to senior citizens. I would venture to 
guess that if you asked these senior citizens, their sons, their daughters, their grandchildren, whether 
they would rather borrow and spend the money on senior citizens or on potash, they would surely say let 
us help the senior citizens. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — I think this point was brought out rather clearly in a meeting that the Premier 
attended last evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the areas of health, medical and hospital plans and social services, the Government has 
spent $405 million, approximately. Can you imagine what increases in budget would do to these areas. 
 
Before the bright people opposite suggest, but you can’t get this money unless you have some resource 
money. True, but before I refer you back to my former remarks as to whether it would really be a good 
business deal to take over the potash industry. Here is an area where money is desperately needed, in the 
area of senior citizens and social services. 
 
Let us look at some other areas where this money could be better and more economically spent. Mr. 
Speaker, I have previously mentioned a major reform of the Saskatchewan welfare system is the need to 
allow those who are genuinely in need to seek help and have easier access to it. Or insisting that those 
who are capable of providing for themselves do so. 
 
Under the present system we treat the senor citizens, the physically and mentally handicapped and the 
widow as one. This is wrong. People should be treated as individuals with different needs, different 
problems requiring different solutions. 
 
The Liberal party is pledged, as should be the Government, to reform the welfare administration, 
eliminating waste and mismanagement. The truly needy will be assured of a decent income without 
having to suffer the humiliations usually associated with the welfare system. Those who can work will 
be provided with whatever educational practice and training is necessary to enable them to find a place 
in the main stream of society. 
 
The present NDP policy in some fields is unfortunately adding program onto program. It is time for 
compassion and change based on a desire to help those who are unable to help themselves. This help 
will cost money. Money that is being spent on potash. 
 
There are, of course, many areas and departments that will come under the Social Services Department. 
All these programs could use additional budget increases. Glancing in the directory of Social Services 
we find programs like Day care and REACH. Much has been said about the need of more finances in 
day care, as well as setting up a board of appeal and complete investigation of the REACH program. 
Both these ideas will take money. 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1027 
 

Also included in the directory is the Corrections Division. Here is a corrections proposal for 
Saskatchewan that the Social Services has put out. This is one of the programs that has been proposed 
for future development. If it were to be accepted wouldn’t this be a place where some of our proposed 
investment in potash could be better used? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Let us look at this proposal just a little closer as an example of something that 
we maybe could be throwing out the window because we are not using our money in the best way. 
 
The planning document presents a statement for primary proposal of directions up to 1980, based on an 
in-depth analysis of the present service system. Anticipated service needs of correction clientele. I dare 
say that each one of us here, I think, would not do otherwise than to say that the correction system does 
need some improvements in it. 
 
This document suggests that we should aim to achieve a more equal balance between control and 
rehabilitation functions of our system, and devote a greater portion of total correctional resources to 
rehabilitative and preventive programming, preferably in the offenders’ home communities. This will 
involve planned, rather than piecemeal development of non-institutional programs in order to provide a 
wider range of sentencings, alternatives to the courts. It will also involve, in time, considerable 
restructuring of existing institutional resources and programs as more alternatives to state custodial care 
are made available. 
 
Of course, though, when we start changing the correctional system we have to look at a number of other 
things. Because the institutions which we now have are getting old and they will have to be replaced. 
They have also proposed to put other institutional centres throughout the province. Central to the plan is 
a proposal that all correctional services be organized, though not necessarily administered, around three 
regions, centered in Saskatoon, Prince Albert and Regina. 
 
Each region should provide a range of programs in integrated services. These services and changes in 
facilities will cost money. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, all these proposals plus others, need the money 
which is now going to be proposed for potash. As I said, this is just a proposal. But an example of other 
proposals that will be scrapped, because we do not have the money. We need the increased funds and 
these funds are needlessly being spent on the potash industry. 
 
Let us look at another area for a few brief moments, Mr. Speaker, the area of CORE services. 
 
CORE Services is a new agency which reports to the CORE Services Co-ordinating Committee. This 
committee is composed of the Ministers of Health, Education and Social Services and the Deputy 
Ministers of these Departments. CORE Services administration’s first tasks are to develop a community 
based mental retardation program, administer Saskatchewan’s two mental retardation institutes and 
administer the vocational rehabilitation disabled persons agreement. CORE Services is doing a 
commendable job and could definitely use some extra 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1028 
 

financial assistance. 
 
I should like to mention some other areas in Social Services that need immediate attention. Two of these 
situations originate in the Lloydminster area. The first concerns a 16-room residence for low level 
mental retardation. This residence is for adults who go to the workshop in that area. This residence is 
shared by eight Saskatchewan trainees and eight Alberta trainees. At present the Alberta trainees, as 
wards of the Government, receive $330 a month, while the Saskatchewan wards are to receive $270.50, 
a difference of $122.50 before the proposed new increase, but still well below Alberta’s. The directors 
of this residence were led to believe that by October 1, the Saskatchewan Government would increase 
their subsidies to the trainees to $313, retroactive to September 1. To date, nothing has been done to 
assist this residence and trainees. If something isn’t done soon the residence will have to start giving the 
eight spaces that we now take up to the Alberta trainees, because we don’t have enough money to 
support them in the home. The workshop, while waiting for Government assistance, has already put 
$11,000 into this residence so the trainees can stay there. Money that shouldn’t have to be spent due to 
Government neglect. 
 
I am sorry that the Member for Cutknife is not here, but I would urge the Government to look into the 
situation and consider that the money would possibly be better spent in this area. 
 
Another concern in the Lloydminster area is regarding the WA Thorpe Recovery Centre, with a present 
of $120,000, which is funded jointly by Saskatchewan and Alberta. I admit that joint government 
support can sometimes cause a problem. I would rather suggest that it gives us an opportunity to set an 
example for these people. We have an extensive AWARE program in this province which I 
wholeheartedly support. 
 
The purpose of this program is to educate the public regarding drinking and drinking problems and 
serves its purpose. 
 
The recovery centre however, that I speak of is for admission and diagnoses and direction for a seven to 
ten day period for alcoholics. It is considered a short-term rehabilitation centre. They have had 80 per 
cent occupancy since opening. There are 12 staff and it is open 24 hours a day. This type of facility 
surely is necessary and should be more adequately supported. It is time we tackled the problem head on. 
Not just a program to ensure social drinkers, but one where money could be used well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Workshops for the mentally handicapped persons provide a great service in our 
province. Many of these are funded to a great extent by the communities involved. This is a good idea 
because the communities therefore feel responsible and feel a part of these workshops. But often 
facilities and programs are lacking because of lack of funds. Limited staff do their best to ensure quality 
programs. But a few qualified persons cannot do that much. I would suggest, therefore, and I hope that it 
is taken as a concerned opinion, that the province needs a training program for persons working in these 
workshop 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1029 
 

areas. It should be set up in either the university or technical institutes, and would naturally demand a 
large expenditure of provincial funds. Believe me, the money spent in this essential and growing service 
is much better than spent on the potash industry. Here is an innovative and imaginative program that you 
are often suggesting that Saskatchewan could be proud of. 
 
We have been seeing buttons lately, Mr. Speaker, of Potash For the People. I say let’s put people before 
potash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say before I close. I should like to say that for many days the 
Government has been asked for information. Some of this information is for the costs or the guaranteed 
top price that will be paid for the potash expropriation. Wide ranging sums of between $500 million and 
a billion dollars have been given. I think that the Members opposite perhaps don’t realize what the 
difference between a million and a billion dollars is, or $500 million and a billion dollars really is. 
 
I should like to use a simple analogy that may help the Members opposite to understand the difference 
more clearly and realize that these figures that you have given us are of little value and an insult to the 
people of Saskatchewan to ask them to allow such a blank cheque to be signed. 
 
As most of you are married I use an analogy with your wives. Now gentlemen, if you have $1 million 
and you gave it to your wife to spend, saying spend a thousand dollars a day and don’t come back until 
you spend it, I would suggest that your wives will be gone 3.5 years. If you had a billion dollars and you 
gave your wife the money and used the same conditions, your wife would be gone 3,500 years. That’s 
quite the difference. Just the same as $500 million and $1 billion is quite the difference. 
 
I seriously ask you to reconsider this and think your situation over. At this time, Mr. Speaker, I beg 
leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 2 - An Act respecting the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, if I fail to display my youthful 
exuberance, let me assure you it is not because my heart is not in opposition to this Bill, but rather I fear 
that due to my activities in this House in recent days and weeks, some Members opposite may have fear 
for their political future and have, I suspect, dropped the flu bug into my coffee. 
 
I will say at the outset, that the Progressive Conservative Party is unequivocally and irreversibly 
opposed to this potash 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1030 
 

takeover for two reasons: 
 

(i) the financial problems arising out of the purchase of the mines; 
(ii) and more important, the effect of the legislation on the people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am not so naive as to think that this Bill will not pass. There are 38 votes across the floor 
and something considerably less on this side. The NDP in their arrogance will ram this Bill through. It is 
just a question of time. Bearing this in mind, however, I cannot agree with the Liberals and their 
insistence on making the cost of this expropriation public. If this were done, it would erode what little 
negotiating power the master planners have and perhaps cost Saskatchewan people even more than we 
initially imagined. 
 
We are, however, Mr. Speaker, considering an amendment to this Bill whereby the risk would be 
assumed by those who are being paid to assume the risk, those people, of course, being the money 
lenders. If they think it is such a good deal, let them assume the risk. There should not be one thin dime 
of taxpayers’ money, public funds or general revenue invested in this venture. Although the financing of 
this potash takeover is very important, let us move to an even more important area, and that is the people 
issues of this takeover. 
 
I wonder first if anyone has asked the employees of the potash companies if they are willing to become 
civil servants. I wonder if they are aware that only 5 per cent of the potash mined in Saskatchewan has a 
domestic market. Has anyone told them that if we don’t get our share of this somewhat hostile export 
market, that they will probably be looking for jobs elsewhere, probably Alberta or some other 
industrialized progressive area of our nation. 
 
I wonder also if anyone has explained to the people now working in the potash industry the implications 
of Section 13 of Bill 2. This section deals specifically with The Public Service Superannuation Act. 
Although I am not a lawyer, the way I read it, is that any benefits built up to date of the takeover shall be 
terminated, but that the corporation may of its own accord establish and support any or all of the 
following: a pension fund; a group insurance plan; and any other pension, superannuation or employee 
benefit arrangement; except of course where a person is a contributor under The Public Service 
Superannuation Act, to The Liquor Board Superannuation Act, The Power Corporation Superannuation 
Act or The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act or The Workmen’s Compensation 
Board Superannuation Act, immediately prior to his employment by this corporation. In these case the 
benefits would follow. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this is a subtle way of saying, move boys, we’re bringing in some of the 
party’s faithful! 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you and the Members of the Legislature contemplate the following: What 
may be the logical end result to this kind of acquisition by threat of expropriation procedure that this 
Government has shown itself capable of employing? 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, it is potash. Will all of the resources 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1031 
 

eventually be acquired in a like manner? How about coal and uranium? Are they next? We suspect that 
they are and in fact the private investment in the coal industry in recent years, due to the restrictive 
government regulations, has been practically nil. After all the resources are securely locked into the 
inventories of the Crown corporation, what then? Could it be down the road a short way that the 
Government has their sights set on the last and greatest resource? That is the fertile farm lands of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Far fetched, Mr. Speaker, we believe not! 
 
Any government which would expropriate the assets of one industry unto itself can and would 
expropriate the assets of another, any time it has deemed it desirable for the party in power to do so. No 
firm or individual can assume that his property will be exempt and we include the farms and farmland. 
 
The twentieth century confronts man with political threats to his freedom which are far more subtle and 
perhaps far more serious than those which promoted the wars, revolutions and constitutional reforms 
that make up the history of his pursuit of political liberty. The threat is more subtle because it comes 
through the political instruments which theoretically are his instruments, because it comes in the name 
of the objectives which are as much his objectives as his political liberty. The threat is more serious in 
its potentialities because there is today no agreed and limited sphere of action and concern allocated to 
the government. Increasingly the efforts of the state have no limits and it becomes the final arbiter in 
more and more of man’s relations with his fellow man and even in much of his way of life. There is no 
way to give big government a human face, no way to bring it close to the people. 
 
If we want tasks which must be done by government to be well done, if we want to avoid being 
overwhelmed by the sheer size of government, then we must be more selective in what we ask or permit 
government to undertake. I ask all Members of this Assembly to consider what I have said before they 
vote in favor of this Bill. I stand opposed as do all Progressive Conservative Members in this House. 
Just in case it hasn’t been mentioned before, I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Government 
opposite has a mandate for this type of takeover and I would, therefore, challenge the NDP Government 
to call an election on this very issue tomorrow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative position has finally been put 
forward with a little me-tooism, except that we fail to understand the Conservative rationale that the 
money figure should not be given to the people of Saskatchewan, because it would weaken what 
bargaining position the Government opposite has. Obviously, the Conservatives have not read Bill 1, 
which gives the government the biggest hammer that it could possibly have and puts it in the best 
negotiating position it could possibly have. I think that the need for the cost that the Liberal Opposition 
has asked for is one that would inform the people of Saskatchewan once and for all what this wonder, as 
they have called it, will cost, what the gamble will cost, what the risk will cost and what the people of 
Saskatchewan and future generations are being charged with when the Premier 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1032 
 

of Saskatchewan says he is prepared to borrow $1 billion to pay for the potash takeover. 
 
Obviously, as I have, the Conservatives have not read Bill 1, because if they read Bill 1, they would 
know that it becomes more and more obvious that the people have a right to know and the people have a 
need to know what it is going to cost and again what future generations may have to pay. 
 
At the outset I should like to indicate the general framework, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 2 is the operative 
section basically of a nationalization of the potash industry. It will give the form of operation once the 
government assumes control of the potash industry. We in the Liberal Party of course have made it 
abundantly clear that we are totally and unalterably opposed to the nationalization of the potash industry, 
and that we feel that the nationalization of the potash industry is too great a risk for the people of 
Saskatchewan to take; that the nationalization of the potash industry proposed by the Government 
opposite is poorly thought out, has been done with inadequate information, has probably been done in a 
fit of pique, when the Government opposite did not know what programs or what direction to take after 
it saw its popular vote drop from 55 per cent to 39 per cent. That in short, the nationalization of the 
potash industry is an ill-thought out approach and program of the Government opposite. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct my remarks to four direct criticisms, broad criticisms, 
of Bill 2. As I said at the outset, Bill 2, being the framework which will operate the nationalized potash 
industry. 
 
My criticisms of Bill 2 will, as I say, take four main points. First of all the question of the political 
involvement in a Crown corporation; the severe disadvantages or great disadvantages that result 
therefrom to people of Saskatchewan; which disadvantages will become more obvious as the 
Government operates in a competitive field as opposed to a public utility monopoly field. 
 
The second general area of criticism will be the matter of organizational problems of nationalized 
industries. Surprisingly the Government opposite has seen fit to avoid discussion and the Attorney 
General, in particular in his remarks on second reading very pointedly, I suggest, ignored the 
organizational problem of a nationalized industry which organizational problems have been well 
illustrated in many countries and in particular in England. 
 
My criticisms too will be on the general financial operation of a nationalized industry. 
 
My fourth area of criticism will be on the previously set-out Liberal approach of the Opposition and 
Parliament’s right to vote supply, a right which is being denied the Opposition, which is being denied to 
this House and which is being denied to the people of Saskatchewan by the refusal of the Government 
opposite to give even a pretty close estimate of what this nationalization of the potash industry will cost. 
 
I revert to the question basically of political control of Crown corporations. Should the Government 
opposite nationalize 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1033 
 

all the potash mines? Of course it will be the largest enterprise in the Province of Saskatchewan, outside 
of government. The opportunity for political control, political operation and political deviousness for 
want of a better word, is obvious. I have documented, if I can refer, it is relevant in this particular case, I 
have referred in previous debates to the matter of political involvement in the Crown corporations since 
the NDP took power. I don’t even think that the Government opposite itself sincerely believes that it 
hasn’t manipulated and used the Crown corporations to its own political ends. They admitted delay in 
the rate increases in the various corporations until after the provincial election, notwithstanding 
management recommendation to the contrary have been well documented. The firings of senior 
personnel because they wouldn’t do government’s bidding, the Cabinet’s bidding, and were putting the 
interests of the Crown corporation first, have also been well documented. The appointment of NDP 
defeated candidates prominent, NDP workers, not just into the Crown corporations but into senior 
management positions, has also been well documented. Obviously, if this type of practice, the 
precedents have been well set by the Government opposite, if this type of practice continues and is 
utilized in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan the immediate and long-term detrimental effects to 
the people of Saskatchewan will be obvious. But the Government opposite certainly cannot be accused 
of not telling the people of Saskatchewan that it didn’t intend to use the Crown corporations for its 
political ends because it certainly has. I am going to quote in a little detail from a paper that was 
prepared on government enterprises and which paper was delivered to the fifth annual conference of the 
Institute of Public Administration, Canada. It deals with the question of Crown corporations as operated 
by the previous CCF Government in the Province of Saskatchewan. The quote begins: 
 

I think we can say that while a Saskatchewan Crown corporation is an independent policy formulating 
body and indeed its "independence" administratively is suspect because of the device of the ministerial 
chairman. 

 
It is "independent" of departmental procedures but, and I emphasize these words, not independent of 
political influence in administration unless the responsible minister so wills it. 

 
Obviously, not too many responsible Ministers opposite so will it, because again, the political 
involvement in administration has been made clear and I know of no Crown corporation that has 
avoided the political taint of the Government opposite. 
 

Apparently all major policy is made by political bodies, the government finance office, the Cabinet 
and the Legislature. Even when the board of an operating corporation does make a policy decision the 
device is that the ministerial chairman renders the decision: (1) by a body at very least aware of 
political considerations. The speaker then poses the question, is it desirable to have Crown 
corporations under such close political control? I think we can say immediately that the political heads 
do or did think it desirable and I can also say as a matter of history that senior administrators do, or 
did, think it desirable for the 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1034 
 

present structure was largely conceived by a small group of administrators. It might be considered 
strange that political heads would favor a system which so definitely fixed upon them responsibility 
for all acts of Crown corporations, whereas one of the supposed advantages of the Crown corporation 
structure is that it shelters a minister from so direct a responsibility. 

 
To explain this I think we must recall to mind the circumstances under which Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations were established. The Government did not stumble into government enterprise all the 
while protesting its distaste for the whole procedure as happened in most other Canadian jurisdictions. 
The establishment of Crown corporations was a major plank in the CCF Party’s political program. 
Under these conditions it would have been useless for the Cabinet to endeavor to shelter behind 
independent corporations. The electorate clearly held the Cabinet responsible for virtually all acts of 
Crown corporations and the degree of independence given to the corporations was that which was 
considered by the Cabinet as likely to give responsible ministers the best opportunity to administer the 
operation efficiently under this personal direction. 

 
As administrator, I do not speak with any authority on the matter. I believe the political climate is 
undergoing a considerable change in regard to Crown corporations. Their existence now are hardly a 
matter (and this is again the speaker) of political controversy. The failures of discontinued operations, 
the successes, are accepted and few if any new Crown corporations appear to be contemplated. 
Furthermore, the corporations have been successful in establishing their separate existence with the 
public. This change affords the Cabinet the opportunity to establish Crown corporations on a more 
independent basis. 

 
It is interesting to note that one responsible Minister has retired as chairman of three corporations and 
has arranged for an appointed official to replace him. This may indicate a trend. The change would 
appear to be desirable and would offer to our Saskatchewan Crown corporations more of the well 
known advantages of independence in administration, but I would not regard the change as being 
particularly significant. I am inclined to the view that much of our preoccupation with the form of the 
corporation is illusory. If we grant that policy matters must be controlled by the political heads and if 
we grant that policy matters and administrative matters are merely two ends of the same stick, then it 
appears likely that the degree of policy and the need of administrative independence is determined not 
so much by the corporation structure as by political considerations in the mind of the responsible 
minister and his colleagues. 

 
These comments, which document once and for all the desire of the Government opposite to bring the 
political involvement in the Crown corporations down to the administrative level, were made by one 
Allan E. Blakeney, B.A., L.L.B. when he was secretary of the Government Finance Office and were 
delivered, as I say, to the fifth annual conference of the Institute of 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1035 
 

Public Administration of Canada in 1953. 
 
Even when the Premier of the Government opposite was a civil servant involved with Crown 
corporations he made it abundantly clear to the people of Canada that he endorsed and that he welcomed 
and that he would stand behind the political involvement in the administration of Crown corporations 
and that the political independence of Crown corporations was not something that he believed in. 
Granted, comment was made that at least he is consistent, but I don’t think that that consistency augurs 
well for the people of Saskatchewan when we embark upon the greatest expropriation in the history of 
this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — As a matter of fact, I think his consistency should frighten the people of Saskatchewan 
and his consistency should be of great concern to the people of Saskatchewan because the Premier of 
Saskatchewan has endorsed the policy of making Crown corporations political arms of the party of 
which he is in charge and making Crown corporations not politically independent but political vehicles 
to be manipulated, to be controlled, to be directed, to be used and to be abused by the Minister 
responsible and, in the words of the now Premier of Saskatchewan, "the Minister responsible and his 
Cabinet colleagues". Fortunately, it is another example of the people of Saskatchewan being well 
advised, well warned, of what the Premier of this province stands for and it is another example of the 
people of Saskatchewan being well advised and well warned of exactly what will happen with any 
Crown corporation and what will happen with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many obvious problems and concerns that arise from an admission of policy by the now 
Premier that political considerations must apply to the administration of Crown corporations that can’t 
be directed to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Obviously an administrative decision to close 
obsolete or dangerous or environmentally dangerous mines, must be made by political considerations 
and not a free management decision in the best interests of supposedly a competitive Crown corporation. 
Obsolete mines in the future will not be closed down because the political ramifications would be such it 
would be politically dangerous for the Government to close down obsolete, costly and inefficient mines. 
We have examples in the potash industry and the reaction to the previously stated program of the Liberal 
Government, the prorationing scheme with the political considerations of the state of New Mexico 
towards the Government of the United States to threaten to impose anti-dumping legislation or a penalty 
tariff against Saskatchewan potash sold in the United States unless some arrangements were made to 
protect the less efficient, less productive, and more costly mines in New Mexico. 
 
There are other concerns with political involvement in Crown corporations. It is easy to perceive that 
new more productive technology would not be allowed to be implemented because it would be bad 
politics to fire people, or release people or give early retirement to people by reasons of technological 
change. The stance of the Government opposite has already been made clear in previous legislation. And 
we have 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1036 
 

examples with other Crown corporations or Government corporations where it has become bad policy to 
make proper and necessary management decisions. 
 
We have in England the problems with the British coal industry, a nationalized industry, which 
constantly has to be propped up and I will in my address later give some of the financial implications of 
the propping up and the cost of propping up the British coal industry, where in that industry 
technological changes constantly balked and constantly opposed by those affected and, of course, the 
government’s hands are tied because it is politically unpalatable to make the proper management and 
administrative changes. 
 
Another example, of course, close to home are the obvious problems of the Post Office of Canada, 
where new technology and technological changes being fought constantly by employees and 
notwithstanding that guarantees of job security are made, job security which probably, rightly or 
wrongly, would not be offered in the private sector or would not be mandatory in the private sector, but 
which political decisions and not necessarily in the partisan sense, but in political decisions are forcing 
inefficiencies, bad economic decisions and costly decisions on the people of Canada. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Like overruling the Crown corporations! 
 
MR. LANE: — That may well be, I certainly wouldn’t be prepared to disagree with the Attorney 
General that political considerations may be made but it won’t certainly make it right that political 
decisions are being made. 
 
I think that we, too, Mr. Speaker, have the question of political considerations operating in the matters of 
management decisions, appointment of management. Another example on the federal level where a 
political decision was made, whether a correct or incorrect political decision, was the desire on the part 
of the Government of Canada to ensure that the French culture of Canada had equal access to 
managerial positions and that compensation was made in the way of appointment to allow, or to force, 
or to direct the appointment of Quebecers to managerial positions with the priority being based on the 
political decision, again rightly or wrongly, that it was in the national interest to make these 
compensatory appointments, based on culturism as opposed to necessarily management capabilities. I 
think that an error was made in the case of Air Canada and that particular decision turned out to be a 
wrong one notwithstanding that it may well have been a proper, and I think a proper, political 
consideration to make the initial decision. But again, it is an obvious problem that can arise even when it 
is not government policy and it is not government policy on the federal level to make Crown corporation 
appointments strictly on the basis of political partisanship like it is with the Government opposite. And it 
is certainly not government policy on the Federal Government level to set down in writing that you 
intend to endorse the appointment of political appointments into managerial decisions and into 
management positions and administrative positions as the now Premier of Saskatchewan did when he 
spoke before the conference of the Institute of Public Administrators. 
 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1037 
 

I shall get into the great difference and I will use the Premier’s words to explain for the fired Minister of 
Agriculture (Mr. Messer), the difference between the political appointments to the Boards and the 
political appointments to managerial positions. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear that the Government 
opposite has taken the argument just given by the new Minister of Industry and Commerce as to policy 
board decisions and political appointments and that the Government opposite has so abused the Crown 
corporation concept in this province that it is appointing political supporters, qualified or unqualified for 
positions and inserting them into senior management positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dangers, either of a partisan or non-partisan political involvement in Crown 
corporations are too obvious and I don’t think have to be documented any further. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting that the extent of the size and involvement in the economic or effect on the economic life of 
Saskatchewan of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan makes it quite clear that the idea of political 
involvement continued on the scale of the Government opposite has made, it will mean that the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan will become the biggest haven for defeated NDP political candidates, 
NDP supporters, any other body or agency in this province. It will allow the Government opposite, if it 
continues its stated policy of political involvement in internal management of Crown corporations, allow 
the NDP to totally control and manipulate those areas of Saskatchewan where the Government owns the 
mines and those areas of Saskatchewan where the Government will threaten to own the mine by reason 
of the expropriation legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also mentioned some of the organizational problems and if the Minister of Industry will 
bear with me I shall show the statements of the Premier with regard to organization. But there have been 
well-documented problems with nationalized industries in the corporations that they have taken over. I 
refer to an article on Nationalized Industries in Britain, prepared for British Information Services, the 
forerunner I think of the Information Services of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Who was the author? 
 
MR. LANE: — I think in reality the author was not stated on the paper, and I purposely looked for it 
knowing the Minister opposite would ask the usual question. I think what it was was a whole body of 
happy little people sitting down and British Information Services got together and drafted it up because 
no one seemingly is taking credit for the document. But it is under the mother-ship or the endorsement 
of the British Information Services. 
 
Now obviously one must, when one is talking about Crown corporations and internal operations one 
must get away from the usual business thought that exists. You know, profits are no longer profits, they 
don’t have profits in Crown corporations, they make money and they have a surplus, but they don’t have 
profits. They don’t lose money. Crown corporations don’t lose money either. And two corporations, I’m 
referring to the paper: 
 

Two corporations in 1966-67, British Railways and British Waterways, made . . . 
 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1038 
 

Now this is a very interesting concept that many people and certainly the people opposite have no 
trouble comprehending and that people who have any business experience whatsoever do - net deficits. 
 
Now that’s a rather interesting position to be in to happily have made a net deficit. I don’t know why, 
when we are talking about Crown corporations everybody is afraid to talk about a profit or loss. A net 
deficit - I think that many of the Government Members would be quite prepared to accept that, is in 
reality - a loss. Others, which have for a time experienced working deficits, i.e. an ongoing loss, I think 
would only include British European Airways and BOAC. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Like the Canadian National Railway! 
 
MR. LANE: — If the Attorney General is using Canadian National Railways as an example of Crown 
corporations then he would be well advised to pull this Bill out right now and forget the whole idea, 
because the people of Saskatchewan can’t afford another operation like Canadian National Railways. 
Make no mistake, if the Attorney General wants to stand with that one, I’ll sit down if he will let me 
resume my place and he can withdraw the Bill. I’m sure he would have the support of his own Members, 
certainly have the support of the Members on this side of the House. 
 

The cumulative capital debt outstanding from the Coal Board (in other words they owe some money) 
to the Exchequer, i.e. the Government (i.e. the people) at the end of 1965-1966 was 575 million 
pounds at that time, about $1.5 billion dollars, and would have been greater had not 450 million 
pounds been written off under The Coal Industry Act of 1965. 

 
Now that type of financial legerdemain that goes on in Crown corporations in the parkbed of ineffective 
and non-functioning socialism in England, certainly applies in the Province of Saskatchewan, and 
without a doubt, based on the statements of the Premier of this province, will apply in the Province of 
Saskatchewan, if in the future the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan loses money and loses fantastic 
sums of money. Members opposite won’t say it had a loss, that it blew it, that it bombed out, but oh! we 
merely had a net deficit. That if the Government opposite is forced to step in and bail out the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, that it won’t be because it lost money, but we’ll just enter this as a 
cumulative capital debt, so then the people don’t have to worry about the several hundreds of millions of 
dollars and as I say, that type of financial legerdemain is going without a doubt to be involved and again 
the evidence is quite clear that this type of thinking and this type of statements, financial records, and 
record keeping will be involved because the Government opposite already is trying to hide the figures 
and the costs of this potential takeover from the people of Saskatchewan. Already they were talking of 
nice, close little figures like $500 to a billion dollars. You know, the old ‘what’s a billion Blakeney’. It 
used to be ‘what’s a million C. D. Howe’. It’s now ‘what’s a billion Blakeney’ and it’s not just inflation 
that’s the difference between one million and one billion, it’s the socialist plot of the Government 
opposite as it attempts to fool and blind 



 
December 11, 1975 

 

1039 
 

the people of Saskatchewan to the enormous risk and gamble that they insist on undertaking. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, we’ll continue of course . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They’ll hire Premier Barrett. 
 
MR. LANE: — I don’t think that ex-Premier Barrett will be coming back to Saskatchewan for a job, 
I’m sure, knowing how the government employees out there take leave of absence, no matter how they 
do it, he will go back to being a happy little social worker that he always was and that he always 
enjoyed, and I know that the Government opposite, with its stated . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Come on, they’ll hire him. 
 
MR. LANE: — No, they won’t hire him because the Government opposite gave us the assurance, and 
they gave us their word that they would not expand the civil service in these inflationary times and they 
would restrain the size of civil service, so I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan in all fairness to the 
Government need fear the Government opposite hiring an awful lot of defeated NDP candidates from 
BC, because they have given us their assurance that they would restrain the Government and civil 
service expansion. As a matter of fact, I think we have their assurance and I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan need be particularly concerned that there will be a great influx of defeated civil servants. 
There will be lots of them floating around the country, but they had better not be in Saskatchewan. 
 
But some of the interesting financial things that happen when we get involved with Crown corporations 
that become poorly run, and become a drain on the people, we can look at BOAC . . . 
 
MR. MESSER: — Look at what! 
 
MR. LANE: — British Overseas Airlines Corporation, and I’m sure he has flown on it. 
 
MR. MESSER: — . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — I don’t think (1) that that’s going to be any concern to any of the people of 
Saskatchewan should your mind wander and I’m sure (11) that it wouldn’t get very far. As a matter of 
fact, it would probably get lost getting to the seat right across from the Hon. Member if it did wander. 
 
Now, BOAC’s capital structure was reorganized under the Air Corporations Act of 1966, when 
borrowings of 176 million pounds were extinguished. Now this is another thing that happens when we 
get a Crown corporation. No longer do we have to worry about paying things back if we get in a bind. 
We reorganize the Crown corporation and extinguish the debt. Now, who, in fact, has to pay for this 
extinguished debt? Are we really so naive as to believe that it’s just gone, it disappears? No, it’s not 



 
December 11, 1975 
 

1040 
 

self-liquidating. There’s no doubt that the great group of people, so-called upon by the Government 
opposite, so-called the people, they are the ones that in effect get stuck with this extinguished debt. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — Not too good right now as a matter of fact, and I have already used that as an example. 
Again, if you want to use that as your example, and your basis for taking over the potash industry, that’s 
another good argument for not going ahead with Bill 2, and it’s certainly another good argument for not 
nationalizing the potash industry. 
 
Now I see that the Minister for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) has his mouth open, and of course that 
automatically means that he has got his ears closed, because he can’t do both, listen and talk at the same 
time, and I think that if the Minister for Biggar was really concerned about this issue, that he would join 
the debate. He has been asked on several occasions tonight to participate in the debate of nationalizing 
the potash industry of Saskatchewan. Seemingly he has either been muzzled, or he’s afraid to put his 
foot in his mouth by speaking in this House. Again, and certainly it has been called to the attention of 
the Press tonight, that many of the senior Members responsible for this legislation, many senior Cabinet 
Ministers responsible for the nationalization and the operation of the nationalization of the potash 
industry, and many senior Ministers that are responsible for the raising of the billion dollars, have 
refused, or neglected, to speak in this debate. I think that this is a shameful act on the part of the 
Government opposite, and I accuse each and every one of those Members as Ministers who are directly 
responsible, the Finance Minister, the Minister responsible for the Potash Corporation, the Premier, to 
stand up and speak in this debate, and I accuse you of a dereliction of duty if you refuse to participate in 
this particular debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m continuing with the financial comments on the operation of Crown corporations as 
they apply to nationalized industries in Britain. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! As scintillating as I find the debate, time presses on, and being 9:30, 
this House now stands adjourned until 2:30 tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


