




















































Hansard: April 03, 1975


1402 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Thursday, April 3, 1975 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO CANADIAN WAR BRIDES 

 

HON. E. KRAMER: (Minister of Highways) Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not have students to introduce, 

they probably are still students but they are studying different things than they do in high schools and 

collegiates. We are honored today with the presence of the Canadian War Brides and they are led by 

Mrs. Betty Frame of North Battleford and Mrs. Brock, I believe, of Abernethy. These ladies are with us 

today from all parts of Canada and originally from all parts of Western Europe, mainly from the British 

Isles. I must say it is a pleasure and a privilege for me to welcome them today on behalf of the House. 

 

I believe that the ladies that came back with our men from overseas have made a tremendous 

contribution to Canada, certainly to Saskatchewan from which the majority of the ladies are from today. 

They have done everything that they possibly could to make their adopted homeland a better place to 

live in. Some of them have gone to farms, some to business and some to other walks of life. They have 

made Saskatchewan and Canada their home and raised their families. Some of them have done a fair job 

at that, there is a lady here from Big River today who has brought 12 new young Canadians to us in 

Saskatchewan. I don't know whether that is a record . . . 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER: . . . but I think it comes close. We thank you all for choosing Canada and choosing a 

Canadian. Would you please stand up ladies and be recognized. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) I should like to join with the Member for North 

Battleford in welcoming on behalf of the Opposition the War Brides to our Legislative Assembly. When 

he announced the lady from Rig River and the 12 wonderful Saskatchewan children, Cy MacDonald 

turned pale, he thought he had the record up to that time. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: I just want to say it might not be a record but it is a damned good average. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1403 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

RCMP INTERROGATION TECHNIQUES 

 

MR. J.G. RICHARDS: (Saskatoon University) Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should like to address a question 

to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow). I have just today got hold of a copy of the RCMP Interrogation 

Techniques Manual released in Ottawa last week. It is the most interesting and damning document. As 

you go through the table of contents and read about the "heaven and hell techniques", the "lawyer 

gimmicks", the exaggerations, flattery, and all the other devices the ROMP are learning for the 

interrogation of people in our society. The obvious question to address to the Attorney General as the 

Minister of the Saskatchewan Government responsible for justice and the police in our province is: Is 

the Minister aware that this kind of document has been used by the Mounted Police in the province; is it 

being used by any other police academies in the province; and what conclusions does the Minister draw 

about the type of training that is being given to the police forces in the Province of Saskatchewan; if this 

is any indication of the mentality and the treatment of Canadian citizens by police forces in our country? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) Mr. Speaker, I am not personally acquainted with the 

document. I have heard of it because of the recent publicity given to it. Quite frankly I obtained a copy 

myself only just this morning. I have directed the copy to the Deputy Attorney General with a view to 

giving me advice at a subsequent date as to what action, if any, should be taken in regard to that 

document as far as the province and the Government of Saskatchewan is concerned. That is as far as I 

can go. I might add that I have no information nor do I believe that the document is either used by the 

RCMP in Saskatchewan or by any municipal police force in Saskatchewan. Informally I have heard that 

the document was one of several police handbooks at one time considered in the course of the RCMP 

studies and basically in Ottawa. Now that is a hearsay comment, I will await until I am better advised 

and more informed as to the situation and advise the Member and the House in the next several days or 

so. 

 

MR. RICHARDS: A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think the obvious request which the House has a 

right to make is that the conclusions that you draw, now that you do have a copy of this report and you 

are obviously in the process, through your departmental officials, of examining the training - whether 

this document is being used, is that you be prepared to make public and communicate to this House and 

to the people of Saskatchewan what you determine about the nature of training procedures of the police 

forces in Saskatchewan. Can the Minister, and I appreciate the Minister has only had a copy of this 

today, can the Minister give this assurance to the House that he will make public and communicate to 

the public the conclusions that he draws from the internal review and study that he is undertaking? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: I see no objection to making that comment in response at a later date to a question 

by yourself after I have had an opportunity to peruse this document. I am reasonably confident, 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1404 

 

with almost certainty, that the Saskatchewan Police College, which as you'll know we set up a year ago 

and this is the second year it is operating, does not employ that document as a matter of training, This 

involves training of municipal police forces in Saskatchewan so I think we can say safely that that type 

of document or that type of exposure is not the basis of any instructor of any police force, municipally, 

in Saskatchewan. I also believe it not to be a document in use by the RCMP in Saskatchewan but I am 

taking steps to inform myself as to that fact and to the nature of the document and I shall be pleased 

within the next several days to make a further response to the Hon. Member. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

WHITE PAPER ON CONSUMER PRODUCT WARRANTIES 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI: (Minister of Culture and Youth) Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day I should like to lay on the table a White Paper respecting Consumer Product Warranties. This is a 

White Paper which is being tabled in this Legislature to generate discussion by both Members of this 

Assembly as well as the public at large. 

 

This document does not necessarily represent government policy and it is for the consideration of the 

Legislature and the public. The law regulating warranties on consumer products is no longer adequate to 

meet the needs of today's consumer. Consumers are experiencing difficulties with warranties as 

evidenced by the great number of warranty related complaints that are brought to the Department of 

Consumer Affairs. The main purpose of any warranty legislation will be to ensure reasonable standards 

of performance, durability, quality and safety in the goods that are purchased and sold. If standards are 

violated the consumer and, in some cases, the retailer should have an effective means of redress. 

 

This White Paper mentions a number of consumer warranty problems and outlines remedies for the 

consumer and provides certain standards and procedures to be followed. It deals with the proposed 

solutions of disputes which may arise as to a product's performance. We invite comments and 

suggestions on this White Paper and what changes should or should not be made. As I say, this is 

another opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to play a major role in advising the Government on 

the kinds of policies they believe we, as representatives, should be taking on their behalf and 

accordingly? I table the White Paper on Consumer Product Warranties. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

OIL INDUSTRY IN SWIFT CURRENT AREA 

 

MR. D.G. STEUART: (Leader of the Opposition) Before the Orders of the Day I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cowley). Is the Minister aware of the recent, almost 

total shut-down of the oil industry in the Swift Current area as a result of one of the companies in the 

United States cancelling their nomination for the month of April? The reason being they found some oil 

at a cheaper price. If he is aware, what steps has 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1405 

 

he taken to make sure that this situation will not happen for the nominations in the month of April for 

production in the month of May? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY: (Minister of Mineral Resources) Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am aware of the 

situation in the Swift Current area with respect to the medium gravity crude where nominations dropped 

virtually to zero. I think there is more than one reason for this. As the Leader of the Opposition is aware, 

the primary market is in the United States, and the export tax which is applied virtually equally to this 

kind of crude and to light crudes has caused some problems in terms of its price there. I should also like 

to point out that the refinery which uses most of this crude oil has a large surplus, I am told at this time, 

of products as a result of the Mississippi River flooding and the product is normally got rid of by barge 

so the refinery has a backup of product and have some difficulty in taking as much crude as they 

normally would. 

 

I want to say that we have been in contact with the National Energy Board and with the Department of 

Energy, Mines and Resources in Ottawa. I know our director of the Energy Secretariat, Mr. Lloyd, was 

late yesterday afternoon talking with some of the people on the National Energy Board and I haven't had 

an opportunity to see him this morning to find out what has transpired there. As the Leader of the 

Opposition will be aware, I expect to be in Ottawa next week at the Energy Conference and at that time I 

intend to follow up with discussions with Mr. MacDonald. I hope that we can take, together with the 

Federal Government, such actions that are necessary to ensure that this not only does not happen again 

in the month of May, but also, as the National Energy Board implements what I take to be the Federal 

Government's policy restricting exports to the United States, that this does not have any more adverse 

effect on this type of crude than it will upon other types. 

 

MR. STEUART: A supplementary question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Is the Minister aware that when I 

raised the question a few days ago to the Premier, that I suggested and he agreed that this was proof of 

rigidity of the provincial tax structure as well as the federal tax structure in regard to export tax. Now, is 

the Minister saying that at the Conference next week he intends to put forward some suggestion that a 

more rapid response to this sort of price situation can be met by both the Provincial and Federal 

Governments in the future? I am sure he is aware that we are liable to run into this sort of thing more 

frequently from now on and I would hope that he would take the lead in saying that we are prepared to 

develop a more flexible approach to our taxation of the oil industry and have the Federal Government do 

the same thing. Because I agree it won't work – it could work if the Provincial Government was 

prepared to reduce their taxes far enough but it would work much better if it was a co-operative effort 

between the Provincial and Federal Government. So would he give us that undertaking that he is 

prepared to set the example and then be in a strong position to ask Ottawa to do the same thing? We 

could be in a great deal more trouble down the road if we don't. 

 

MR. COWLEY: Mr. Deputy Speaker, in response to the Leader of the Opposition's question, I believe 

I said that together, I hoped that we would be able to work out something and I think that 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1406 

 

means that both Governments have to recognize that there may indeed on both of our parts be changes 

necessary. I want to indicate that we have had some difficulty over the winter with both the medium 

gravity and the heavy crude in terms of finding its market and we had a substantial amount of the heavy 

crude shut in I believe in the month of December. At that time we approached the Federal Government 

with respect to the problem and there was an adjustment made on the export charge of heavy crude We 

also at the end of December adjusted our royalties on heavy crude and medium crude, lowering them on 

both gravities of crude. We have indicated to the Federal Government since December that we felt there 

needed to be more movement in the medium gravity crude because while this month has been 

particularly bad, the month previous to this had also seen very low nominations in the Swift Current 

area. It is a problem which has been around for awhile. 

 

In discussions with Mr. MacDonald that I hope to have next week, I hope we can come to some 

understanding on this problem and the long-run problem that is going to come if the Federal 

Government does continue to restrict exports in general of crude oil to the United States which will have 

particular problems for Saskatchewan because of the types of crude we have. 

 

CLOSURE OF HOSPITAL BEDS 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Milestone) Mr. Deputy Speaker, before the orders of the Day I should like 

to direct a question to the Minister of Health (Mr. Smishek). 

 

I think the Minister of Health is aware that last Friday the General Hospital in the city of Regina 

announced the closure of another 34 beds, bringing to a total the number of closed beds to 133. The 

reason given is the shortage of nurses in the Province of Saskatchewan, particularly the number of 

nurses who are willing to work at the General Hospital. Also I am sure the Minister is aware that the 

Base Hospital has been unable to open all the beds that are required because of a shortage of nurses and 

it would appear now that the city of Regina and all of southern Saskatchewan is shorter of beds than at 

any other time in the past despite the building of the new Base Hospital in Saskatchewan. I am sure the 

Minister is also aware that in the month of April the majority of nurses in Saskatchewan should be 

working and as the chairman of the Hospital Board has indicated in the month of July and August he 

expects the situation to worsen. Can the Minister tell me what steps he has taken to try and alleviate this 

emergency situation or the continuing deteriorating situation in southern Saskatchewan so that it will not 

have a very detrimental effect on the entire hospital situation in not only the city of Regina but the whole 

of southern Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Health) Mr. Deputy Speaker, while there are nurse shortages in 

some southern Saskatchewan communities, it is not a general problem in southern Saskatchewan. We 

have problems in Yorkton and Weyburn and at Moose Jaw and in some of the smaller centres but the 

problem isn't as critical as it is in the city of Regina. It is not a question of having not enough nurses in 

the province, the problem arises because there are nurses who are not prepared to work at the present 

time. I have indicated to this House that in the Province of Saskatchewan at the 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1407 

 

beginning of the year we had just about 6,800 that were registered. There are 4,000 full time jobs, so it 

really means that 2,800 nurses are not employed. It is not because there isn't work for them, we are 

satisfied because of the economic conditions of the province - the buoyancy of the economy, there are 

those who dropped out of the labor force and would just as soon look after the welfare of their families 

rather than to be employed in hospitals. We recognize that shift work is having its problems. I can also 

tell the Member that in the northern part of the province, for whatever reasons despite the economic 

conditions, that problem doesn't exist. We have had a conference at the end of February where we 

invited the hospital administrators, the registered nurses, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the 

Canadian Union of Public Employees, the Service Employees Union as well as administrators from a 

variety of hospitals, initially our thought was to have a conference with about 40 or 50 people. But a 

great deal of interest was expressed over 140 people attended that conference. Among other things the 

Department of Education and the Department of Health, together with Canada Manpower, initiated as of 

the first of April a short-term upgrading and refresher course. A number of nurses have registered in the 

six-week upgrading and refresher course. Also, together with the hospitals in the city of Regina, we are 

trying to check whether shift work can be restructured. We're also working on day care nurseries, in fact, 

it's got to be more than day care nurseries. The Hon. Member will appreciate this because of night shift 

operation. Whether we can, through these ways, attract the nurses to come to work, only time will tell. 

Some other things that are being reviewed by the hospitals to bring or help entice nurses to come back 

into the labor force. The Member will know we are training as many new nurses as ever before, who 

will be graduating this summer, in fact, this year the number enrolled is greater than ever before. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: Supplementary question. As the Minister has indicated it seems that the two 

hospitals in Saskatchewan where the worst situation is in hospitals that the Minister himself runs, the 

General Hospital and the Base Hospital. I know there are some hospitals in other parts of the province 

where nursing shortages are present so is the Minister doing anything specific to examine and alleviate 

the problems that the nurses at the General Hospital have indicated, the problems of salaries, working 

conditions, shift differentials and is the Government of Saskatchewan and the Department of Health 

examining particularly the situation of working conditions and the complaints of nurses from the 

General Hospital and the Base Hospital. I think particularly of the General Hospital because that's where 

the majority of complaints have come from in the past. Just exactly what is he doing about his own 

responsibility because it would appear that those two hospitals under the Department of Health, 

Government of Saskatchewan are the worst in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: Mr. Speaker, may I correct the Hon. Member's misunderstanding. These are not 

hospitals that are run by the Department of Health. These are hospitals that are administered by boards 

in the same way as union hospital boards. There is no real difference. May I also inform the Hon. 

Member when he referred to those two hospitals in particular the South Saskatchewan Hospital Board 

not only administer the Plains Hospital it also has the Pasqua Hospital and the Wascana Hospital. In 

those two hospitals I'm glad to report that the situation 



 

April 3, 1975 

 

1408 

 

is much better. Certainly some of the grievances that have been brought to the attention of the general 

board have been looked into and have been corrected. In cases of the salary question, as the Hon. 

Member may be aware, our negotiations were completed last May. At that time the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses in a press statement did say that Saskatchewan wages that were negotiated at that time were 

higher than any other province in western Canada. Now since then others have negotiated, The matter of 

shifts and shift work is being examined and I think that our conditions are as good as in any hospital. 

 

POLL MAPS 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to give a response to a 

question the Hon. Member for Athabasca asked yesterday about poll maps. I'm advised, I haven't 

personally discussed this with the individual, but the situation is that there is a delay. We're not able to 

be specific as to the length of the delay. The reason for it is that Lands and Surveys is proofing all maps 

and forwarding them to the Electoral Office which in turn then forwards the maps to the Returning 

Officers. In some cases changes have been made. The maps have to be returned to Lands and Surveys to 

go through a second process to make sure the descriptions are absolutely accurate. They're working on 

this now. We don't know exactly how many changes will be necessary but hope the maps will be 

available very shortly. 

 

Assembly adjourned at 9:32 o'clock p.m. 

 


