
























































Hansard: December 16, 1975


1135 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

23rd Day 
 

Tuesday, December 16, 1975. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, in your name and on behalf of the 
House, I am very pleased to welcome about 30 students from Balfour Collegiate with their teacher, Mr. 
Weichel here today. I am sure they will enjoy viewing what happens in the House and I will be meeting 
with them later on today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. H. P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I too, want to welcome the 30 students from 
Balfour Tech. and their teacher, Mr. Weichel. Balfour Tech. school is my home collegiate as my 
daughter took her high school there some time ago. I want to welcome them today. While the school is 
located in Regina Wascana, my former seat, most of the Balfour Tech. students do live in Regina 
Victoria. I want to extend a warm welcome to them all and hope they have a pleasant stay. At the same 
time I wish them the compliments of the season. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Significant Crude Oil Discovery in Southeast Saskatchewan 
 
HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Mineral 
Resources I wish to make an announcement before the Orders of the Day. 
 
I wish to announce a significant crude oil show in a recent well drilled in southeastern Saskatchewan. 
Light gravity crude oil was obtained from the well located approximately five mile west of the city of 
Estevan. The well drilled by Dome Petroleum Limited, is called the Dome-Scurry-Table Land 11-14-2-9 
W2nd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the indicated discovery at this well is significant for two reasons. It is significant because 
oil has been recovered from the Winnipegosis formation, a formation from which there is no other 
present oil production in the province. And it is significant in that the crude obtained is light gravity 
crude. At present 70 per cent of Saskatchewan crude production is in the heavy and medium crude 
categories. 
 
Production casing to determine the potential of the well, has been set. The well was drilled to a total 
depth of 10,259 feet. The Dome Table Land well is the first of a multiple well program planned for the 
southeast part of the province by Dome Petroleum Limited. 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1136 
 

Mr. Speaker, although this could be an important new oil find for the Province of Saskatchewan, our 
department is cautiously optimistic. Because of the open hole condition, the well could not be 
adequately tested during drilling operations. However, now that production casing has been set, further 
testing will be undertaken to accurately measure the potential of the well. 
 
Should this potential prove to be good, Dome Petroleum would receive the benefits of the new oil 
royalty rates in our proposed oil policy. These benefits would, of course, Mr. Speaker, be available to 
any company discovering new oil in Saskatchewan. Our proposed oil policy is intended to give 
incentives to, and to encourage the petroleum industry in the province so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can benefit from this resource. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to briefly reply to the 
Minister’s announcement. We certainly welcome the news that there has been a find. I was trying to 
listen carefully to the Minister and I think the find might be somewhat speculative at this time. But we 
do welcome this news. 
 
I think it should be pointed out to the people of Saskatchewan that it was a private operator who found 
this oil and not Saskoil. I understand that the commitment to take these exploration wells was made 
many months ago by Dome and having nothing whatsoever to do with the Government’s new 
announced policy on oil royalties. However, we do welcome the news and we hope that the company is 
successful in bringing this well to proper completion along with many more wells. 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could reply to the Minister. I too 
welcome this news. I think it is a real Christmas present and I do hope that this does turn out to be the 
start of many good things. We have taken a setback as far as Bill 42 goes over the years and certainly we 
are looking for the brighter side right now. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Is Potash Corporation Presently Headquartered in Regina 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 
should like to direct a question to the Member for Biggar, the Chairman of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan (Mr. Cowley). 
 
Is it a fact that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is now headquartered in an office located at 
2161 Scarth Street? Is it a further fact that they have leased approximately 8,000 square feet of office 
space at that location? Is it a fact that that location has been renovated and partitions have been set up for 
an office, a board room has been constructed complete with, I understand, lead lining, to make it 
impossible for electronic eavesdropping? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1137 
 

MR. STEUART: — Is it a fact that Mr. Dumbowsky the president of the Saskatchewan Potash 
Corporation and Mr. Ching, executive vice-president, or whatever his present title is, is it a fact that they 
are located there and presently directing the operations of the development of this corporation from that 
location? And if these things are facts, would you not call that the present head office of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am very interested in the questions 
from the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. I don’t know what stopped his electronic eavesdropping 
devices, and if it is lead as he suggests, I will take his word for it. I am not aware what material any 
board room might be lined with or otherwise. 
 
With respect to the question of the location, I believe that is the exact location. It is the MacPherson, 
Leslie, Tyerman Building, the MLT building, and I assume the Member has the correct address. The 
head office of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, as was set out in the Order in Council 
establishing it is Regina. Office space was acquired for the corporation. It is under lease. No decision as 
to the permanent location of the head office has been made. In the interim it is in Regina, it is in that 
location. 
 
With respect to the type of furniture, etc. that may be in there, I am not familiar with whether or not it is 
lead lined or anything else. I certainly would be prepared to get the Member for Prince Albert the costs 
of the furnishings and the costs of the partitions, which I understand are moveable. The office space 
would be suitable in the event that the head office moved to some other location for some other agency 
or sub-leasing. The president and vice-president are located at that location now. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure what is lead lined, I think it is the board room and it 
might be some of the executive hired as well. Would the Minister then - and I find it remarkable that 
some of these things he doesn’t know. I hope he would admit that in the Saskatchewan Gazette, Regina, 
Friday, December 5, he has been named as Chairman of the Board; Mr. Romanow has been named a 
member of the Board; and Mr. Messer has been named a member of the Board; I think Mr. Romanow is 
the vice-chairman. I hope they have been attending some meetings. 
 
I understand the furniture is in the nature of $80,000 to $90,000 imported from Montreal or Toronto. 
Would the Member admit that being Chairman of the Board he would take some interest I would hope in 
the affairs of the corporation, and the lease on 8,000 square feet I would presume is about $9 a square 
foot? You are talking about $70,000 a year for probably a five-year lease. Would the Minister explain to 
us then that with 8,000 square feet, approximately how many staff, I would think this would look after a 
staff of anywhere from 30 to 40 to 50 people under normal circumstances? Would the Minister please 
explain the sort of, the point I want him to explain is that if the head office is to be moved, if the head 
office is not to be located there, it is the head office now, if the head office is not to be located there, is 
this going to be the pattern of that corporation? They have committed or invested anywhere from 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1138 
 

$400,000 to $500,000 of money right now. And they casually get up and say but we might move it later 
on. I suggest, and I ask the Minister to confirm the truth that that is in fact the head office and will 
continue to be the head office and all the people like Mr. Romanow going around threatening people, is 
that they are playing cheap games when you know the head office is presently there and if you move 
later, accept you are wasting a fantastic amount of the people’s money. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t mind replying to the Hon. Member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake’s speech. I want to say first of all that I am aware that there is furniture and I am aware of the 
office space, the size and type and the particular decor of the furniture I am not aware of. I want to 
inform the Member that it was ordered from Eaton’s in Regina, which while it is a national company it 
does do some business in Regina as I think some of the Members of the House may be aware of. Where 
they obtain their supplies from, I don’t know. But nevertheless it’s a Regina based operation from which 
the furniture was purchased and the partitions as well. 
 
With respect to the head office, it certainly will accommodate more staff than are presently there. With 
respect to the location of the head office, I want to suggest to the Member opposite that the leasing of 
that space was made some time ago when we were considering a policy which is different from the 
policy which we are now under. I want to suggest to the Member that the space in my view would not be 
adequate for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 12 or 15 months from now. We have not made 
and I emphasize that again, a final decision as to the location of the head office. The location of the head 
office for the time being has been since the Order in Council was passed and continues to be Regina. 
When a decision is made with respect to the location of the head office of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan I would expect to announce it in this House or outside this House if it is not sitting. I 
would expect also that alternative arrangements with respect to the facilities that are now there for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan could be accommodated without any loss of money to the 
province. 
 
MR. STEUART: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if . . . 
 
MR. KRAMER: — State your question. 
 
MR. STEUART: — It’s nice to see you back. How is the auctioneering going? I hope for your sake it 
is. I wonder if . . . 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That’s your third question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I wonder if . . . I have forgotten what I was going to say now. I wonder if the 
Minister would then confirm that in the near future we can expect the Minister who has been appointed 
now as Chairman of the Board, that he will come into this House and be prepared to give us more 
information. It is strange he knew where the furniture was purchased, but he has no idea of the 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1139 
 

cost, he has no idea if there is a board room constructed. I suggest that if he answers the question 
truthfully we are going to find that this is probably a floating head office here in Regina today, 
threatened in Saskatoon tomorrow, possibly for Moose Jaw the next day. It may be a long time before 
that is pinned down at a very costly expense to the people of this province. 
 

Only Crown Agencies Exempt From Rent Controls 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I address this question to the Minister in 
charge of Consumer Affairs and Co-operatives (Mr. Shillington). In view of the statement made this 
morning on an open line show by the Hon. Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) to the effect that 
only Crown agencies would be exempt from any rent controls and thereby attempted in my view to 
misrepresent the legislation as we have it before the House today, presumably for political gain. Would 
the Minister explain and tell this House once again, what exemptions are provided for under the 
amended Residential Tenancies Act as it applies to rent controls? 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the question 
illustrates a good point and one perhaps that the Member for Regina South might be interested in since I 
believe he has raised it in the House. The Residential Tenancies Act and the rent controls which are part 
of it were designed to regulate the relationship between a landlord and one who rents a residential 
tenancy. Within the literal definition of that in the Act, there are some kinds of tenancies that are 
included that are not residential tenancies in the normal sense. The rent control in The Residential 
Tenancies Act does not cover the Salvation Army because it is not designed to deal with that sort of 
relationship. It doesn’t cover the YMCA, it wasn’t designed to deal with that sort of relationship. It does 
not cover Crown leases because The Residential Tenancies Act is not designed to deal with that kind of 
relationship. 
 
MR. DYCK: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Would the Minister be good enough then to 
provide this information in writing to the Member for Regina South so that we do not have a repeated 
attempt to misrepresent this Bill to the general public? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege. My Point of Privilege 
is that the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair either didn’t listen to what I had to say this morning or didn’t 
understand. Or else he didn’t listen to what I had to say last night when I went into that in some detail or 
alternatively and it is most likely he listened but didn’t understand. 
 
I did not say, with respect to the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair, that it was only the Crown that was 
exempt under the rent control legislation. I said it was a piece of legislation which by and large 
exempted the Crown and I wondered whether that was a satisfactory principle for us to be accepting. I 
will not stand and listen to that Member in particular misrepresent what I said to the public on that 
broadcast. I said and I repeat to you that the Crown by and large under that Act is exempt and if 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1140 
 

you look at the Act you will find that it is exempt. May I say in one last remark to the Minister who 
responded to that question . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Member relates to the House what he said on the radio, the Member for 
Saskatoon Mayfair has another version of it. I can only accept the Member’s words in either case 
because I didn’t hear the broadcast. I can only accept the Member’s words that that is what he said. I 
don’t think that is a Point of Privilege, perhaps a point of correction to that extent. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. The member 
for Saskatoon Mayfair stood on his feet and said that the Member for Regina South deliberately 
misrepresented the facts. That is what he said. And certainly that is a Point of Privilege. He imputed a 
motive to the Member for Regina South and the Member for Regina South is merely standing up and 
defending himself. 
 
MR. DYCK: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to point out to the Member that this is not what I said, as a 
matter of fact I can read from my question. He attempted to misrepresent, I never said anything about 
deliberate misrepresentation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, there does indeed seem to be some confusion on the opposite 
side of the House as to what this Bill is trying to do, we’ll certainly provide them with that information. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on the same Point of Privilege and if you like, on a 
different Point of Privilege. You can discuss all you like the substance of that piece of legislation and the 
substance of what I said, but you are not going to stand here . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — This is a Point of Privilege and I am entitled to rise on a point of Privilege. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would ask the Member to come to the Point of Privilege as quickly as 
possible in stating the Point of Privilege, and not preface it with some other remarks. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I will come to it very quickly. That member stood there two minutes ago and he 
said that I attempted to misrepresent this situation. That is a Point of Privilege, I put to you, Mr. Speaker, 
with deference, for a Member to stand on that side and say to me on this side that I attempted to 
misrepresent this situation. First of all it is a Point of Privilege, secondly, I deny it flatly and I ask the 
Member to withdraw it. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1141 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t accept that as a Point of Privilege. I accept that it may be a debating point. I 
suggest to both the Members that this is not the proper time for the debate in this forum on that issue. 
They will get lots of opportunity to discuss that item. If we could continue on with the next question. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the clear understanding that all Members of this House 
now have insofar as present exemptions are concerned under the proposed Bill, I wonder if the Hon. 
Minister would invite the Hon. Member for Regina South to share a joint time with him on any future 
programs in order that a record may be very clear, and we won’t run into this situation again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, some extraordinary effort is going to have to be made 
to try and make it clear to the Members opposite what we are trying to do. We’ll certainly do that. 
 

Application for SkyWest 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might direct a question 
to the Minister in charge of Transportation, the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy? I assume the Minister is aware of 
the difficulties that the Manitoba Government is having with their badly prepared application to the 
Canadian Transport Commission with regard to SkyWest and because of the nature of the statements 
made by the Government, I wonder if the Minister is aware of the four areas of deficiency in that 
application, and those areas were: (I don’t know whether this Government was aware of them) 1. No 
verification of operating costs; 2. The Manitoba Government failed to show an adequate breakdown of 
forecasts of business; 3. The traffic levels that were put - Mr. Speaker, I am asking if the Minister is 
aware of these deficiencies and I have a specific reason for asking that - 3. If he is aware that the traffic 
levels that were presented before the CTC were all 1980 traffic levels, when the Minister should know 
that and that Government should have known that the application was for a temporary licence to see if 
the matter would work on a temporary basis; and the last failure was that there was no provision for 
backup of aircraft. 
 
I asked is the Minister aware of those deficiencies, because the comments made in the Press haven’t 
sounded like it and secondly, will this Government now pick up application and try to do properly what 
the Manitoba Government apparently feels it can’t do properly? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
Member’s question with respect to the application by SkyWest for a licence to provide a service to the 
communities of Winnipeg, Brandon, Dauphin, Yorkton and Saskatoon, may I say that I am aware of the 
deficiencies that were suggested at the hearing December 1. I note that he put 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1142 
 

particular emphasis in his question on the deficiencies with respect to what I would call the technical 
concerns of the Commission. But I would call the technical concerns of the Commission as very 
surprising to the SkyWest people since they were in continual conversation with the Commission with 
respect to their application; asking is there any more information necessary, is all the information 
adequate and so on. What we observed as an issue, and certainly the Saskatchewan Government and the 
Manitoba Government agreed what was observed as an issue, was with respect to the commitment by 
the Ottawa Government to purchase the Saunders aircraft and lease those aircraft to SkyWest. What 
CTC asked for was documentation with respect to the aircraft. It is legitimate that they should ask that 
question, because how can you provide a service without aircraft? We zeroed in on that issue, as a key 
issue, and I think we were legitimate in doing so. Since we hadn’t had any response from Ottawa with 
respect to that key issue, we have withdrawn the SkyWest proposal. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — As a supplementary to the Minister. The Manitoba Government has said they 
will not give any financial assistance to a private carrier. Will the Saskatchewan Government back out 
on providing service to those areas having given its commitment? In short, are you prepared to back up 
the Yorkton application and see to it that that area gets assistance, whether you feel that the Federal 
Government has not handled the matter properly? I suggest to you, you know well that the Federal 
Government had little alternative . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I want to take this opportunity to remind the Member again of my ruling of 
November 27, 1975, which said in part, "The question is to be brief, to the point, without preamble or 
speech. The question must relate to an urgent and important matter." 
 
Now it is true the Member did not have a preamble on his supplementary. But I notice he had something 
on the end of it. I don’t know what you call that, but I would suggest to the Members that is not allowed 
the same as a preamble at the beginning of a question or a supplementary. If the Member can get to the 
point of what his supplementary is, then I think it will enhance the question period. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Hon. Member for Regina Wascana to repeat his 
question. I didn’t get it clear in my mind. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I clearly accepted that preambles were out, but I 
didn’t know you had a rule against postambles as well. 
 
The sum and substance of the question is: now the Manitoba Government has indicated that they will 
abandon the project, that they won’t put any money into private carriers, that they abandon those areas 
and they are out of the field. Does the Saskatchewan Government take the same narrow view? 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1143 
 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Our policy and as I indicated in a telex to the Hon. Minister of Transport, was 
with respect to giving support to the public carrier. We have now withdrawn that support to the public 
carrier, since it is obvious it can’t be put together. We have not considered either as a government or in 
consultation with the Manitoba Government any change in the policy of support to the public kind of 
carrier. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, second supplementary. I am really asking the same question 
again. We know that you have withdrawn support to the public carrier, the question is: will you now 
consider support to a private carrier? There were private carriers who were interested in that route. Will 
you give the same support to a private carrier that you were prepared to give to a public carrier? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, we have no proposition before us with respect to providing 
support to a private carrier. We had put forward an experimental proposal with respect to a public carrier 
which we strongly support. We think it would have done the job which the private carriers have not 
done with respect to those communities. We would have a very difficult time in light of past experience 
to provide support to private carriers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Board of Trade 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders 
of the Day - I beg the indulgence of the House because my question is going to require a preamble. 
Yesterday, I asked the Attorney General a question about some comment made to Saskatoon radio and 
television media. He suggested the transcript of these remarks should be brought to the attention of the 
House. I should like to bring the transcript to the attention of this Assembly, then ask the Attorney 
General a question. 
 
The transcript is as follows: 
 

What bothers me as a Saskatoon MLA is that Saskatoon, the hub of potash, with five miles around it, 
would be a logical candidate for headquartering an operation of this size. The spin-off to the university 
and businesses would be fantastic. And yet the Government looking at the hostility of the Board of 
Trade towards this venture, and I might say the only Board of Trade so far in Saskatchewan, really 
have to take this into account. We have requests from the Yorkton Council and Board of Trade, the 
Moose Jaw Council and Board of Trade to house this very significant venture there. I am hoping that 
we can base it in Saskatoon, but it is certainly made tough by Saskatoon members of the Board of 
Trade. 

 
In the light of the operative words of this particular statement, which is: "And yet the Government 
looking at the hostility of the Board of Trade towards this venture, and I might say the only Board of 
Trade so far in Saskatchewan, really have to take this into account." 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1144 
 

My question for the Attorney General, does he not consider that a threat and in the light of the statement 
today in which he does not apologize to the Board of Trade, or clarify it that he did not intend to say that 
the Board of Trade do not have the same rights as other citizens to speak their mind as it relates to 
government action? Is he not now prepared to apologize to this organization? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — No, Mr. Speaker, I am definitely not prepared to 
apologize to the Saskatoon Board of Trade, because I do not believe that I have anything to apologize 
for. The words as the Member has quoted, I have a copy of the voice clip as well, I would agree are 
substantially correct. The point that I was meaning to convey by those words, as I said yesterday, I 
repeat again. It is in my view the logical location for the PCS headquarters to be in Saskatoon. The 
Government when it comes to the final decision, as to where the PCS headquarters should or should not 
be located, will obviously have to take a look at all of the factors, one of which is, the atmosphere of the 
business community or part of the business community toward the introduction and the location of this 
very valuable and important head office. If one was to judge on the part of a provincial government the 
atmosphere, judging by the Board of Trade campaign, some of the Board of Trade campaign statements, 
this is a factor which makes my job as I said in the statement on Sunday, my job and some others who 
believe that Saskatoon should be the head office, very, very difficult indeed. That’s what I said, that’s 
what I intended. 
 
I repeat that again. The Board of Trade can do whatever they want by way of an advertising campaign. I 
repeat that again. I am just simply saying that with respect to the location of the head office, it is very 
difficult. The Hon. Member I am sure would agree with me, that it is very difficult for me to convince 
my colleagues that Saskatoon should be the place for the head office for this PCS to be located when by 
judging all the newspapers the business community, apparently some of the business community doesn’t 
want the head office located there. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I believe the Attorney General has missed my 
point. I am not arguing as to the advantages or disadvantages to be gained by the Saskatoon Board of 
Trade in their campaign, nor am I arguing about the ethics of this campaign. What I am attempting to 
bring across to the Attorney General is the problem of government threatening organizations and 
individuals in our society with action that is detrimental to them in the event that they don’t withdraw 
certain actions. 
 
I read again to the Attorney General his operative phrase, "Yet the Government looking at the hostility 
of the Board of Trade towards this venture, and I might say the only Board of Trade so far in 
Saskatchewan, really have to take this into account." Is the Attorney General suggesting that with that 
statement he is not threatening the city of Saskatoon with dire consequences if the Board of Trade do not 
withdraw their action? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, I repeat again to the Hon. Member. I repeat again, in my judgement the 
answer is absolutely, No. We are all 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1145 
 

the people who take the consequences of whatever actions or words or statements that we make. We do 
it in the House every day. The Board of Trade makes statements with respect of locations of the PCS 
headquarters. That by itself may not even be all that substantial a factor in the end result as to where the 
head office is or isn’t located. But I do say to my friend from Nipawin, and I say this as sincerely as I 
can, it is important that the PCS office be located in an atmosphere which is reasonably conducive for it 
to do the types of things that I think this fantastic head office operation will do for the people of 
Saskatoon and for the people of Saskatchewan. Given the present type of negative, destructive and I 
think quite frankly, childish advertising by the Board of Trade (that’s my own point of view). They can 
argue against the Bill any way they want, but when they start the cartoons, and that type of caricature, I 
characterize that as childish. I am saying that the totality of that is making it difficult for me to do my 
job for Saskatoon, which is to try and get the PCS headquarters located in Saskatoon. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If the Attorney General is serious about (and 
I have no question that he is serious) trying to ensure that the public are fully aware of the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan in this matter, my question is: would the Attorney General in a public 
statement please clarify those operative words that were involved in his initial statement which 
suggested to the people of the city of Saskatoon, that the Government of Saskatchewan would take dire 
action in the event of a continuation of the policy of the Board of Trade. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say again, I think this is the only way I can put it, that 
the words as are said in the voice clip, "Yet the Government . . . really has to take this into account." 
That’s what the plain words say, the black and white. What the Hon. Member says is that that equals 
dire consequences against the city of Saskatoon. It doesn’t. The words don’t say that, and it never was 
my intention for it to say that. It is my intention as the words say, that it is a factor in a variety of factors 
that the Government must take into account when it ultimately decides where the head office of the PCS 
should be located. It is a factor as the locality of the mines, as the mines that may be acquired, as the 
population, as transportation, as communication, as the environment of the business community are all 
factors. It is a factor and I repeat, something that the Government really has to take into account, not 
exclusively. And I repeat over and over again, I don’t know how many times I have to say this to the 
Member, not in any sense of a threat. I don’t like to see the campaign because I think it’s wrong, but 
more importantly I don’t like to see the campaign because it is prejudicing the city of Saskatoon and the 
people of Saskatoon and the Board of Trade should not be doing it in my view. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — I wonder if I could be permitted a question, despite the 
fact there have already been four, to follow up on this matter? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question relates to the points that the Attorney General has just been attempting to 
make and I think 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1146 
 

we’ve got to take a look at what has happened over the last few weeks. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I will take a question, but I won’t take a speech. 
 
MR. PENNER: — All right, I’m not interested in making a speech. Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that since 
the proposed legislation had been put before this House and there has been a campaign put on in the 
media of this province and there has been a statement made by the Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. 
Mostoway) saying that the Board of Trade has no business disagreeing with the Government? Why is it 
then that the Attorney General makes a statement which puts the thinking of the business community of 
Saskatoon in difficulty and then today calls that childish? Why is it that the city of Saskatoon should be 
taking that kind of abuse from the Attorney General? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I heard what the Member for Saskatoon Centre 
said and he did not say as is misrepresented purposefully by some Hon. Members opposite, that the 
Board of Trade has no right to campaign. The Member did not say that. He said that the Government 
should consider its membership, Crown corporation membership in the Board of Trade. That’s his view. 
I personally don’t happen to agree with that, but that’s his view and I know that a number of people do 
happen to agree with his view in Saskatoon. 
 
All I want to tell the Hon. Member, it’s not me who is hindering this, it’s the Board of Trade. I don’t 
think that the Board of Trade, they may speak for certain numbers in the Board of Trade, but of the 
businessmen who have phoned me about the campaign, they certainly don’t speak for a vast majority of 
the businessmen of Saskatoon. And I take exception as is my right, for aldermen, some in this House 
and some not in this House, running for political aid and comfort of political parties to the detriment of 
Saskatoon as I think is being done in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And, I want to say, that it’s not me who is hindering the location of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan location. I’m not raising these questions trying to twist the words, about cutting off grants 
and threats and reprisals. I’m fighting for that head office to be in Saskatoon and I urge the Member for 
Saskatoon Eastview to join me in that fight. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I was under the impression that the Member for Saskatoon Eastview asked for a 
further supplementary. He has now had his supplementary. Now if the Chamber wishes to carry on with 
more questions, I’m in their hands. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that I had asked if I could put a further question. If that is the 
case, then I have a supplementary that I should like to put. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t think there is agreement in the Chamber that we proceed with further 
questions. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1147 
 

MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to ask one further supplementary. Why is it that because 
there has been some opposition . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Question! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I asked a question and I am beginning the question with why. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. Did you not rule that that was the last question? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I was under the impression that we were allowing ourselves four questions and two 
supplementaries per question. We have now had that. The Chamber agreed to allow a further question. I 
was under the impression it was a supplementary, the Member was under the impression it was a 
question and he asked further that he be allowed one more supplementary, the Attorney General has 
nodded agreement and I’ve asked the Member to phrase the question. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Why is it that after the proposed legislation with regard to 
nationalization of the potash industry was tabled in this House, and there has been a great deal of 
government advertising with respect to the advantages, why is it that when some groups in the province, 
and there have been groups and individuals, voiced opposition, that the Government through the 
Attorney General has become so defensive about the Bill? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I really have a difficult time answering that question because 
. . . 
 
AN HON MEMBER: — . . . difficult time . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, I do because it really assumes a debating point and does not ask any 
question directly of the Government. I would only repeat again what I think is patently obvious about 
the location of the head office. I say this to the Member for Saskatoon Eastview that I think he can 
properly join me and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mrs. Edwards) could join me and my 
colleagues on this side to do what we could to have the head office of the PCS located in Saskatoon. I 
think we could make a good effort. That’s where I think it should be located. We hope that the Board of 
Trade will reconsider its position as well. It has nothing to do with their rights, they can do whatever 
they want to do of course. I think the interests of the people of the province and of Saskatoon really 
require something a little bit of a higher calibre than the type of advertising that the Saskatoon Board of 
Trade tries to carry out. I think that really demeans the operation and I’m very, very sad to see that 
because I think as the Member will know, I have been an MLA on the Opposition side and on this side 
who has supported the Saskatoon Board of Trade, not without some difficulties as the Member will 
know, but I have. But I tell you in this particular case, when we go about trying to convince the 
Government and others that there should be the centralization of such 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1148 
 

an important adventure such as PCS for Saskatoon, in the face of that I repeat again, it makes my job 
very difficult and so do frankly, some of the questions of the Members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Would the Attorney General permit just a point of clarification? It’s not a 
question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No! 
 

Question Period 
 
MR. DYCK: — On a Point of Order. The Premier was kind enough to allow a number of additional 
supplementary questions. In my view it has been the strong tradition of this House for a number of years 
that we allow three questions from the Opposition with two supplementaries. I think we have gone far 
beyond that today. In view of the fact that we’ve gone far beyond it, I think we are wasting a lot of 
valuable time and it seems to me that we are impairing the ability of this House to carry out its business. 
Therefore, I think that we should limit the number of questions to what we have had before. 
 

Location of Potash Corporation 
 
MR. H. H. P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege. I’m somewhat 
surprised that the Attorney General and the Leader of the Conservative Party have already picked the 
location for the potash head office. I assume that while it’s located here it’s going to stay here. Regina is 
the logical place for it and I certainly am not going to support the Attorney General in this one. I don’t 
think he’s taken over this side of the House yet. Heaven forbid if he ever did. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BAKER: — But I do want to say I think this is a debatable point and I wish the Premier was here, 
I would have asked him the question whether the location has been picked. I suggest to the Minister in 
charge, keep buying more furniture and look for more space in Regina. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I question whether that was a Point of Privilege or a Point of Order. I am at the 
point myself now where I think we should go on with the business. There are private Members who 
want their business dealt with today. We are obviously getting into a debate on this issue. I think the 
Attorney General has clarified, if I may put it that way, several times already and he keeps being asked 
for further clarifications and I would suggest that we go on with Orders of the Day and Questions Put By 
Members. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1149 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 6 - Establishment of Board of Inquiry Re Teachers Leaving 
 
MISS L. B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie) moved, seconded by Mr. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to establish a Board of Inquiry to 
investigate the numbers of teachers leaving the province or the profession and to determine the reasons 
therefore in order that responsible solutions can be formulated to deal with this situation. 

 
She said: Mr. Speaker, I have submitted this Resolution because of my concern over the number of 
teachers who are leaving the profession and the province. I am asking for a Board of Inquiry to 
determine the reasons therefore so that we can formulate reasonable solutions to the problem. 
 
Although we were fortunate enough to get almost enough teachers for the Province of Saskatchewan this 
year, no one here with any realization of the teaching profession can say that this is not a serious or not 
an increasing problem. I don’t pretend to be an expert in solving the problems of the teaching 
profession, but I should like at this time to read a couple of statements that were made by members in 
Saskatchewan who are involved in the teaching profession and the problems therein. 
 
The first one I should like to read that will relate to this Resolution was made by the President of 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Association and the title was, "Possible Exodus over Salaries" and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan teachers may leave the province or at least the teaching profession if salaries are not 
brought up to standard of the rest of the country, STF President, Mike Badham told delegates at the 
SSTA convention. Salaries must remain competitive in order to retain good teachers and not lose the 
cream of the crop. He said starting salaries for a B.Ed graduate in Alberta are now 12 per cent higher 
than Saskatchewan and the maximum for a teacher in the post-graduate category is $1,200 more in 
Newfoundland than in this province. 

 
He told trustees that he and Dr. John Egnatoff, then SSTA President, met with Prime Minister Trudeau 
in Regina a few weeks ago, following the Government’s announcement of inflation controls and asked 
for clarification in the catch-up factor. 

 
He also outlined for trustees, various ways in which the STF is working for better quality education. 

 
He reported some preliminary results of a collection of data on teachers, class size and workloads. The 
survey showed, he said, that a large percentage of teachers are spending many hours in extra-curricular 
activities with students and pointed out that although it is not a case for overtime remuneration for 
teachers, it should be taken into consideration in organizing their teaching loads and daily class 
assignments. 

 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1150 
 

I’d like to continue this because this is one of the reasons why I feel that we are having a problem with 
the teachers in Saskatchewan, why they may be leaving and why we need this Board of Inquiry. 
 
As well, he stated: 
 

that teachers spent a large percentage of after school hours in involvement in activities with 
colleagues, such as supervision of practice teachers, in-service meetings and other professional 
pursuits. He almost mentioned the teachers satisfaction survey which has been conducted for the past 
five years and reflects the teacher opinion at one point in time during the school year. He told trustees 
this survey could provide a valuable discussion tool among teachers and between teachers and their 
employing boards and superintendents. He said the survey was not intended to be statistically sound, 
but can be valid as an expression of teacher satisfaction on provisions before professional 
development, school community relations, school facilities and equipment and personal relations and 
supervision. 

 
Now this is one statement by our head of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Association. I should like to read 
another statement that was made by Mr. MacMurchy before he was appointed as Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. At the same convention he stated that: 
 

MacMurchy is concerned about the teacher shortage that may occur. The Provincial Government has a 
responsibility to see that teacher salaries are fair in relation to other professional groups, outgoing 
Education Minister Gordon MacMurchy told trustees at their annual convention. Mr. MacMurchy 
said, a serious teacher shortage, supply shortage could occur if salaries are not kept competitive and 
added it is clear we have to be able to attract and hold teachers in Saskatchewan. He said, the 1976 
settlement will have to reflect some catch-up since the present salaries are behind both Alberta and 
Manitoba and he said the catch-up factor would probably have to go beyond the two per cent allowed 
by the Federal Government’s wage control. He told trustees the Provincial Government will support 
the federal program, but asked for two major changes; that price increases on key commodities be 
reviewed by an anti-inflation board before they are implemented and that a two per cent catch-up 
factor be made more flexible. 

 
Now we have asked what the Provincial Government is doing about salary negotiations at the present 
time. They have said that at the moment they are waiting for some federal initiative. Well, we have been 
suggesting that perhaps the province, like other provinces, take this initiative and we propose that they 
get on with this initiative as soon as possible. I know that they are meeting today with some of the 
trustees and the members of the STF, but we would again stress that this is important and that they get 
on with this type of business. 
 
I continue to restate that the best solution that could be made, would be to arrive at some kind of prairie 
average for wages and prices. I’m only pointing this out because it is indeed exemplifying that two 
members, one of this House and one 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1151 
 

of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation do realize that this is a problem and indeed this Resolution 
could possibly aid in finding solutions. 
 

Again the best solution would be to arrive at some kind of prairie average for wages and prices, Mr. 
MacMurchy said, pointing out that the greatest movement of people is between the three prairie 
provinces. So that a reasonable degree of equity across the provinces would be a workable 
compromise. 

 
Mr. MacMurchy urged trustees to adopt a policy of their state and spending, especially in the area of 
capital construction. However, in times of such restraint it becomes important to make sure that the 
most quality is being obtained from the education dollar. 
As trustees you will want to concern yourselves more and more in finding out just what is going on in 
your schools and ensuring that programs are providing the best possible education. 

 
He mentioned a number of programs that are contributing to an improvement of quality education 
including the kindergarten program and the physical education program, development of consumer 
and agriculture education and environmental studies and the flexibility for second language programs 
in a language other than French. However, the teacher is the most important factor in the quality of 
educational processes. 

 
And I stress that point because this is the main idea behind my resolution. 
 

He said, a good deal of research is being done into more effective teacher training programs. The 
number one issue has emerged as being increased field experience at levels of training programs, more 
observation periods in schools and shorter practice teaching. 

 
Another aspect of ensuring quality in teachers is to take a hard look at the present teacher tenure 
legislation. He said existing tenure legislation leaves teachers feeling exposed to unjustified 
dismissals. 

 
Now I won’t continue with the rest of the article, but I think it exemplifies that two of these members 
have felt that this is an area of major concern and is something that we should be looking at. 
 
I would like to compliment, and I’m sorry that he has left, I think, I was going to compliment the Hon. 
Member for the work he has done, especially in the physical education area, although . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . me . . . 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Not bad, you haven’t done anything yet. Although otherwise a little 
disappointed in his outlook at SkyWest today, but I am sure he will get on to the hang of that one as he 
did in the physical education area. 
 
I should like to describe briefly, as now we have the new 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1152 
 

Member here of what has been done in physical education. I am just using this as an example because 
this is one of the programs where we find problems with teachers. The reason for that is that academic 
subjects or basically academic subjects generally do not have that much trouble in hiring teachers, 
because they are more readily available than in some of the non-academic or non-professional areas. 
Although I am a physical education teacher, I don’t like to call them non-professional, but unfortunately 
it is a lot harder to get teachers in those areas. The type of program that has been developed by the 
physical education committee and its objective was to co-ordinate the activities of all groups involved in 
physical and recreational activities in the schools of the province. This includes in-school programs, 
physical education, interschool athletics, outdoor education activities and community recreation 
programs where applicable. It has responsibility for program development in the field of physical 
education, consultative services and in-service activities for teachers. 
 
An area I should like to stress here is that in these types of programs whether it be physical education or 
whether it be in a second language as I pointed out or audio-visual areas or hearing impaired or visually 
impaired areas, these are the areas in which we do not have as many qualified teachers and this is why 
we have problems drawing them into Saskatchewan. There are other reasons, I would suggest than 
economic reasons for teachers not coming to Saskatchewan, although that is the main one. I think this is 
why we have to look at this area seriously and get some discussion on the problem. 
 
I should also like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, another area which is, beside the areas of visually 
handicapped and hearing impaired that is being affected and I think of major interest to the Government 
and that is the technical education area. This is one of the newest areas in the high school curriculum. 
The total number of students enrolled in the technical areas has increased to a great degree in the last 
year. There were 12 new programs in technical education, the majority of which were established with 
vacant classroom space through facility modification. 
 
The enrolment comparisons for various sections of the technical education program have increased. The 
total numbers were from 27,000 in 1973 to 32,000. These numbers show us that this is a new area and 
one that is being well accepted in the high schools. 
 
I am particularly interested in this area because this is an area in which I taught in the comprehensive 
high schools in Saskatchewan. We have nine comprehensive high schools in Saskatchewan. Right now 
we are facing a problem in that most of the teachers in the technical areas have come basically from 
industry. They have got some teacher qualifications and then gone into these schools to teach. What is 
happening now, unfortunately, is that these teachers are now finding that it is better, due to economic 
and working hour reasons to go back into industry. We have found in some of the areas such as welding, 
in particular, this year, that we have lost the teachers and that some of these comprehensive high schools 
are not able to offer these classes to the students. I would suggest that if any of these areas are of 
particular importance to government it is in the technical areas. Because for instance Sask Tel does hire 
these students. As soon as they graduate most of these 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1153 
 

students in technical areas of electronics go directly into Sask Tel because they are qualified. I am not 
saying all, but this is one of the areas in which Sask Tel can get their employees. I think that this is a 
trend that is occurring, this is one of the areas and it will continue to occur unless we do something 
about it. 
 
I was interested to find that we had a number of visitors last day, two of them were looking at our 
technical education area. I was fortunate enough to meet with them and talk to them about these 
problems hoping perhaps that they might avoid some of the problems that we are having here. 
 
I suggest that we should get on with such a proposal as I am making now which is, of course, try to 
ensure that negotiations for salaries are completed as quickly as possible. But if you are not willing to 
take action in this way, then I hope that the Government and all Members of this Assembly would at 
least show their concern and support the Resolution that I am proposing. This will be the first step 
towards showing the teachers that you do care, and care about the future of their profession and of the 
students in Saskatchewan. 
 
I so move the Resolution, seconded by Mr. Penner. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I wonder if the Member would permit a question before she takes her chair? I was 
listening carefully to the Member’s remarks. It seems to me she said one of the main reasons that 
teachers are leaving is salaries. Is she officially representing the Opposition’s position that salaries must 
be substantially increased and therefore they would or she would support salary increases which are 
substantially beyond the federal guidelines? 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — That’s a very interesting question. I said one of the reasons definitely was 
because of salary increases. There are many other reasons. I also stated that one of the problems was that 
your Government, or our Government or whatever, is not getting into these negotiations and that we 
should indeed get some wage guidelines of our own. I have talked at one teachers’ convention and I said 
that if I as a teacher, and this is my personal opinion, not that of the caucus, that if I as a teacher were 
put in a position to say that for one year my wages would be left as they are, I would personally take that 
stand, this is my personal opinion not the caucus’ and I would follow those guidelines. I can assure you 
that it’s not that of the teachers either because they were quite upset. This is my personal opinion. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It can’t go beyond the guidelines. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — No, but this is not a caucus opinion. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, if I may make a few remarks to the 
Resolution in seconding it. First of all, possibly with regard to the question that was put by the Member 
for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) about a position vis-a-vis teachers’ salaries, 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1154 
 

I think the Member may recall that there was a press release that was made back in November, very 
soon after the then Minister of Education, the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy had made a statement with regard 
to prairie averaging of teachers’ salaries as a possible solution to the dilemma where teachers’ salaries 
seemed to be lower in Saskatchewan today as compared with Alberta or with some of the other 
provinces. Basically we said, yes, that is a good idea. We also are aware of the fact, of course, that 
teachers’ salaries as they are presently in Saskatchewan are the result of a two year agreement that was a 
mandatory agreement not available to be negotiated at the bargaining table, and because of that, 
teachers’ salaries have fallen behind a little bit more than might have otherwise been the case. Because 
of that we think that some catch-up is likely going to have to be a part of the 1976 teacher salary 
contract if we are going to approach it in a realistic way. When I say some catch-up, I mean something 
beyond the guidelines that have been announced. 
 
I want to make some comments with regard to the Resolution from a slightly different point of view 
possibly than that of my colleague from Wilkie and address some remarks to the question of the 
possibility of a teacher shortage in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is reasonable to suggest that there are parts of the province where that is not likely to be the 
case. I am speaking specifically, Mr. Speaker, of urban areas and areas surrounding the large population 
centres in the province where at least up until now you can’t argue, at least I don’t believe that you can 
argue, that there has in fact been any kind of widespread shortage of teachers. There are some 
exceptions to that. Certainly in the Division I area and the Division II areas there does not seem to be 
any shortage of teachers. But when you get into some of the more specialized areas, and I am thinking in 
areas like industrial arts and home economics, some of the technical subjects that the comprehensive 
schools are offering and where second languages are being offered at the secondary level, shortages are 
becoming a part of the scene even in urban areas. For example, in my own instance I have had to hire 
people without teaching certificates in order to fill a classroom vacancy in the field of home economics. 
I have had a good deal of difficulty in the area of industrial arts. 
 
When you get out into the rural parts of the province then the situation is much more difficult in more 
than just the specialized subject areas. We have jurisdictions in the province for example, that are having 
to hire fairly significant numbers of Americans in order to fill the classrooms, a situation which has been 
growing increasingly difficult over the last couple of years. There are more and more situations where 
school boards are having to hire people who have been trained in the United States and do not hold 
Saskatchewan certificates and these teachers have to be issued provisional certificates in order that they 
can get into the classroom. 
 
I think that when one looks at reasons why teachers may be leaving Saskatchewan or why there is a 
shortage in some areas, we have to recognize that there are many reasons for that. One is, of course, the 
old adage that faraway fields look a little greener and it’s fair to say that a number of teachers are 
leaving the province simply because they want to get away, they want to try their wings somewhere else. 
It wouldn’t matter what the situation was in Saskatchewan. In many respects they would leave and go 
somewhere else because of that. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1155 
 

I think in addition though, we have to keep in mind that salaries and working conditions are going to 
play a part in the kind of decision that a teacher is going to make, or a graduate is going to make about 
whether he is going to stay in Saskatchewan or whether he is not. Prospective teachers coming out of the 
College of Education, I expect, are looking at information, as for example the fact that teachers in class 
six category would be making 7.1 per cent more if they were living in Vancouver, or 16.7 per cent more 
if they were in Calgary, or 17.3 per cent more if they were in Edmonton. I think those kinds of things are 
factors, and are reasons why support of the Resolution is important. 
 
I think too, that we have - and if this Resolution is passed by the House it would give us the opportunity 
- got to look at some other things. For example, the university program. Part of the reason why we have 
a shortage of teachers is the fact that certain subject areas are not turning out specialists in those 
subjects. 
 
I heard on the weekend, for example, that the University in Saskatoon will be turning out one graduate 
who can teach chemistry, and is going to be turning out three graduates this spring who can teach 
physics. And it is likely that is going to precipitate difficulty in a number of jurisdictions in the province 
in hiring qualified teachers to teach the specialty science subjects in Division IV. There are other 
examples that could be used that relate to the question of the university program in those areas. 
 
I think too, that a Board of Inquiry might look at the question of advancement within the profession. 
There has been a great deal of discussion in the last couple of years about the role of women in the 
profession. I am not standing here saying that the lack of advancement opportunities is one of the 
reasons, but I think a Board of Inquiry might look at that and see whether or not it does make any 
difference and whether in fact there are any things that are happening in Saskatchewan with regard to 
advancement that are different from things that are happening in our neighboring provinces. 
 
I think with regard to the technical area, Mr. Speaker, the areas in motor mechanics, tinsmithing, 
electrical technicians, at comprehensive schools at the secondary level, that we need to be taking a look 
at our technical institutes as well, because that is part of the public sector with regard to education. There 
are some difficulties as my colleague pointed out in terms of being able to keep people who have come 
over from industry in education. These are finding that the working conditions and the economic 
conditions of being back in the private sector are more advantageous than being in the school system. 
For these reasons then, Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to support the Resolution and urge all Members of 
the House to do the same. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, if I may I should like to 
make a few comments on this Resolution. 
 
First of all let me say that some of the comments, that both of the Members who have spoken before me 
have made, were 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1156 
 

good comments for a number of reasons. They were probably fair comment. But in rising to speak on 
the debate in this Resolution, I want to express my regrets that neither of the Members really gave any 
recognition to the many important steps that have been taken in recent years to deal with this problem, 
and I use the same word as I think both of them used, the historical problem of teacher retention in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Because it is not unique nor is it new. As a matter of fact there were times 
not so long ago when that difficulty was far greater than in Saskatchewan today. I would certainly want 
to commend the Member for Wilkie on her fine contribution to this debate because she used some very 
authoritative and good people from which she quoted, the Hon. Member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
(Mr. MacMurchy), the former Minister of Education and also the President of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Badham, who really composed most of what she had to say, and therefore it is 
difficult for me to argue with those points which she raised. 
 
Now, another thing which I found of particular interest, and really it was not a matter that clarified 
anything in this House. In fact, I thought before the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) rose 
to speak that maybe we had a clarification, but after he was finished I found out that we had no 
clarification and were confused once more. Because when the Member for Wilkie was asked if she 
would answer the question of the Member for Saskatoon Buena Vista about the catch-up, she said, "No," 
she would not be in favor. But when the Member for Saskatoon Eastview rose to speak on that 
obviously he was trying to correct her, or defend the caucus over there, because he said, "yes," he would 
be in favor, in fact would support some degree of catch-up beyond the guidelines. Now I certainly would 
hope that at some point in time we get a confirmation or clarification what the stand of the official 
Opposition is in this House on this question. I’m sure that we, the other Members in this House not only 
would like some clarification, but I know some of the teachers in the field would like it as well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Because it appeared, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Wilkie rose to 
speak and had some very wise things to say and I’m not arguing with what she had to say; she indicated 
that there was a problem, and indicated that there was a problem for many reasons. One of those reasons 
that she put a great deal of stress on, as did the Member for Saskatoon Eastview, was the difference in 
the salaries of the teaching profession (I think she used Calgary and Edmonton) certainly some places in 
Alberta, and how terrible that situation was. I don’t disagree with that. I think that there is a difficult 
situation, and has been historically. I think that some effort has to be made to see if we can bring that 
about. But she sort of shot her whole argument down unfortunately and I was really disappointed 
because I thought I would really have her support on this question, when she answered the question and 
said, "No," she would not be in favor of the catch-up. So, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Members on this 
side of the House and the trustees and the teachers would really like to know what the position of the 
Liberal Opposition is on this particular question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this resolution asks for an inquiry to 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1157 
 

investigate the numbers of teachers who are leaving the province, or the profession, and that it give the 
reasons. Well, let me say that anyone, anyone with a little thought can easily identify, as has been done 
by both Members opposite to some extent, why teachers leave the profession, why nurses leave the 
profession, and why others leave their areas of work. For example, over the years there has been a very 
high correlation between the prosperity level in the province and the teacher supply. During the past 
several years I think it is well understood and known by everyone here that our economy has 
experienced unprecedented buoyancy and affluence, and in part many married women in rural 
Saskatchewan would to some extent answer the question of the point raised by the Member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, many married women in Saskatchewan choose not to teach during periods when 
farm incomes are high, and I think the last two or three years this certainly has been a case. 
 
Now in some cases persons holding valid teaching certificates (and I think this has also been raised) 
elect to take other employment because during the past few years the opportunities in all areas of work 
have increased dramatically. Mr. Speaker, the fact is that since 1971 a number of positive steps have 
been taken to deal with the historical problem of teacher retention in Saskatchewan and the general 
approach to this problem has been to implement legislation and programs which have made teaching in 
this province more attractive than it ever has been before. 
 
Let me take some time to give this House some examples of how this has been done. 
 
First of all, Members will recall the situation that once existed where the Government established a rigid 
pupil-teacher ratio in this province. The pupil-teacher ratio and the calculation of school grants was 
eliminated by this Government and I should just like to note that this was warmly welcomed by teachers 
and trustees, and this change has brought about major improvements in education and the working 
conditions of teachers . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — . . . teachers who are sincerely concerned about the quality of education. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am also sure that Members will recall the days of the conflict and the 
controversy and the government dictation that surrounded the negotiation of teachers’ salaries. 
 
MR. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — What has happened now? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’ll tell you in a minute what has happened. Just sit back there and listen 
and you’ll hear. Let me say that Saskatchewan teachers remember that controversy very well also. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be able to say that since the introduction of the new Teacher Collective 
Bargaining Act in 1973 things have changed considerably and that is they have changed for the better. 
This significant legislation has resulted in meaningful negotiations and vastly improved conditions of 
work for Saskatchewan teachers. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1158 
 

Now it is true, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has always been an exporter of teachers, particularly to 
provinces like British Columbia and Alberta, and the reasons for this movement are many. There are 
such things as climate, there are such things as personal reasons, because of the spouse may have been 
transferred or many have moved for work or other reasons, there is also the attraction that some people 
(and that I have never been able to understand) but it is a fact and it is the case the attraction of some 
people to the larger urban centres, and the desire to experience another part of Canada, as the Member 
for Saskatoon Eastview indicated. Those reasons have always been here and I suspect that to some 
extent those reasons will continue. Salary differences too have also been a reason. I think that that is a 
good reason why it has been stated that the anti-inflation guidelines must consider the need to maintain 
reasonable and historical relationships with neighboring provinces. I only wish that the Members 
opposite would decide on which side of the fence, on this issue, they stand. The important thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there is now the opportunity for real negotiation to take place. Far different from the 
restrictions that had been imposed by the former government. 
 
Now, I know the Members opposite would like some interference in those negotiations. Well I don’t 
accept that, and we are not about to have it happen. There is no doubt that the teacher collective 
bargaining procedures now in Saskatchewan will continue to result in improved conditions of work for 
teachers making the teaching profession more attractive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of superannuation, for example, amendments to the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan providing for increased benefits and earlier retirement have made this province an attractive one in 
which to pursue a life-long career in teaching. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, such programs as the Department of Education 
Teacher Bursary Program have assisted teachers to upgrade their qualifications. I believe the evidence of 
the success of our approach can easily be seen in the increasing number of teachers who are now coming 
to Saskatchewan from other provinces in this country. For example, in 1972-73 there were 173 teachers 
from other provinces who came to this province. In 1974-75 this number had increased to 223, an 
increase of almost 29 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, comments have been made by speakers who spoke before me about the relationship 
of the numbers of teachers to the numbers of students. Well let me say that in 1971 . . . 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — We never mentioned that. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Oh, in some of the comments, I don’t know whether it was the speakers, 
but in some of the comments coming across unofficially, there were some of those points made. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that 1971-72 there were 10,959 teachers in Saskatchewan, and there were 
243,047 students enrolled. In 1974-75 there were 11,187 teachers in Saskatchewan and 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1159 
 

there were only 218,954 students enrolled in our classrooms in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Resolution asks for an Inquiry into this matter. I think it is important to keep in 
mind that the teacher service section in the Department of Education does a continuing study in this 
area, and that the joint trustee, Government and Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Bargaining 
Committee are also doing a careful study of this question, any the Resolution is asking, during a time 
when there is a need for restraint, that a considerable amount of public money be spent on a project that 
would duplicate work that is already being done. Surely this would be irresponsibility of the highest 
order. I’m sure that even the Progressive Conservative Party which is clearly interested in efficiency 
would wholeheartedly agree with me on this. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it must once again be emphasized that some very major accomplishments 
have been made in encouraging more Saskatchewan teachers to stay in this province. In view of the 
record of this Government and the sound, positive actions that have been made, I propose the following 
amendment to the resolution. I move, seconded by the Member for Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) the 
following amendment to Resolution No. 6: 
 
Delete all the words after ‘Assembly’ and substitute therefor the following: 
 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its efforts to make the teaching profession in this 
province more attractive by its introduction of new collective bargaining legislation, designed to 
improve conditions of work for teachers, by a grant formula which has eliminated the teacher-pupil 
ratio, by improving superannuation benefits for teachers and by providing bursaries for teachers in 
specialized areas. 

 
And further, that this Assembly recognizes that through such positive actions the Government of 
Saskatchewan has fostered an environment which will be most significant in improving the supply of 
teachers in this province. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to participate in 
this debate and seeing that the amendment covered such a wide area there should be very little if any 
limitations to what one can say about education in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I might say that during the course of the last few years there have been a very 
large number of different committees within the Province of Saskatchewan that have been set up to look 
into situations that needed particular attention. I can think of the student evaluation committee which is 
presently reporting to the Minister; and certainly he had people within his department who were capable 
also of making reports on student evaluation. I see in this particular instance there was consultation with 
the public. I can’t see why there should be any limitations here. In fact, it would seem to me that the 
argument presented by the Minister is null and void. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1160 
 

The second thing is that the Government has had advisory committees on the deaf, and we have a 
School for the Deaf. And again, they should have been able, according to your reasoning, been able to 
handle any problems, and any changes that the school should bring about. We have had conferences on 
teacher education. The Education Relations Council for the last two years has been surveying 
Saskatchewan, making a study and is coming up with recommendations on the type of teacher training 
program we should have. The Government has had this report for a considerable length of time. First of 
all I think they were tardy in not beginning the report and coming up with recommendations at an earlier 
date. Teachers have been waiting for a considerable length of time to know what our training program is 
going to be in Saskatchewan - whether we are going to have the two year program, or whether we are 
going to have the four year program. I believe there is general agreement by the trustees and by the 
teachers’ organization, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, to increase the number of years of 
training required. 
 
There were also changes recommended within the actual program with a greater concentration on 
in-classroom activities and with less on the straight academic work at the university. These suggestions 
have been brought to the attention of the Department quite some time ago with agreement, as I said 
earlier, by both the trustees’ organizations and the teachers’ federation. The changes haven’t come about 
because of the tardiness of the Department. Here you have two groups widely interested in education 
being held up by the Department. We hear that there might be some action but we have heard this so 
often that one begins to really wonder if we are going to have any action in this particular area. 
 
Now talking about a shortage of teachers. In the Saturday edition of the Leader-Post, if the Minister is 
not aware, this is a particular clip that I just picked up before I came in here. I think you can see it is 
quite extensive, approximately two and a half to three columns. So indeed, I think we do have a 
shortage. I think we will have to look into some of the reasons for it. 
 
First, I agree with some of the things the Minister said. Yes, ladies go back to the home. No doubt this is 
one of the reasons we have a shortage, but we also have people moving to other provinces. I believe this 
was mentioned. We have job expectations and I think sometimes the people get into the field of 
education and a little later on are probably not quite satisfied with the type of work that they are doing. 
In rural areas where I am I know one of the real problems is housing. You get into a small town and try 
and find suitable accommodation and it is very difficult to do so. The job security again I think we find 
both the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association feel 
that the present tenure policies are not satisfactory and would like to see changes. I was very pleased to 
hear the Minister at the Trustee’s Convention indicate that there would be some changes in the 
legislation with regard to job security and that there was a possibility that legislation would be 
introduced here to the Legislature before the end of this particular Session. I think this is a step in the 
right direction. 
 
Now moving to the other item on pay. Moving onto pay I think, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
mentioned, that one of the problems that we have had is the two year agreement. There was 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1161 
 

an opportunity last year, I believe, at the request of the Teachers’ Federation to open up the agreement. 
The Department of Education or the Minister at that time did not open up the agreement. At the same 
time there were payments made to the other civil servants but the teacher agreement was kept frozen. 
Personally I think that a lot of the teachers, in talking to them, saw that two year agreement as a political 
gimmick. It took the Government by the election period from 1973 to 1975. 
 
Then last year you introduced the legislation to make the length of the contract negotiable. This moved 
the Government over that particular period. The question has been raised on that side about the 
guidelines. I have no hesitancy in saying to the Minister of Social Services that I think you are going to 
have to exceed the guidelines. I know you are negotiating and I happen to know a little bit about the 
negotiations you are having. I also know that Friday, this Friday, is the last day on which teachers in 
Saskatchewan will be teaching under the contract that they are operating on. This Friday will be the last 
day. Most of our schools are going to close down. You haven’t got a contract with those teachers. You 
are still negotiating with them. 
 
Your record wasn’t too good with the Liquor Board employees. Your record wasn’t too good with the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees Association (SGEA). You had a strike. I hope we don’t have a 
strike with the people in education. I understand in your negotiations with teachers you have been 
quoting the $2,400 maximum figure in classes IV, V, and VI. Now this particular figure, I’m afraid if 
you will note, will not give parity with Calgary or with Edmonton or with Alberta. It moves them close 
to what the salaries and the contracts are in that area right now. But those people have negotiated 
increases for next year. I don’t see how this agrees with the statement that was made to the Trustees’ 
Convention by the Hon. Gordon MacMurchy, the former Minister. He said we were going to have to 
have some sort of degree of parity if we are going to be able to retain our teachers in Saskatchewan. And 
I think in your negotiations you certainly are going to have to move into this area. I’m speaking 
personally not as a caucus decision. I thought earlier that there had been a statement at the time of the 
Throne Speech, that there was agreement that the teachers and some others would have to exceed the 
guidelines. I stand to be corrected and I shall have to check it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’re not all cheap on this side like your fellows are. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — As I said to the Minister of Education I am not aware of any particular meeting 
of caucus where there was a decision made on the matter. It is as simple as that, but we will certainly 
come up with one in the very near future, before you the Government, with your guidelines. After all 
remember you are the Government, you are the ones who are supposed to have guidelines and yet over 
there you are querying us. You want to find out what our decisions are, what are yours? You’re the 
Government, we’re not the Government, we’re the Opposition. 
 
So I should just like to mention to the Minister of Education that I would hope that come the first part of 
January that our schools in Saskatchewan are not closed. I know negotiations are still taking place. I 
suppose they are sort 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1162 
 

of moving into a very, very crucial area. One of the things I should like to refer to is where you indicated 
that there was such great satisfaction with the present Teacher Collective Bargaining agreement. I have 
been working in this field for many years and I haven’t detected that great satisfaction, particularly on 
the part of the Trustees’ organization. I know they feel they are in a very frustrated position. The fact 
that having four members to five on the negotiating committee hasn’t met with their particular approval. 
And even talking to some of the people in the field, teaching field as well, there wasn’t any satisfaction 
on their part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 8 - Nationalization of Railway Road Beds 
 
MR. D. H. LANGE (Bengough-Milestone) moved, seconded by Mr. Skoberg (Moose Jaw North): 
 

That this Assembly request the Federal Government to nationalize the railway road beds to ensure the 
provision of adequate rail service to all populated areas of Saskatchewan and to ensure complementary 
operations of the rail line companies required to improve overall operating efficiencies. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, when John Marchand, former Minister of Transport, suggested two years ago that 
Canada’s transportation system was a mess, it was regarded by most western Canadians as an 
understatement. Although an understatement it was nevertheless a significant statement because it 
indicated that the Federal Cabinet was finally becoming dimly aware of what western Canada has been 
experiencing for 100 years, an unco-ordinated, arbitrary transportation system serving primarily the 
business interests of eastern Canada at the expense of western Canadian growth. 
 
Another understatement was made in this House last Tuesday. This time by the Member for 
Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) and he was joined by Members of the Liberal Party. He stated that the 
discussion on transportation should not involve political ideology, that in fact somehow transportation 
transitions can take place in Canada without the discussion of politics. He suggested that the Member for 
Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) should not talk about past developments in transportation, that he 
should not talk about the history of the Canadian National Railway or the Canadian Pacific Railway, that 
all of that is past and irrelevant to today’s attempt to achieve a better transportation system for 
Saskatchewan people. As though the events of history are somehow unrelated to the problems of today 
in transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, transportation in Canada is steeped in history and political ideology. Our transportation 
system was founded in political ideology. It is presently in a mess because of political ideology and only 
through discussion of political ideologies will an effective transportation system be devised for Canada. 
The principles involved in the discussion on 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1163 
 

transportation rationalization, mainly the railway companies, the farmer owned co-ops, have their raison 
être in political ideology and it would be naive to assume, as does the Member for Rosetown-Elrose and 
some of the Liberal caucus that we can discuss one without the other. 
 
Now any discussion of current transportation issues must begin with the question, what is rail 
transportation for? Let us first ask that question within the historical context. I know that might upset the 
Member for Rosetown-Elrose. Historically rail transportation was implemented to settle and develop 
western Canada. The purpose of the railroad was to populate western Canada so that resources could be 
extracted and shipped back on the same railroad for the profits of eastern Canada. To these ends it 
served its purpose. However, one must now ask, what is rail transportation for in context of the changing 
nature of the Canadian economy? The desirable answer for Saskatchewan I think everyone would agree 
could be that rail is a tool for regional development, for industrial growth, for agricultural stability, for 
community preservation and as well it is the most efficient mode from an energy and long-term capital 
investment standpoint. 
 
Let’s look at the rail transportation system in the light of regional development, industrial growth, 
agricultural stability and community preservation and transportation efficiency. And let’s see whether 
discussion can or cannot avoid political ideology and let’s see whether the Federal Government of 
Canada has a perspective for economic growth in western Canada as it relates to transportation. Mr. 
Speaker, much as the formation of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company in the 1870s was the turning 
point for western Canadian development, so today we are at a turning point for Saskatchewan 
development. As a result of decisions made with regard to our railroads Saskatchewan’s social future 
will go one of only two ways. There is no question in anyone’s mind that because of the limited land 
base available to produce food, Saskatchewan obviously has a wealthy future in store. Now whether that 
wealthy future will involve many rural communities with many people involved in primary agricultural 
production, secondary industrial manufacturing and wholesale retail distribution, or whether that 
wealthy future will involve only a few primary harvesters of grain will be determined by two factors 
only, political ideology and rail line abandonment. Which direction Saskatchewan will take not as an 
economy but as a social structure will be determined by the transportation system developed over the 
next few years. And the profile of that transportation system will be determined by politics and politics 
alone. 
 
The present political power because it is based upon population is concentrated in the urban areas. As a 
consequence Canada’s political clout rests in central Canada with Toronto, for instance, having more 
political influence than the Province of Saskatchewan. Because the power of politics is urban, political 
decisions are made to perpetuate the urban life style and even though there may be those who prefer a 
rural environment political decisions are not being made which encourage a reversal of the urban 
demographic shift. Urban problems will continue to grow in geometric proportion while plant facilities 
in rural areas, such as telephones, power, gas and roads and community structures will continue to be 
under utilized. Conversely a transportation policy combined with a political ideology which has in mind 
today the optimum utilization of 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1164 
 

existing plant facilities in rural areas could affect the political representation of that area for tomorrow 
by encouraging the growth of population in rural areas. 
 
Now let us analyze existing programs and forces in Canadian politics and see whether or not these 
forces are encouraging growth in rural areas in western Canada. Let us see whether present political 
ideologies are contributing to or subtracting from the best future use of the facilities we have in rural 
Saskatchewan. We will analyze several controversial points which are being discussed before the Hall 
Commission and several more which are thought to be unrelated to the Hall Commission hearings but 
nevertheless are very much factors in the development of our picture. 
 
First, let’s discuss a Federal Government report which is familiar to everyone, the Task Force Report, 
Mr. Speaker, that infamous blueprint commissioned by the Federal Government and written by several 
economists, accountants and administrators. Now did the Federal Government when it was 
commissioning the Task Force Report ask a western Canadian farmer for his input? Did the Federal 
Government ask a Canadian businessman for his input? Did the Federal Government ask a sociologist, a 
demographer, a political scientist for their input? No, Mr. Speaker, the Federal Government 
commissioned five academicians to project the future for Canadian agriculture. And those five to the 
Task Force Report suggested the operation of agriculture was inefficient. Mr. Speaker, for over 90 years 
farmers have been growing grain and livestock in Saskatchewan. In spite of a perpetual lack of stability 
in agriculture, in spite of the capricious nature of the agricultural market, in spite of the vagaries of the 
weather, in spite of the exploitation by the Canadian Pacific Railway, the farmer has still managed to 
develop an industry which takes advantage of sophisticated chemical and agronomic techniques which 
employs technology of a refined nature. In spite of a blatant lack of assistance from the Government of 
Canada, the farmer has managed to survive and furthermore to develop an industry fraught with risk to 
an enviable level of sophistication. And the Federal Government Task Force Report tells him that his 
business is inefficient. 
 
The Task Force Report says that agriculture in Canada is inefficient. Furthermore, the report said that 
the biggest problem in agriculture was not the lack of stability in the market, it was not that the farmer 
needed support prices so he could plan over several years, it was not that small farms should be 
intensified, it was not that poor transportation service existed, rather the Task Force Report suggested 
that the problem with agriculture was in the economy of scale of investment, that farms were too small. 
Mr. Speaker, for over 90 years farmers have been deciding for themselves how big their farms needed to 
be in making their books balance. Now all of a sudden accountants, economists and administrators are 
decreeing that farmers have the wrong economy of scale, that the average farm is too small to be 
efficient. Their solution was not more loan capital for small farmers to transfer his land to his son, their 
solution was not to suggest small, sophisticated, highly specialized technology to help intensify small 
operations, the Task Force solution was not a two price system for commodities which would help the 
small farmer to survive, the Task Force solution was much simpler than that. Simply eliminate the small 
farmer. Increase the economy of scale such that two out of every three farmers would disappear and 
voilà, agriculture 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1165 
 

would miraculously, all of a sudden, be efficient. The Task Force Report said that farms of a certain size 
which had been that size for years were no longer efficient and to make agriculture efficient those small 
farms would have to disappear in favor of a centralized system of large farms. 
 
Well, it is not particularly surprising that such a report should come from academe, it is not surprising 
that an analysis which does not include the social cost of declining rural communities, which does not 
consider the life style of the farmer and his family, which is coldly mathematical, should come from 
economists, accountants and administrators. What is surprising is the effect which the Task Force Report 
has had on the agricultural industry. What is surprising is that the thinking of the Federal Government 
has been closely related to the Task Force Report. What is surprising is that the political ideology which 
has been applied to agriculture and to transportation emulate the recommendations of the Task Force 
Report, that is to get rid of two out of every three farmers. 
 
Now why would we want to eliminate two out of three farmers? Why would we not want as many 
farmers involved in agriculture as possible? Why do we need increasingly larger machines in the 
agricultural industry, do the 50 foot cultivators do a better job than a 12 foot cultivator of comparable 
technology, does a man who farms two sections of land do a better job of farming than a man who farms 
a half section? Does a large farm yield more in production per acre than a small farm? I doubt it, Mr. 
Speaker. There is another reason for encouraging the reduction of farmers. That reason can be found in 
the political ideology of the Federal Government and the Task Force Report. The Report said that 
agriculture should be operated like any other business, extensive financing, extensive land base, 
extensive machinery, minimized labor. To obtain the greatest dollar value from agriculture there are to 
be as few people employed in the industry as is physically possible. In other words create a farm in 
which large, vertically integrated, multinational corporations can operate. It is desirable for large 
corporations to have as few people and as much technology involved in agriculture as is physically 
possible. If you can minimize the human variable, you can maximize the profit. 
 
That is the way the American system of agriculture operates. Vertically integrated, centralized 
agribusiness based on speculation and free open market systems. And that is the way many American 
corporations and eastern businesses in Canada would like to see the Canadian system operate. I mean in 
particular Cargill, Continental, the Canadian National and the Canadian Pacific railroads. The ideal 
system for them would be a centralized system of grain handling and transportation which would have 
as few grain delivery points as possible. If there were grain terminals every 80 or 100 miles which were 
built by the farmers, and if the hauling to these grain terminals were done by trucks at the farmers’ 
expense and if the road beds for those trucks were maintained by the Saskatchewan taxpayer, then, of 
course, large grain companies and railroads would have the maximum volume of grain moving through 
and over the cheapest amount of capital facility. Now this means a lot of profit for those industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an analogy can be drawn between the type of system that the railroads and the private grain 
handling companies would like to see and the present system that we have in 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1166 
 

the operation of our telephones. As you know, our telephone system has an infra-structure of telephones 
operating from offices, homes, wherever they might be to a central switching mechanism and that is 
complemented by a microwave system which moves east and west across Canada and north and south in 
Saskatchewan. It makes no difference whether a call is placed from northern Saskatchewan to 
Vancouver, or whether a call is placed from south Saskatchewan to Hamilton, Ontario. Those calls 
ultimately will move through a microwave system. By having one cheap capital facility, a microwave 
system, and by maximizing the volume of telephone calls moving over that microwave system, you 
maximize the profits by having the greatest volume of calls moving at a low tariff each. An analogy can 
be drawn between that kind of system which exists in a telephone operation and the type of microwave 
system that the railroads and the grain handling companies would like to attain. 
 
The railroads would like to see the same kind of microwave system because they would have only a few 
railroads moving east and a few railroads moving west. They know that ultimately because it is the 
cheapest way to transport bulk commodities, grain must move on that rail system. What they do not 
want is to have to maintain the infra-structure that it takes to support that system, that is, the branch 
lines. 
 
Consequently, if they can eliminate the branch lines, they eliminate the maintenance on the branch lines. 
If at the same time they can encourage trucking, then the farmer will pay for the fuel, the farmer will pay 
for the capital costs of the trucks, and the taxpayer will pay for the roads to inland terminals. If 
furthermore, you can eliminate the Crow’s Nest rates in the process, then obviously, you can optimize 
your profit from the greatest volume of grain moving at the highest price per bushel through the lowest 
capital facility. Indeed a microwave system for grain. 
 
Not only have maximized the profit, but in the process you have monopolized the industry by 
controlling the supply which will lead to price manipulation. Through a system of inland terminals and 
minimized rail line, you can monopolize the selling end of the agricultural industry. 
 
The private grain handling companies would have a virtual monopoly in grain handling and the railroad 
companies would have all of the grain moving to the coasts over as few branch lines as possible. Make 
no mistake the railroad companies don’t want any more than a minimum amount of rural railroad lines, 
perhaps one every hundred miles or so. Branch line subsidy makes very little difference to the railway 
companies in the kind of system which they would like to see. They don’t want the headache of 
maintaining branch lines. They only want a few big delivery points so that they can quickly load large 
trains which will move over as few miles of rail lines as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there be any doubt in anyone’s mind about the projections for the future with a regard to 
a microwave system in rail line, let me refer to an interim report on freight transportation in Canada, 
published as late as June, 1975 by the Ministry of Transport, under the Hon. Otto Lang, Ottawa. In this 
report they project the future for grain export in Canada. They show in the report through a series of 
analyses how by the year 1990 over 70 per cent of all of the grain being exported from Canada will 
move through the Great Lakes terminals, over 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1167 
 

the Great Lakes and through the St. Lawrence network. They show how the other 30 per cent will move 
west to Vancouver. They show how in the year 1990 with projected exports of grain being radically up 
from what they are now, that only one per cent of all of the grain in Canada will move through the Port 
of Churchill. 
 
What does that mean to the western Canadian farmer? Well it means that he will be charged an extra ten 
to twenty cents per bushel to have his grain moved through eastern Lakehead terminals and down the St. 
Lawrence as opposed to moving out of the Port of Churchill. The Federal Government has no intentions 
by its own projections for 1990 in improving the export quality of Canadian grain systems. 
 
I would ask, after reading a report like this if the feds are working for the grain farmer or whether they 
are working for eastern business, when they blatantly deny a saving to the western Canadian farmer by 
not improving the facilities at the Port of Churchill. They are obviously, Mr. Speaker, trying to create a 
microwave system for the railway companies in grain handling. Contrast this microwave system of grain 
handling with the historical co-operative approach with which western Canadian farmers are familiar. 
We sell our grain, for instance, through the co-operative method, profits on sales by the Canadian Wheat 
Board throughout the year are averaged and returned to the farmer in the form of back payments. The 
system of repayments even takes into account those who had poorer luck with the weather. That’s the 
kind of co-operation that farmers are used to through the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
As well, we have farmer owned pools which buy and handle our grain, profits from this industry are 
returned to the producer. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool for instance has been so profitable that it has grown 
to be Canada’s 16 largest industry, returning net profits of $23 million for Saskatchewan producers last 
year. Co-operation and sharing in rural Saskatchewan goes even further if we think about the retail 
co-operative organizations and credit unions, all of which have their decision making process in the 
communities to which the profit is returned. The growth of much of rural Saskatchewan has been 
predicted upon the concepts of co-operation. Contrast the historical development of Saskatchewan 
wherein the community as a whole shares its resources to provide services to all with the microwave 
system of grain handling and transportation that the American grain companies and Canadian railway 
companies would like to create. A system based on open market philosophy where everyone fends for 
himself and profits by someone else’s loss. 
 
Let’s see which side the political ideology of the Federal Liberal Government has supported. Let’s see 
how the Task Force Report relates to the image of agriculture of large companies promoting inland 
terminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Task Force Report is the image of those large companies. The Task Force Report 
suggests getting rid of small farmers, small farmers can’t afford to haul long distances to inland 
terminals. But if you can eliminate them, and leave only large farmers, they can afford the extra costs to 
those inland terminals, and thereby support the terminals which will control supply and, of course, 
ultimately lead to price manipulation in the grain industry. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1168 
 

How does the Federal Government’s political ideology fit into this? Well, if for instance, you refuse 
credit to small farmers while at the same time allowing large farmers more credit, obviously you can 
eliminate small farmers. That’s exactly what the Farm Credit Corporation, a Federal Government 
lending agency has done over the past several years. In spite of the fact that for ten years, the Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan and the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan have asked the Federal Farm 
Credit Corporation to extend low equity loans to small farmers, so that they could indeed make their 
operations viable, the Federal Government has consistently refused. They did not make credit available 
to a farmer who had little or no assets the way the Land Bank program does. Rather the Farm Credit 
Corporation increased the amount that could be lent to those who already had, so that they could buy out 
those who did not have and could not get. Now that is an effective way to eliminate two out of every 
three farms. It is simply a matter of policy. 
 
It wasn’t until the Land Bank was introduced, it wasn’t until the Land Bank became an effective 
instrument in small farm development that finally the Farm Credit Corporation only a few months ago 
has allowed low equity loans and made them available to small farmers. That is the one thing that 
perhaps Saskatchewan people will never appreciate about the Land Bank and that is that through 
competition of the Land Bank program, the Federal Government has in effect been coerced into 
providing low equity loans to small farmers in Canada. 
 
Now, eliminating two out of every three farmers is one thing, but effecting a centralized grain handling 
system on as few rail beds as possible is quite another when we already have a rural elevator system 
operating on existing rail lines. So, how can scavengers like Cargill and Continental grain companies 
compete with co-operatives like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? Why do I call them scavengers? 
Because they wouldn’t come to Saskatchewan to compete with other grain companies during the past 40 
years of agricultural development, but now that the agricultural industry is flourishing, after someone 
else has built the infra-structure for a viable industry, now the scavengers come to pick the most profit 
possible from the industry by investing as little as possible in the industry. 
 
How can scavengers compete with our rural system? The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they can’t. That is why 
they have never been in Canada until two years ago. Cargill has been an agent for the Canadian Wheat 
Board for over 40 years. But they have never been involved in rural grain buying and handling, because 
they couldn’t compete with the rural elevator system that was located only a few miles from every 
farmer in the province. That same rural elevator that not only provided convenience, but profitability, 
the Wheat Pool for instance returning $23 million of profit to the Canadian producers last year. 
 
The only way that the large grain companies can compete is to have a large volume of grain moving 
through as few points as possible, a centralized inland terminal system. But you can’t have an inland 
terminal system existing beside a rural elevator system and expect the farmer to leave the convenience 
of his local delivery point and haul many miles to a terminal. It has to be one system or the other. They 
are mutually exclusive and you can’t have both co-existing. There must be some economic coercion to 
persuade the farmer to turn his back on his 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1169 
 

rural elevator system and to haul to the inland terminal. 
 
Let’s see whether there has been an economic coercion by the Federal Government in this respect, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s see how the political ideology of the Federal Government has weighted the issue of rural 
elevators. We can all remember that in 1969 the Federal Grains Group was struck. The Grains Group of 
course, was commissioned by Otto Lang and it was set up to analyze, among other things, the grain 
delivery system. The Grains Group did not talk about the problems of grain delivery as they related to 
railroads. The did not suggest that Canada’s grain export system was inefficient because the railroad 
companies did not do their job properly. The Grains Group did not talk about the fact that the railway 
companies left cars on sidings for days, weeks and months, without picking them up for delivery. They 
did not suggest that the efficiency of the system could be improved by eliminating back hauls, by 
lengthening sidings and rural elevator systems. They did not talk about bottlenecks in the system, like 
the Port Mann Marshalling Yards at Vancouver, they did not talk about poor industrial relations in the 
port of Vancouver, they did not talk about the possibility of expansion of the use of the Port of 
Churchill. Instead of blaming Canada’s poor reputation as a grain exporter, on the people who are 
responsible for it, the railway companies, the Grains Group chose instead to blame the rural elevator 
system. 
 
Much like the Task Force Report blamed the small farmers for the ills that plagued the agricultural 
economy, the Grains Group again supported by the Federal Government of Canada, blamed the rural 
elevator system for the ills that plague our grain handling. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, the Grains Group said that the single most predominant factor causing our export 
system to function inefficiently was the rural elevator company, it was the same rural elevator company 
which has efficiently collected and handled our grain for over 50 years. The same system which in 1972, 
when the railroads were operating efficiently, shipped twice our total production of that year’s crop. The 
same system that is supposedly inefficient, that was operating on an antiquated rail system was declared 
to be inefficient. The same system that in 1972 shipped one billion bushels of grain out of the prairie 
regions of Canada, twice our production for that year, was declared by the Grains Group to be 
inefficient. Why did the Grains Group not give the same emphasis to the railway system? Why did the 
Grains Group not suggest a revamping of our rail system? 
 
Rather than placing the onus on the railway companies and suggesting improved sidings along a slightly 
rationalized elevator system, they recommended an inland terminal system to replace the existing 
network of rural elevators, which would handle twice our annual production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why, all of a sudden, have we heard about an inland terminal system shortly after the 
Grains Group had been struck by the Hon. Otto Lang? Why by blaming the rural elevator system and 
not blaming the lack of ability of the Federal Government to co-ordinate the railroads and to nationalize 
the railroad network in Canada, why did the Grains Group make the rural elevator system the scapegoat 
for federal ineptitude in Canada’s grain handling system? 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1170 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we compare the Grains Group philosophy and the Task Force Report philosophy 
and the political ideology of the Federal Government and the ideology of the railway companies and the 
American grain corporations, perhaps we can understand why the Grains Group suggested that there was 
something wrong with the rural elevator system. It is perhaps because there is a grand design for western 
Canadian agriculture. Why did the Grains Group not simply suggest an adjustment and modification in 
the existing system of elevators and railroads, rather than suggesting a whole new system of inland 
terminals based on the Americanized system of grain handling? It is because, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
grand design on western Canadian agriculture. That design is to maximize the profits for the railway 
companies in Canada and the American vertically integrated grain companies. It is to minimize the 
subsidy of the Government of Canada to the rail lines themselves. 
 
And that grand design is to Americanize Saskatchewan’s grain handling system and to open up the 
Canadian food system as a new frontier for American capital. It is not enough that they have got oil, gas 
and coal, copper, timber and potash, they now want the food system as well. We are headed for an 
American monopoly of the Canadian grain handling system. The strategy is to monopolize the industry 
through a centralized grain system, the mechanism by which the plan will be effected, is rail line 
abandonment. 
 
If rail lines are abandoned, many elevators will be abandoned along with them. If elevators are 
abandoned, with them goes one of the options, that the small farmer and the small community that he 
supports have to survive, economically. He may be able to afford to haul ten miles with his present 
equipment but he can’t afford to haul 20, so he sells out to a larger neighbor who can borrow from the 
Farm Credit Corporation. Whom does the Federal Government help in the process? Did it help small 
farmers through the Farm Credit Corporation? Did they help the elevator companies by the 
nationalization of the Canadian railroad system, by making a common rail bed, by eliminating back 
hauls, by improving the shipping facilities through the Port Mann Marshalling Yards, by putting 
connecting links into the rail system, by providing upgrading facilities in the rural areas, by providing 
longer sidings for the rural elevator companies? No talk about this, Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. But 
rather they bought the story of the railroads and the American grain companies and are moving instead 
towards a centralized grain handling system. 
 
Now which side is the Federal Government on? Is it on the side of the small Saskatchewan farmer? On 
the side of small Saskatchewan rural communities? Is it on the side of the rural elevator system? I think 
any of us can answer that question if we have been watching the commercials which are advertised 
asking for submissions to the Hall Commission. If any of you have seen those commercials they contrast 
the elevators and the railroad companies. They contrast them by comparing in imagery the horse and the 
wagon to the elevator system and modern sleek technology of a high speed modern train for the railway 
system. They suggest in their commercial that there has been no change in the rural elevator system for 
over 50 years. That in fact, the rural elevator system is antiquated, that no improvements have been 
made and that it is the rural elevator system that is to blame. At the same time they suggest that 
somehow the railroads have made tremendous technological strides simply because 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1171 
 

they have changed from steam to diesel, because they have changed from a box car to a hopper car. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask you, in view of those kinds of advertisements for a presumably independent 
commission, those advertisements projected by the Federal Government of Canada, which side are they 
on? Are they on the side of the railway companies or are they on the side of the rural elevator 
companies? 
 
They are suggesting that there has been no upgrading, no improvement in the rural elevator companies 
in the last 50 years. In spite of the fact that most of those rural elevator companies have moved from 
single elevators to operating units, in spite of the fact that they have become electrified, in spite of the 
fact that they all can virtually load hopper cars in rural Saskatchewan, in spite of the fact that many 
elevators have two legs, one loading in, one loading out. In spite of the fact that they have large scales to 
accommodate virtually every kind of truck. Outside, Mr. Speaker, the rural elevator system may still 
look the same, but inside it has changed drastically. 
 
Now why do the commercials that advertise for the Hall Commission not suggest that the rural railroad 
system is not efficient? Do the commercials talk about the lack of upgrading in the railroad system over 
the last 30 years? Do the commercials talk about the deterioration that exists in the rural railroad 
system? Do the commercials talk about the inefficiencies because of the Port Mann Marshalling Yards 
in Vancouver? Do the commercials talk about the prospect of improving the facilities at the Port of 
Churchill? Do the commercials talk about the possibility of a connecting link between Ashcroft and 
Clinton to try to improve the efficiency of the rail lines? Nothing, Mr. Speaker, they only imply that the 
rural elevator system is somehow outmoded, outdated and inefficient and the cause of the plagues that 
affect Canada’s export position in world grain markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since Members on the opposite side of the House are somewhat wont to misinterpret things 
that are said, I do not want them to understand from my previous comments that I do not support the 
Hall Commission. In fact exactly the opposite is the truth. If any man in Canada can probably do 
something to effect some change in the grain handling and transportation system, it has to be Justice 
Emmett Hall. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — A man who has been King’s Counsel, bencher lecturer in law, Provincial Justice, 
Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, a man who has been on 
commissions in medicare, reform of the Ontario education system, who has been concerned about Indian 
rights in Canada, who arbitrated the 1973 railroad dispute, the man who revised the Saskatchewan court 
system. I have the greatest degree of respect for Emmett Hall. If one man can do it, perhaps Emmett Hall 
can. But Emmett Hall does not write the commercials for his own commission. That is done by the 
Federal Government of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if any one doubts the grand design in agriculture being perpetrated on western Canada by 
the railroads, by the free market grain companies and abetted by the Federal Government’s ideology, I 
think it is worthwhile for us to 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1172 
 

analyze the inland terminal at Weyburn since terminals will soon exist in other areas in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, the Federal Government says that they are not involved in the inland terminal system. The Federal 
Government says that the farmers are simply doing a little experiment in grain handling and 
transportation at Weyburn. They say, why shouldn’t we allow the farmers to take a bit of a chance and 
see if they can effect some improvement in Canada’s export position with regard to grain. 
 
Let’s see what kind of a chance those farmers are taking at Weyburn. As we know approximately $1.6 
million for that terminal at Weyburn has been invested by local farmers in southern Saskatchewan. In 
thousand dollar lots and more. At the same time $3.2 million has been borrowed by the group from the 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. Let’s suppose just for a moment that the inland terminal at 
Weyburn goes broke. What happens to the farmers’ money? What happens to the farmer who has 
invested $1,000 of his own hard earned money into the Weyburn inland terminal? If the terminal goes 
broke the farmer loses money. There is no guarantee for the Saskatchewan farmer on his money if the 
terminal goes broke. But suppose that the terminal goes broke, what happens to the money that the 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce has lent to the group to build the terminal? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce has been guaranteed its money, 90 cents on the dollar. 
Guaranteed by whom? By the Federal Department of Regional Economic Expansion. If the Weyburn 
inland terminal goes broke $3.2 million that was invested by the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce 
is guaranteed by the Federal Government of Canada at 90 cents on the dollar. If the inland terminal goes 
broke a year after its startup, after it has collected 10 per cent interest on its money it means that the 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce has collected all of its money back but the provincial farmer who 
is simply participating in an experiment to try and improve the efficiency of the grain handling system in 
Canada losses all of his money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers take the risk and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce is guaranteed its 
money, compliments of the Federal Government of Canada. And the Federal Government suggests that 
somehow it is not involved in the Weyburn inland terminal experiment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Now, the Liberals will say fair enough, why don’t you allow an experiment to take 
place? Allow an inland terminal to compete freely with the rural elevator system and let’s see what 
happens in the open competitive market place. Now, I agree, why not? If indeed there was not lobbying 
going on concerning trucking; concerning rail line abandonment; concerning removal of the Crow’s 
Nest rates, I would say allow the experiments to take place simultaneously and in the same space frame. 
But the fact is that while the inland terminal is being built in Weyburn, there is a trucking lobby going 
on; there is a rail line abandonment lobby going on; there is a lobby going on to eliminate the Crow’s 
Nest rates. All of those lobbies are being abetted by the Federal Government of Canada. 
 
Now they say they will do the same for anyone, anyone who 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1173 
 

wants to build an inland terminal. Well they might. But let’s take a look at another factor that is involved 
in the Weyburn inland terminal. 
 
That factor exists in the presence of an individual called one, Rod Bryden. Now Members on the 
opposite side of the House will know who Rod Bryden is, he is a former law associate of the Hon. Otto 
Lang. He was the campaign manager for the Hon. Otto Lang in 1968 and soon became his executive 
assistant shortly thereafter. Shortly after that he became the chairman of the Grains Group Organization. 
The Grains Group as you very well know commissioned Patrick M. Foody, a consulting firm from 
eastern Canada, to do a feasibility study and to project an inland terminal system on western Canadian 
agriculture. Patrick M. Foody’s study requested by the Grains Group was modelled after the American 
system of inland terminals. Who was the chairman at this time? One Rod Bryden. Shortly thereafter Rod 
Bryden moved to become a senior official in the Department of Regional Economic Expansion. And 
who backed the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce for the Weyburn inland terminal but the 
Department of Regional Economic Expansion. Shortly after that, what happened to Rod Bryden? He 
quit the Federal Government and he set up his own consulting firm called Bryden Limited. Who did the 
consulting of the Weyburn inland terminal at a cost of some $40,000 odd of the Canadian taxpayers’ 
money from the Department of Industry Trade and Commerce? Bryden Limited, none other than Bryden 
Limited. The same Rod Bryden who had been involved in the Federal Government. 
 
Now that the preliminary work has been done, the Weyburn inland terminal is being built by a company 
called Techtrol Incorporated, and Techtrol is a corporation the principals of which are one Patrick M. 
Foody and one Rod Bryden. But the Federal Government says we are not involved in the Weyburn 
inland terminal. We don’t have anything to do with the Weyburn inland terminal. We are just allowing 
the farmers to go ahead with a simple experiment in trying to improve the facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan with their grain handling system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — One other point is worth mentioning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in connection with Mr. 
Rod Bryden and that is that Rod Bryden also did the liaison for the inland terminal people between the 
Canadian Wheat Board under the jurisdiction of one Hon. Otto Lang who has to approve the terminal 
and he also did the liaison with the Canadian Grains Commission under the jurisdiction of Hon. Otto 
Lang which has to license the terminal. And he also did the liaison with the Canadian Pacific Railway. 
What is the Canadian Pacific Railway doing at Weyburn, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The Canadian Pacific 
Railway has, for the low cost of $60,000 invested by the Weyburn inland terminal group, agreed to build 
a siding along the Weyburn inland terminal. A siding worth some half a million or more dollars. The 
Canadian Pacific Railway is saying that they will charge the Weyburn inland terminal group $31,000 a 
year until the debt is paid off; or, in the event that they can fill some 40 odd unit trains in the course of a 
year, they will grant them free $31,000 per year until the debt is paid off. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Pacific Railway is building a siding into an inland terminal to 
try and improve 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1174 
 

the efficiency of the grain-handling system in Saskatchewan at the expense of the rural elevator system. 
I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when in the history of Saskatchewan has the Canadian Pacific Railway 
ever built one siding alongside a rural elevator at its own expense? Not once can Members opposite ever 
cite an example of that happening in Saskatchewan history. 
 
But when an inland terminal is built at Weyburn, sided and abetted by the Federal Government and by 
the Department of the Regional, Economic Expansion, all the preliminary work having been done by the 
Grains Group, then the Canadian Pacific Railway puts in a siding potentially free of charge to the 
Weyburn inland terminal group. 
 
The Federal Government stands back and says, but we are not involved in the Weyburn inland terminal 
studies. We don’t have anything to do with inland terminals in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is no accident that the first terminal in this province is being built at Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because Weyburn sits on the Soo Line and the Soo Line of course connects 
central Saskatchewan with Minneapolis, Chicago and the American grain-handling system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — What is located at Minneapolis? None other than the headquarters of Cargill 
Corporation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Of course, we must remember that feed grains now for the first time in the history of 
the Canadian Wheat Board are on the open market. Let’s suppose that within a few years we again have 
what we had four years ago. A four bushel quota, a couple of dollars per bushel for wheat. Farmers my 
age in debt up to their eyeballs, having to make payments each year which the quota system would not 
allow. 
 
Cargill can come along and say to the Weyburn inland group you can act as an agent for us, and we will 
buy number one red wheat on the free open market as feed grain. What will Cargill do with the grain 
after it gets to the inland terminal, paid for by the Saskatchewan farmer, paid for through Saskatchewan 
fuel subsidy, paid for by the taxpayer’s roads? What will Cargill do with the grain that is bought in 
Saskatchewan on the free market system? It will take it on the rail network down the Soo Line and into 
the American network. What will Cargill do with it when they get it o the United States? Well, Cargill 
could do a number of things with it. They could put it into any one of their numerous feed processing 
plants that they have dispersed across North and South America. They could perhaps mix that feed grain 
with some of the wastes from their vegetable processing plants; or perhaps from one of their corn 
refineries; or perhaps they could mix it with some waste from one of their flour milling operations; or 
perhaps they will mix the waste with some meal from their fishing fleet of the west coast of Peru. 
Perhaps they will mix this altogether and put it into animal feed. Then they will take the animal feed and 
they will put it into one of their 50 odd animal feeding plants in North and South America. Or perhaps 
they won’t want 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1175 
 

to put it into the livestock industry at all. Perhaps Cargill will simply take that grain that was bought in 
Canada at off board prices, because feed grains are on the open market, perhaps they will simply store 
that grain in one of their 12 inland terminals in the United States until the price becomes right. And 
when the price is right they will dole that grain out through one of the biggest trucking subsidiaries, 
which they own, in the United States or perhaps they will dole it out through their 1,000 leased hopper 
cars that they have plying the American rail network, or perhaps they will ship it in their own ocean 
going fleet to be stored in one of their six international terminals, all the time monitoring the 
international grain exchange on a $200 million dollar computer facility that they have located in Zurich, 
Switzerland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of competition the people are referring to when they say, a little 
competition is good for the Wheat Pool. Cargill is a multinational corporation of vast extent. A 
multinational corporation which earned last year some $5,270,000,000 in gross revenue. This is the kind 
of system that we are complementing when we are building an inland terminal system at Weyburn. That 
is the kind of system we are complementing by rationalizing and abandoning rail lines in rural 
Saskatchewan. That is the kind of system people are referring to when they say, a little competition is 
good for he Wheat Pool. 
 
Even though the Wheat Pool may be a big organization by Canadian terms, and even though it may have 
returned $23 million profit to the Saskatchewan producer last year, Cargill on the free open market 
speculative system can afford to hedge grain for a period of ten to fifteen years if they have to until the 
have broken the backs of virtually every Pool in rural Canada, the UGG, and other elevator systems, 
combined. And particularly if they are abetted by the federal programs in rail abandonment. 
 
Whom can we thank for this kind of psychology that has developed in western Canada? We can thank 
Otto Lang . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — . . . we can thank the Federal Government. You know those guys aren’t so stupid are 
they? My compliments, gentlemen, you came to the same conclusion I was going to come to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us digress for just a moment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Let’s talk about the trucking industry for a moment. Now, most Members, even 
Members on that side of the House because they represent rural constituencies would have to accept as 
an axiom, as an a priori assumption, that trucks are less efficient than rail. Now we can analyze that any 
way we want. We can analyze it as the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) did the other day. 
We can talk about British thermal units per ton mile, or we can talk about joules per kilogram kilometre 
or we can relate it in terms of twice the investment of the railroad mode or fifty times the labor of the 
railroad, but we will always come to the same conclusion, and that is that trucks are axiomatically less 
efficient than rail. Now, if trucks are less 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1176 
 

efficient than rail, why all of a sudden when we have never heard about it before is there a trucking 
lobby which is occurring at the same time as the lobby for inland terminals in western Canada? Why is 
there a trucking lobby at roughly the same time that the Task Force has been introduced into western 
Canada? Why is there a trucking lobby at the same time that there are suggestions being made for 
rationalization and abandonment of our rail system? 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, is because trucks provide instant flexibility. They provide instant flexibility for 
a free market system predicated upon centralized terminals. It is very difficult, (even though railroads 
may be cheaper and more efficient,) it is very difficult to build a railroad system to a strategically 
located inland terminal. But if you locate the inland terminal, then trucks, by going on the taxpayers’ 
road, can effect instant flexibility for that terminal. That’s why we are hearing a lobby about trucks. 
Because trucks compliment inland terminals, and if you abandon rail lines in rural Saskatchewan, and if 
you complement that with inland terminals, and if you complement that with the trucking system, then 
of course you can effect the kind of system that Cargill would like to see in western Canadian 
agriculture. 
 
At the same time, because you have transferred grain delivery from the rail mode to the road mode at the 
same time as abandoning federal branch lines, the railroads now have no maintenance on branch lines, 
so the railroads have decreased their expenses. And if you are supplied with hopper cars, compliments of 
the Canadian taxpayer, then obviously you can improve the efficiency on those lines that are left and are 
of a class one stature. 
 
We must remember finally, the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National railways own some of the 
largest trucking subsidiaries in Canada, so they are not going to suffer as a result of travelling and 
hauling grain on roads maintained by the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is there a transfer of grain from the railroad mode to the trucking mode? 
 
As well as providing instant flexibility, there is another factor that is involved. Now I can remember in 
the town of Mazenod when I was still very small, going to town and seeing coming in on the train, 
things as big as combines and picking up things as small as letters. Less than 25 years ago the railroads 
were still providing flexibility in freight transport. They are saying now that they cannot provide 
flexibility in freight transport because the technology does not exist in that area. They are saying that 
there is no flexibility in the railroad, that is the trucking mode is more efficient for hauling freight. Is it 
true that the technology doesn’t exist with respect to the railway companies? Well, Mr. Speaker, I have 
here a device which I should like to show to the House and with which I should like to do a comparison 
with regard to technology. 
 
Now everybody knows what this is. It is a small handheld computer, measuring approximately 100 
millimetres by 50 millimetres and less than 10 millimetres thick. Now, Mr. Speaker, this small computer 
doing geometric, logarithmic and memory bank, analytical calculations simply did not exist 40 years 
ago. We had no such device any place in the world that could do what 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1177 
 

this hand-held computer can do today. Thirty years ago in order to do the computations that this 
computer can do would have required machinery that would have filled a room the size of this Chamber. 
Twenty years ago this small hand-held computer was a laboratory scientific dream. Ten years ago the 
integrated solid-state circuitry in this small hand held computer was just beginning to be researched. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, only 35 or 45 years from the time when such a device did not exist at all, the 
average person in our society can buy such a computer to be used himself for less than $200. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Can we take a look at it? 
 
MR. LANGE: — You are welcome to come over and look at it if you like. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I use this small hand-held computer to demonstrate the strides that have been taken 
in technology in the last 20 years with regard to the individual in our society. 
 
Now Canadian National and Canadian Pacific telecommunications control much of the integrated 
solid-state circuitry in Canada. The Canadian Pacific Industries Limited is lauded the world over for its 
ability as a consulting firm. Canadian Pacific Investments Limited controls things like logging 
companies, like Marathon Realty, like hotels, like Cominco, like Algoma Steel. It controls Pan Canadian 
Petrol and Fording Coal Company, amongst many, many other subsidiaries. The Canadian Pacific 
Investments can co-ordinate and control that kind of an industry. They control most of the integrated 
solid-state circuitry in Canada, and railroad technology is over 100 years old, and the Canadian Pacific 
Railway Company is suggesting that the technology does not exist for freight transfer on the railroad 
mode. Mr. Speaker, it is ridiculous to assume as the railroad companies do that we do not have the 
technology, the technological potential available to upgrade, integrate the railroad network. Why is there 
no flexibility . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’m having trouble hearing the speaker. I don’t know about the other Members, but 
I’m having trouble hearing the speaker. 
 
MR. LANGE: — I am too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is your Point of Order? 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I understood yesterday you called one of our Members to order for not talking to 
the Resolution. His Resolution is about rail line abandonment. I have heard everything from Cargill to 
. . . well my gosh. All right, rule on it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have been listening to the Member’s discussion and he has been relating fairly 
closely to the Resolution as I see it on the Order paper. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that you have been listening to him, but you have 
been out of the House for the last half hour. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1178 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think it is quite clear that I was out of the House for about five minutes, if the 
Member was watching. Because I was very careful about the amount of time I was out of the House. 
 
MR. LANGE: — They are wondering whether I will be relating to the contents of the Resolution, and 
as a matter of fact I have mentioned ‘nationalization’ five times in my speech already. 
 
We were discussing why there is no flexibility in the rail mode presently, and we conclude that there is 
no flexibility because the railroad companies don’t want to have any flexibility in the rail system. 
 
Now why do they not want to have flexibility in the rail system? Simply because they have a subsidy on 
branch lines in rural Saskatchewan. Now how can you collect on the one hand the subsidy for branch 
lines which are not paying, and at the same time be involved in freight transport? The railway companies 
can do that because not only do they own railroads they own trucking subsidiaries. In order to collect a 
branch line subsidy you must decrease the amount of load that goes over the railroad in one year. How 
do you decrease rail load? By decreasing the amount of freight that is on it and transferring that freight 
from the rail mode to the trucking mode at the same time suggesting that trucking is somehow more 
flexible than rail. So you gain the advantage of the freight on the road mode, paid for by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer, at the same time the Federal Government subsidizes the branch lines which you 
have now caused to run at an inefficient level because it only handles grain. They will pull tricks like 
that to try and gain freight transport, at the same time obtaining subsidy on the branch lines in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In spite of the fact that the railroads have been downgrading their system; in spite of the fact that they 
manipulate and coerce the rail system and the Canadian taxpayer into paying for freight on the road 
mode, through trucks; in spite of that, the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) rose the other day 
in anguish to defend the railroad companies rather than the rural elevator system. He suggested that even 
though a few rural elevators had been pulled out of a particular area that the branch lines still existed. He 
tried to prove, I suppose, that the railway companies were not the ones who were effecting branch line 
abandonment. I don’t know which line he was referring to, but there can only be two reasons for an 
elevator company pulling elevators out of rural Saskatchewan. One reason is that there must be another 
elevator within seven or eight miles of that existing elevator, and it would not be a great burden on the 
farmer to have to transport a few miles extra; or the other reason, which is more probable, is that the 
railroads allowed the lines to deteriorate to the point where a train would fall off them, standing still, so 
that the elevator companies were in effect forced to rationalize to another point on better rail lines. 
 
Now it is a brave man who will rise in this Chamber and represent a rural seat and defend the railway 
companies. Perhaps the Member for Rosetown-Elrose may have been co-opted and duped by Cargill, the 
railroads, and the Federal Government, but I would suggest that the average farmer in Saskatchewan is 
far more knowledgeable about the rural elevator system and branch line abandonment than he would 
like to think. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1179 
 

Also last Tuesday, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) rose in the House and 
talked about the tremendous contribution that the Federal Government had made to the grain-handling 
system in western Canada, and he lauded Otto Lang by suggesting that it was a tremendous effort on his 
part to provide $200 million worth of hopper cars for western Canadian grain movement. He suggested 
that somehow we should be certainly honored and privileged about the fact that we have had a $200 
million outright expenditure by the Canadian taxpayer for hopper cars. Now let’s see what $200 million 
will . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will remind the Member that I’m still listening closely to his remarks, and he is 
making direct references to other debates which are on another issue in this Chamber, and I think that he 
should confine himself to the Resolution. At this point I think that he should not refer to other debates, 
because the Member whom he referred to has not spoken in this debate, neither of the Members that he 
has referred to have spoken in this debate. He should confine his remarks to this debate. 
 
MR. LANGE: — Mr. Speaker, I can try and do that although the comments are certainly pertinent to 
this debate. 
 
A $200 million expenditure in hopper cars is not particularly a great act on the part of the Federal 
Government with regard to western Canadian agriculture. Let us ask, for instance, how long a hopper 
car will last? Well, the average hopper car in Canada has lasted 50 to 60 years, and the new hopper cars 
will last at least 50 to 60 years, perhaps 100 years if proper maintenance occurs with them. 
 
Now let us ask what the contribution of the western Canadian grain farmer was last year to the gross 
national product of Canada? Something in the magnitude of $3 billion to $4 billion, Mr. Speaker. The 
western Canadian grain farmer contributed $3 billion to $4 billion in one year to the gross national 
product of Canada and we are supposed to laud the Hon. Otto Lang because he contributed less than 10 
per cent of that amount for a capital facility which will last for over 60 years. Although we should be 
thankful that we have the hopper cars and not particularly laud them, since they are a right and a 
privilege for western Canadian farmers, at the same time we should ask why are we getting hopper cars 
all of a sudden when nothing is being done about the Port Mann Marshalling Yards? Why are we getting 
hopper cars when nothing is done about putting longer sidings into the rural areas to handle unit trains 
which the hopper cars will fit into? Why are we not talking about connecting links in the railway 
network at the same time? Why are we not talking about back hauls which will improve the efficiency of 
the grain handling system as it exists in rural Saskatchewan? Why are we not talking about expanding 
the Port of Churchill? Why are we simply talking about hopper cars and producing them very, very 
quickly? Could it be perhaps, Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan only has 1,856 miles out of its total 
7,000 miles of rail line that can carry a hopper car, and that in fact if the rural elevator companies want 
the optimum service from the railway companies through the newly manufactured hopper cars, that that 
service will have to occur only on the lines which are upgraded to class 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1180 
 

one standards, and that those lines are in the minority in rural Saskatchewan? Could it be that through 
hopper cars, they are forcing the rural elevator companies to rationalize according to only class one and 
perhaps class two lines in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let us summarize. We have talked about the Task Force Report, which suggests that 
a certain number of farmers in rural Saskatchewan must be eliminated. We have talked about the Grains 
Group which introduced the idea of inland terminals. We have talked about trucks, we have talked about 
hopper cars, and we have talked about the implications of the free market system on western Canadian 
agriculture and the future of rural communities in Saskatchewan. And we see that agriculture for 
Saskatchewan is in the most precarious situation that it has ever been in throughout history, and that the 
mechanism by which that future will be changed will indeed be rail line abandonment. And we have 
seen that the Federal Government has been involved all the way along with programs such as Task 
Force Report, the Grains Group, the trucking lobby, the rail line abandonment lobby and the lobby to get 
rid of the Crow’s Nest rates. The Federal Government has not blamed the railroads for the inefficiency 
of Canada’s grain-handling system. It is not the farmers in rural Saskatchewan who are to blame. It is 
not the rural elevator system which is to blame, because it does not have the authority to effect the kind 
of change that is necessary, but rather, it is the inefficiency of the railroads which is to blame. And 
because of the psychology which has developed in western Canada, we may be headed for a centralized 
grain-handling system which will decimate rural communities in Saskatchewan. That’s what the Federal 
Government is responsible for in western Canadian agriculture. And we can thank the Liberal Party of 
Canada, and we can thank the Hon. Otto Lang for developing the psychology that is presently extant in 
Saskatchewan. And there is more yet that we can thank Otto Lang for. We can thank Otto Lang for 
taking feed grains out of the jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board and putting them on the open 
market; and we can thank him for the feed freight assistance which he has given to eastern livestock 
producers at the expense of the western Canadian producer; and we can thank him for costing the 
farmers of Canada several millions of dollars through subsidies from the Canadian Wheat Board into the 
free market system of feed grains from July to December of last year. 
 
Most important, we can thank him for taking the first step towards the destruction of the monopoly of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But there is more than that that we can thank Otto Lang for in western Canada. We can thank Otto Lang 
for the infamous, insidious LIFT program of a few years ago. 
 
Now farmers in this country may not have been to University, and they may not be ministers of justice 
and ministers in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board and ministers of transportation, but there is one 
thing that farmers in western Canada do know, and that is when to seed and when to harvest. And in 
spite of that, in spite of this fact the farmers have for 75 years been doing their own thinking in their own 
industry. In spite of the fact that the world’s grain reserves were at an all-time low in the 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1181 
 

year of LIFT, (world grain reserves of less than 35 days to keep the whole world); in spite of all that 
Otto Lang suggested to western Canadian farmers, in fact coerced western Canadian farmers into not 
growing grain, into summer fallowing for the second year running. 
 
How many people indirectly starved in the world because of that move is not known. But whoever 
starved and whichever country suffered as a result of it, can be attributed to the stupidity of virtually one 
man in Canada. Prairie farmers are still smarting from the infamous LIFT program. It is only a few years 
ago that they started to come out of the effects of it. Otto Lang may have been one man who can effect 
bilingualism in Canadian airports but he is not one who can change the railways’ freight rates for 
western Canada to hope to support western Canadian industry. Western Canadians owe a lot to Otto 
Lang and perhaps within the next few years he will receive exactly what is owing to him. It has taken 60 
years for agriculture to develop an orderly marketing system that protects the farmer, the western 
Canadian grain producers. It has taken 60 years to develop an efficient, modern, elevator system. And 
for 60 years the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific railways have been trying to break the 
co-operatives. For 60 years the American private grain trading companies have been trying to get their 
foot into western Canadian agriculture and for 60 years organizations like Palliser have been trying to 
break the back of the Canadian Wheat Board. Oh, yes, Palliser has been around for 60 years. It is just 
that they are all of such an independent nature it took them 55 years to get together for an organizational 
meeting. Sixty years it has taken to develop western Canadian agriculture and in less than 10 years the 
Canadian National and Canadian Pacific railways of Canada and the American multinational grain 
corporations can break the back of the whole system simply because they have found an ally in the 
Cabinet of Canada that comes from western Canada. An ally in Otto Lang, that Benedict Arnold of 
prairie Liberals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Now whoever suggested that two out of three farmers should disappear? It wasn’t the 
farmers. Who suggested that there was something wrong with the rural elevator system? It wasn’t the 
farmers. Who suggested that there should be terminals in western Canada to replace the rural elevator 
system? It wasn’t the farmers. Who suggested first that there should be abandonment of the rural rail 
system in Canada? It wasn’t the farmers. Who suggested that there should be trucks to replace rail in 
grain-handling functions? It wasn’t the farmer. And who suggested first that the Crow’s Nest rates 
should be eliminated in favor of flexible tariffs on the rail lines? It wasn’t the farmers. Every one of the 
lobbies which have been going on against the rural elevator system, for terminals, for abandonment, for 
trucks, can be traced either directly or indirectly to the Federal Government of Canada and Benedict 
Arnold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you thought that there was an exciting plot in the book, "The Brothers Karamazoff", if 
you enjoyed the espionage associated with "Murder on the Orient Express", then surely you will enjoy 
even more the documentary that history will record about the manipulation, coercion and intrigue in the 
true story of Otto Lang and the demise of western Canadian agriculture. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1182 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — This historic story, Mr. Speaker, will be tragic. It will talk not only about how the 
rural elevator system was eroded in favor of a centralized grain-handling and railway system; it will talk 
not only about massive trucking on expensive roads in Saskatchewan; it will talk not only about large 
extensive farms in rural Saskatchewan; it will talk not only about the lost opportunity for people to live 
in rural areas in the future; it will talk not only about how the co-operative spirit in Saskatchewan has 
been destroyed; but most important, it will talk perhaps about how the Canadian Wheat Board had in 
effect been destroyed. Canada is going to become a very powerful nation in the world in the next several 
years, simply because of its ability to distribute food to the world. 
 
To effectively distribute food to those who need it there should be a monopoly control by a government 
agency and that is exactly what we have through the Canadian Wheat Board presently. If, indeed, that 
monopoly control is destroyed then the distribution of food to people in the world who need it will be 
done simply by the private grain companies. And that is the biggest tragedy which exists in the 
centralized grain-handling system as we see it on the horizon. Canada’s future as a major power in the 
world and in the world politics of food is presently at stake because perhaps the power, the monopolistic 
power of the Canadian Wheat Board will be destroyed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what could government do rather than promote inland terminals and flexible rates 
and rail line abandonment? Perhaps the Federal Government of Canada could recognize along with other 
governments that there is another economic future which could be pursued. An economic future which 
does not necessarily emphasize machines but rather people. An economic future that uses programs like 
Land Bank and FarmStart to intensify and diversify small farm operations. An economic future which 
uses appropriate sophisticated technology for large and small farms. Perhaps the Federal Government 
could start another Task Force Report, the kind of report written by farmers and businessmen from 
western Canada. A Task Force report that involves sociologists, demographers and political scientists as 
well as economists and accountants. A Task Force report which suggests that there can be industrial 
growth in rural areas. A Task Force report that suggests that the maximum potential of plant facility in 
rural Saskatchewan be utilized. A Task Force report which encourages people to want to go to rural 
areas; and a Task Force report which does not suggest that farmers and communities should be here for 
the profitability of the railroads but that conversely the railroads should be here for the profitability of 
the farmers. 
 
After having had such a Task Force report what could the Federal Government do? Well the Federal 
Government could recognize that the bugbear in the total grain-handling system in Canada is the 
railroad system. And the Federal Government could do as the Provincial Government has done in 
Saskatchewan with regard to potash. After recognizing that the railroads are not operating efficiently, 
they could take them over. They could nationalize the rail beds of Canada for the effective utilization of 
all people in Canada. They could recognize that we don’t need a centralized grain-handling system that 
all we need is 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1183 
 

intelligent use of the railroads. They could freeze abandonment. They could preserve all lines on a basic 
grid structure of 30 miles in any direction. They could allow the elevators to adjust for future and to 
integrate and upgrade according to that grid structure. They could expand the Port of Churchill, they 
could expand the Port Mann Marshalling Yards, they could put in sidings in rural areas to accommodate 
unit trains, they could put in a link from Ashcroft to Clinton to help improve the export potential. They 
could try and create a better atmosphere for the 28 labor unions that are involved in rail transportation 
and grain transport. There are many, many things that the Federal Government could do rather than 
blaming the rural elevator system for the ills that plague export of grain in Canada. And after that they 
could let anyone who wishes build an inland terminal but that terminal would have to compete with the 
rural elevator companies on existing upgraded rail lines at the expense of the Federal Government and at 
Crow’s Nest rates. In short, rather than wasting the potential of rural communities, rather than 
destroying future opportunities for people who wish to live in rural Saskatchewan, rather than blaming 
the rural elevator system, rather than promoting inland terminals, rather than destroying the Canadian 
Wheat Board, rather than promoting trucks, one simple move could be made by the Federal Government 
which would pre-empt all of these things, nationalization of the railway beds. 
 
Through nationalization the operation of the railroad could become a public utility. A public utility 
serving small scale agriculture, industrial and community development and small scale community 
development, also a railroad network which would reverse the trend of demographic shift towards urban 
centres in Canada. 
 
The issue of rail line abandonment is not a simple case of whether or not we are going to have more or 
less rail lines, whether we are going to truck grain ten or perhaps 20 miles. The issue of rail line 
abandonment is not whether or not we are going to have a rural elevator system, these are certainly all 
factors in the discussion. The real issue in rail line abandonment is, are we going to have a rural future in 
Saskatchewan? Is agriculture in Saskatchewan going to continue in the tradition of co-operation and 
sharing under the Canadian Wheat Board, Wheat Pools and Crow’s Nest rates, a co-operative approach 
which will encourage small farm development, which will encourage industrial and community groups, 
which will encourage more people to live in rural areas, ultimately increase the voting power of western 
Canada or, are we heading for a new economic order? An economic order which will eliminate two out 
of every three farmers in rural Saskatchewan and encourage large and extensive farm operations with an 
agricultural elite in rural Saskatchewan, situated four miles between farms and 50 miles between 
communities; a new economic order which will lead to a centralized elevator system, complemented by 
centralized agribusiness which will lead to an extensive highway system created largely to serve the 
grain trucking industry; an economic order which will devastate and obliterate rural Saskatchewan and 
which will destroy any future possibilities of many people being involved in the industry of agriculture; 
an economic order which will monopolize and construct the agricultural sector and make it totally 
dependent upon the vagaries of the speculative market. This is the issue in the rail line abandonment 
discussions. 
 
There are two directions which Saskatchewan can go. And 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1184 
 

the mechanism which will determine that final social direction is abandonment of rail lines. 
Abandonment of rail lines will determine the kind of grain-handling system we will have. The kind of 
grain-handling system will determine how many farmers will be left in rural areas. The number of 
farmers will determine how many rural communities there will be. The number of rural communities 
will determine the industrial development pattern of Saskatchewan as it relates to the secondary 
processing of agricultural products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decisions made with regard to the railroad will be irreversible. The next few years of 
discussions on rail lines, the next few years of political ideology will determine the kind of economic 
future Saskatchewan will have. And largely responsible for the direction of that economy will be the 
Federal Government. 
 
Now why do we need a nationalized rail system? To remove from the railway companies the arbitrary 
ability to determine population and industrial growth patterns of western Canada; to allow the rural 
elevator and the farming population to independently determine how they will rationalize their own 
grain handling system and the size of their own farms. We need a nationalized rail system to obtain use 
by society of transportation tax dollars for preventing future inflationary trends in transportation costs by 
scarce energy and spiralling construction costs. We need a nationalized rail network to provide the basis, 
at present day prices, for a future transportation system which could integrate the various modes of 
transport into a comprehensive policy providing the most flexible service to the public at the least 
possible cost. And most important, Mr. Speaker, we need a nationalized rail service to provide options to 
small farmers and small communities in rural areas so that we could preserve agriculture in its 
traditional form of co-operation, encouraging many more people to be involved in primary production 
and secondary processing of agriculture products. Options for people to be involved in the future of 
agriculture in Canada. Options for people to utilize to its full maximum plant facility in rural 
Saskatchewan. And options to give western Canadians the opportunity to increase their voting power 
over the next 40 to 50 years. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I now move this Resolution. 
 

MOTION 
 

Sitting of the House 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the 
Premier (Mr. Blakeney), by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall, on Wednesday, December 17, 1975, meet at 3:30 
o’clock p.m. until 6:30 o’clock p.m. 

 
This basically will allow the House business to adjust so that some of those Members who are able and 
would like to attend the funeral of Pére Murray tomorrow may do so. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1185 
 

The debate continued on Resolution No. 8 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I rise to speak, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Resolution 
about which we heard a one and one-half dissertation which managed to scramble most of us in the 
process. I am sorry the Member isn’t here, I meant to ask him a couple of questions about his 
Resolution, particularly, and perhaps the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) who seconded 
the Resolution can shed some light on it. 
 
He asked us in effect to approve the nationalization of the rail beds and I am wondering how many 
millions of dollars that would cost. That is the question I was going to ask the Member who moved the 
Resolution. I gather from looking at the Member for Moose Jaw North he can’t shed any light on that 
question. 
 
You know we have a little practice in our caucus where in effect we draw lots to see who follows whom. 
It was my misfortune to draw this particular lot this afternoon. Although the Member for Lakeview 
assures me that the Hon. Member for Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) it sounded like one from 
Toronto-Eglinton actually, given his level of understanding of western agriculture. The Member for 
Lakeview assures me he makes only one speech a year and it is pretty much the same one, so that we 
will only to listen through presumably three more of them, over the course of the next three years. 
 
The Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) will remember during his days in the House of 
Commons when Members from the heart of Toronto would stand up and speak about western 
agriculture and I am sure he was irritated very often at the level of ignorance and misunderstanding of 
the topic and I am sure during the course of the address from the Member this afternoon, he felt he was 
back in the House of Commons listening again to one of those Members from another province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I don’t know how one can talk about a resolution to nationalize railway beds and 
talk about the Task Force at great length, which was commissioned in 1965 or 1964, Farm Credit 
Corporation, inland terminals, Grains Group, rail line abandonment, Benedict Arnold and God knows 
what else. The Member for Lakeview told me that in drawing the assignment I did to respond, asked me 
if I knew anything about skylabs. I said, "What?" He said, "Skylabs." He said you may have to know a 
great deal about skylabs if you are going to respond to the Member when he makes his annual speech. I 
didn’t hear any reference to skylabs, but I did hear reference to camel feeding practices and computers in 
Switzerland, anchovies in Peru. On and on it went, a whole array of subjects that I don’t know very 
much about and which is evident he didn’t either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — It is a very interesting mentality at work this is. We used to get very irritated in 
some of the years gone by, particularly when the great NDP cry was the Task Force Report and how 
those dirty Liberals were going to drive two out of three farmers off the land. What I used to wonder is, 
how many 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1186 
 

people that stuff actually got to. I now know for certain it got through to one. He talks about these great 
conspiracies and these sinister designs that are around, and I guess as he walks around his farm, every 
time he kicks a bale, he sees another conspiracy behind it. I wonder, given all those dark thoughts, how 
the poor gentleman can sleep at night, with all the conspiracy abroad to turn the prairie farmer under and 
Benedict Arnold being one of the main characters in the piece. 
 
I was wondering what he was going to do when he talked about the Benedict Arnold of the West, being 
one, Otto Lang. It occurred to me that the Attorney General may have to go back to university to get 
another law degree so that he can now say he didn’t get his degree under one, Otto Lang. 
 
I want to let him in on another little secret, I don’t know what the Member for Quill Lake (Mr. Koskie) 
is going to do about this, but he actually roomed with that guy, Otto Lang, for a couple of years at 
university. I wonder if he was tainted in the same way. 
 
I’ll tell you our problems aren’t so bad. The Attorney General was tutored by him, the Member for Quill 
Lake, roomed with him, I happened to work with him for a period of time, but at least we don’t have to 
change our name to disassociate ourselves. I wonder how the Member for Bengough-Milestone enjoys 
having the particular surname Lange in view of the Benedict Arnold speech he gave his afternoon. 
 
I want to talk just a little bit about the Task Force Report to which he referred, and I concede, Mr. 
Speaker, it has no relevance whatever to the motion. But I want nonetheless to say a word or two about 
it, merely because it is possible, just possible, that someone, somewhere might pay a little bit of 
attention to it. Not very likely, but it is possible. That Task Force Report is a report that has seen more 
distortion and more fairy telling in the process, I think, than any other document produced for a 
government has ever been subjected to. He’s quite right when he said there was a commission which 
reported to the Federal Government on the future of agriculture in the country, not in Saskatchewan. He 
is partially right when he says that that report which was given to government in 1967 or 1968, foresaw 
the day when the numbers of farms in the country was going to be reduced by two-thirds. What all 
Members on the other side omitted to do at the time, and apparently continue to omit to do is to talk 
about where the farms are that were the subject of that particular recommendation. It didn’t talk about 
Saskatchewan farms having to go, or Alberta farms, or Manitoba farms, in fact it recognized that 
farmers in the prairies are the more efficient if not the most efficient farmers in the whole world. What it 
said was that there were a whole lot of tiny Quebec and Ontario farmers trying to survive on ten acres 
and 15 acres that had been there for some years and the only reason they were surviving was because 
subsidies were made available to them. And in due course those people who were trying to survive on 
five, ten and 15 acres, and those people who were farming as a hobby, were going to have to go. If the 
Hon. Member has spent any time at all on the north shore of the St. Lawrence and seen those farms, he 
himself would understand why some of them inevitably had to go. 
 
The point at issue is the Task Force Report did not suggest two of three farms in Saskatchewan or in the 
prairies had to 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1187 
 

go, nor incidentally, which is even more important, did the Federal Government accept those 
recommendations. Indeed the Federal Government did the very opposite and said we have the report 
before us, it is a gloomy kind of report, we don’t buy it, we are much more optimistic about agriculture 
in this country than that and they rejected it. Despite the fact it was thrown in the ash can some six, 
seven, eight or ten years ago, we still hear reference to it. It surprises me that the Member for 
Bengough-Milestone, being a farmer particularly, should continue to refer back to those old things 
which they’ve peddled so strenuously all over the province during the federal election campaigns and 
didn’t do very well at either. It’s only one more of those easy and fear kind of slogans which the Hon. 
Members coin every time we face an election. Last time it was rail line abandonment, how bad it was 
going to be on the prairies because those dirty Liberals were going to abandon every rail line in sight, 
and the Member for ‘Losttouch’ was the worst one of all. As a matter of fact in his reference to it he 
talked about how his poor community was going to die as the result of this doom and gloom and 
corruption along with it. That was one. The other one to remember, the slogan used to be, two out of 
three prairie farmers are going to be driven off the land, so say the Liberals, which is a lot of nonsense 
and they knew it was nonsense. The other was the reference to the stabilization plan and how it was 
going to stabilize poverty and we see what’s happened as a result since. Again and again we continue to 
see these fear kind of slogans that are whipped out of the back pockets of the Members opposite to try to 
win elections on. They haven’t done very well federally in respect of them, and one day they may learn 
that simplistic misleading kinds of tactics aren’t going to get very far. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Then I actually heard during the course of that hour and a half or two hour 
dissertation, the statement that the Farm Credit Corporation was trying to get rid of farmers. Imagine! 
The Farm Credit Corporation is trying to get rid of farmers. The Farm Credit Corporation has done 
more, has done more in itself than any other single government agency or move to benefit prairie 
farmers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — And for a Member however junior he is, and however little he knows about 
agriculture in the West, even for him to say the Farm Credit Corporation is trying to get rid of little 
farmers is not very satisfactory and I don’t think he ought to peddle that stuff here or in the country. 
Matter of fact, farmers themselves know very well the assistance the Farm Credit Corporation has been 
to them. 
 
He talked about the Grains Group and Rod Bryden and Benedict Arnold, and somehow wove it again 
into some kind of a dark conspiracy. I don’t know what kind of a conspiratorial mind is at work that can 
weave a conspiracy of that kind, but I want to take a moment again just in case, as I said earlier, just in 
the small event that somebody may pay some little bit of attention, that some part of those 15 bushels of 
stuff scattered to the wind may stick, I want to say this about the Grains Group, and under Rod Bryden 
incidentally. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1188 
 

The Grains Group is responsible for the new quota system that we now have. They were responsible for 
recommending and achieving extended credit provided by the Federal Government to the Canadian 
Wheat Board to expand markets for Canadian grain. They instituted the Block Shipping System, which 
is proving so beneficial. They responded to pleas from farmers to give farmers information about quotas 
and initial prices before they seed in the spring, because farmers had long understood their seeding 
patterns were in part determined by what quota levels on various grains were likely to be and what initial 
prices were likely to be. For some lengthy period of time farmers have been requesting that kind of 
information in advance. That Grains Group under Rod Bryden and under that particular minister which 
the Member found is part of the great conspiracy to get the western farmer, did the very thing the 
western farmer was asking them to do three or four years ago when they began the practice of before 
seeding, giving the farmers information about quota levels, guaranteed quota levels incidentally, and 
initial prices which were also guaranteed. The same Grains Group, that same Benedict Arnold, provided 
the 6,000 hopper cars which the Member seemed (although his logic got so convoluted you weren’t 
certain whether he was in favor of the hopper cars or a’gin them) or whether it should be the railways 
buying them, or the Wheat Board or the Government, it wasn’t all very clear. The only thing that 
emerged again was that somehow, you go out and purchase 6,000 hopper cars that’s part apparently of 
the great conspiracy to get the Saskatchewan farmers. It is hard to understand that logic, but again that 
seemed to be the point that was emerging. 
 
He talked about the need for attention and some action at the ports and much remains to be done at the 
ports, but again he conveniently overlooked the fact that it was that Grains Group under Rod Bryden, 
and Benedict Arnold as he referred to him, who doubled and in some cases tripled the unloading of 
boxcars at Vancouver and Thunder Bay. Hon. Members, those who know the facts, and that wouldn’t, of 
course, include the Member who spoke and in respect to whom I now reply, but those Members who do 
know the facts will remember that in Vancouver they used to unload about 450 or 500 cars per day at 
best. When the Grains Group took a look at that problem they appointed port co-ordinators each at 
Vancouver and Thunder Bay. They asked the elevator companies, and the railway companies to agree to 
pool the grain that was coming in and the cars that were coming in, and it was the task of the port 
co-ordinators to do it. They did a very good job of it and the result in the end was that Vancouver began 
to unload 800 or 900 cars a day and indeed reached 1,100 or 1,200 cars per day. So we are looking at 
levels there these days of not 400 or 500 as it used to be, but levels now of as many as 1,100 cars per 
day. 
 
Now, again this same Grains Group, I guess conspired against the western farmer and this Minister 
conspired against the western farmer in the interests of Cargill and that Swedish computer organization, 
or whatever it was, to bring in the two price wheat system. Now however distorted the view of the 
Member who gave that speech are about the two price wheat system I’m not sure that he is going to 
convince many farmers that that somehow is part of a conspiracy to get the farmer. 
 
Again, it was that same Grains Group and that same Minister who stopped the rail line abandonment that 
was going on, and there was a great deal of rail line abandonment going on at one 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1189 
 

time in this province. They put a stop to that rail line abandonment. There hasn’t been a rail line 
abandoned as long as that government has been in power. Again, it’s something with that particular 
Grains Group, again, it’s something the Hon. Member overlooked. Again, I guess that’s part of the 
conspiracy. If you prevent rail line abandonment then you are conspiring to get the western farmer. 
Again, I say, if you wonder why at this moment we seem a bit scrambled on this side, understand, we 
listened to it for pretty nearly two hours, and it’s little wonder. As a matter of fact, I told the Member for 
Lakeview, if I draw this assignment again I’m going to ask the Speaker if I can wear a helmet. You 
understand what shell shock means after you listen to that for an hour and a half, believe me. 
 
I want to say this too about the reference you hear often from the other side, and it gives me a chance to 
talk about, although I concede again that I’m not in order, my remarks are not relevant to the motion, I 
concede that at the outset, but having listened to an hour and a half of the stuff it wasn’t nearly as 
relevant as this, I’m going to take the liberty of saying it nonetheless. The Member alluded to it. It’s this: 
 
I have heard many times in the last number of days we have been here, Members from the other side of 
the House talking about how things are so much better in the province than what they were in 1971. 
Agreed! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Agreed! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Agreed, so do we. They talk about communities thriving where before they were 
declining. They talk about grants at this level today as opposed to that level yesterday. And always in the 
process they take for themselves the credit for it. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Right, agreed! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Agreed, they say. Well, I’m going to tell you and I’m going to tell that Member 
particularly a little bit about farm economics, because when you take credit for yourselves for what’s 
happening in the province in the last four years, not only are you wrong, but you are taking credit from 
the man who deserves it, who is the prairie farmer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We used to in the years, 1968-1970, have total grain sales in the three prairie 
provinces of about $700 million or $800 million a year. It was $700 million or $800 million a year. That 
was a fairly long-term kind of average for return to the three prairie provinces. In the last two and a half 
or three years total grain sales in the three prairie provinces have brought to the prairies some $3.5 
billion as opposed to the old level of $700 or $800 million. Now I tell you that the economic force of $2 
billion in the three prairie provinces is a tremendous force. Governments at no level, particularly at this 
level, but even at the national level, cannot begin to effect things in the farming community in the same 
way that an economic force of $2 billion can. Not only is it a direct additional $2 billion that has come 
into the prairies in the last two or 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1190 
 

three years as opposed to the old levels of $700 million or $800 million a year, but we have derived the 
benefit of all the spin-off of that extra $2 billion. That is why I say to Members opposite, when you pride 
yourselves in some of the good things that have happened in this province over the last two or three 
years, (a) you are wrong; and (b) in taking credit for yourselves you are taking credit away from the 
people who deserve it, and that’s the farmer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I guess for the Federal Government to acquire ownership of the railway beds in 
the country would cost millions and millions of dollars I suppose maybe between $500 million or a 
billion, or something in that order in any event. And with the Federal Government already having as we 
hear every day, including from Members opposite, a budgetary deficit in the order of billions, constant 
calls for restraint and cutting down on spending, and every time we make a suggestion, and somebody 
made one about a bridge, we are told oh, no, no, it costs money. Then the Member for 
Bengough-Milestone comes forward with a suggestion that as I say would probably cost $500 million or 
a billion, and that isn’t a very big spread, but I guess it would be something in that order, for the Federal 
Government to acquire these beds at a time when at the same time he decries the enormous deficit that 
exists there and the inflationary pressure that that deficit adds. 
 
Now that’s why we find it curious that he should come forward with this suggestion, which would cost 
these enormous sums of money. And more curious, we wonder why he would want to spend these 
enormous sums of money to the advantage of the CPR. Now I guess we should understand that he has a 
pretty close concern and sympathy for the financial well-being of the CPR, and I suppose you might say 
he is a spokesman for the CPR, he’s a particular friend of the CPR, concerned about the finances of the 
CPR and how they are losing money, and how they have lost so much. So what we should do, we should 
relieve the CPR of beds so that they wouldn’t have to undertake the expense any more of maintaining 
them and we would give them these many millions and billions of dollars to go out and do all those 
other nasty things that the Hon. Member would suggest they want to do. 
 
But I say that while he may want to do something to the vast profit of the CPR, while he may be 
concerned about the financial plight of the CPR or the particular friend of the CPR, the spokesman for 
the CPR, I tell you that we aren’t. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We’re not going to support a resolution, I can you, we’re not about to support a 
resolution to the great advantage of the CPR in this way. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Indeed, we struck a nerve at long last. You see what happens in the process, Mr. 
Speaker, you know what is sauce for 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1191 
 

the goose is sauce for the gander, you see. The Hon. Members are going to have to learn that. When they 
find their own twisted arguments, twisted around to their own disadvantage and hear them coming from 
this side of the House, suddenly they begin to squirm. Well, I tell you if you sat on this side of the House 
for a while it wouldn’t take very long before you get so used to it, it doesn’t bother you any more, but I 
wanted to see what kind of reaction we would draw from you with that kind of a foolish argument, that 
you are always giving to us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Matter of fact it occurred to us that maybe the particular Member is campaigning 
for a directorship with the CPR and coming forward. And I suppose you might say Hon. Members 
opposite draw large campaign sums from the CPR, because it’s got to be some combination of that, you 
see it’s got to be some sort of a, it’s got to be a sinister conspiracy of some kind. They always exist. We 
just kicked another bale and there is another conspiracy. Why would you bring forward and spend an 
hour and a half in trying to convince us to do something to the great advantage, the profit advantage of 
the CPR if there wasn’t some reason for it, if it’s not part of the conspiracy? 
 
Now, as I say, however sympathetic the Hon. Members opposite may be to the plight of the CPR, I tell 
you we aren’t and for that reason we will oppose this resolution and oppose it strongly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address myself to this Resolution. 
I must admit I will probably only hit the parts that pertain to the Resolution, I’m not going to talk about 
microwave and hovercraft and Switzerland. But it does sound as if this particular speech must have been 
written by Mr. Sinclair, the President of the CPR. I wonder if the Member isn’t trying for a place on its 
directorate. Surely he must have been promised it. 
 
He says in his own words that the rails are so bad we can only run hopper cars over 7,000 miles out of 
26,000. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — No, he said 1,000. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Well, anyway, just a few. He says, that no, we’ll take these over, these 
downgraded, worn-out lines, we’ll purchase them and upgrade them with our own money and let the 
CPR take their profits. You should just take them. Well I have no doubt they would give them to the 
government, because certainly then the CPR has every excuse in the world. They say we can’t run our 
trains because your lines aren’t ploughed and you as a government must plough them. We are going to 
let them default out of paying for fixing up lines that ran into disrepair. You are quit willing to put our 
millions over the CPR. My gracious! 
 
Then he turns around and says this antiquated railroad system we should take over and buy. We should 
rent it as people. We shouldn’t let the CPR pay for their own mistakes. He says we’ll never lose an 
elevator, I heard him say, as long as we 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1192 
 

have a rail line, unless that rail line can’t run a train over it. I’ll have you know in my country we have a 
rail line that’s set for the year 2,000 and there’s not an elevator between a 60 mile stretch and those are 
Pool elevators that were pulled out. So I don’t think your argument about if you have a rail line you have 
elevators really has much force. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I think you would find that this step of nationalization is the first step towards an 
NDP plot to remove the Crow’s Nest rates. Half the Crow’s Nest rates are set up to pay for the losses on 
those branch lines. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — We take that away and what have we left? We’ll have left, that the CPR can say 
that we don’t, we are not keeping the lines up, now we should pay on the actual cost of freight. You are 
leading us to a differential rate system and the loss of our Crow’s Nest rates. That’s an NDP conspiracy. 
One that’s been used for years to break our rural communities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — And do you know why they want to break our rural communities, Mr. Speaker? 
They want to drive our farmers out so that they don’t have any buyers, it will go into the Land Bank and 
we’ll have state farms. And they have followed this plan. In 1971 what did they do? The NDP took and 
put on a moratorium on loans to our small implement dealers. We lost two dealers in towns on each side 
of me because they went broke, as banks couldn’t carry them. Losing them, we’ll lose rural population. 
 
What do we find now they do just in this year? They put in a drug plan. They put such paper work on 
our small druggist, he can’t afford his staff and our druggist is leaving. Mind you they allow the big 
dealer in Regina to sell at a reduced rate. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . opposed to the drug plan? 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Oh, I’m not opposed to your drug plan, I’m just saying the way you set it up, 
you forced our druggist out. You have forced out a machine dealer, we lose our town. Now you want to 
take our railroads away. You want to take our Crow’s Nest rates away. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I tell you the man who made this speech finally showed the true colors of the 
NDP and that’s to drive the rural farmer off the farm so the NDP can make state farms. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Truly, look at your record. Sure you don’t like to see your record shown up by 
what you do to rural communities. 
 
What did you do? You turned around and you have driven up 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1193 
 

your lease rates so the small farmer and the lessee is going broke. You are trying to drive them off. 
 
For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I could not support this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak to the Resolution totally. My 
remarks will be brief. Two points I’d like to bring out. One, there is already an extensive study in 
progress to study the total transportation system in western Canada and I’m sure we all have the greatest 
confidence in the gentleman responsible for this study. Number two, and I’ll stand to be corrected if I’m 
wrong, I was under the impression that a railroad bed is a pile of dirt on which the ties and rails, etc. are 
placed. To nationalize a railroad bed, I think, really won’t do anybody a whole lot of good. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) in amendment thereto: 
 

That the words "the Federal Government to nationalize the railway road beds" be deleted and the 
words "the Hall Commission to examine the possibility of Federal ownership of Railway Right of 
Ways" substituted therefore. 

 
The debate continues concurrently. 
 
MR. J. L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, speaking very briefly before I adjourn the 
debate for this evening, so we have time to think seriously about the amendment, I might just first say 
that it did strike me rather strange coming from the opposite side, the amendment that has just been 
introduced. I do believe that any type of public ownership, examination of railway right of ways and rail 
beds wouldn’t necessarily want to fall under former Chief Justice Emmett Hall. It seems to me that Mr. 
Justice Hall has all he can possibly do at this time to keep within the terms of his reference in so far as 
this examination by his Commission is concerned right now. 
 
I should like to suggest though that listening to the Hon. Member for Shaunavon that it strikes me that 
he somewhat misses the whole text of what the Hon. colleague of mine introduced this afternoon. It is 
also quite apparent that those opposite aren’t quite prepared to accept reality as it was explained to them 
this afternoon and I would hope that my Hon. Member a little later on in this debate will again have an 
opportunity of repeating much of what he said today so that those people opposite will realize what it’s 
all about. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — The Hon. Member for Regina South, of course, was defending the status quo, 
defending his previous boss whom he worked for in Ottawa and I can quite appreciate that, because I 
think all of us had some feelings for his previous boss, even though his boss didn’t have that much 
feeling for the rural people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1194 
 

I might just say that it seems ironic indeed that we have another situation before us now in Canada, 
called a Stabilization Bill, which is just strained a wee bit too, but if it hadn’t been for the Opposition in 
Ottawa at that time and the determination of the New Democratic Party, the stabilization plan that was 
supported by the then Minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board, would have ended up exactly 
where he wanted it and that was the income for five years based on gross income and not on net income, 
which we have some resemblance of similarity now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — It also seems, Mr. Speaker, very strange that when we talk about nationalization of 
the road bed or that the road bed should be nationalized in the interests of the economy of the country, 
many, many studies have been undertaken, not only in Canada, but even today in the United States they 
are talking about the very same thing. It isn’t that far out to suggest that that could be a very significant 
move in the right direction and that we could rent equipment to those people running equipment over 
those road beds, or they would pay a rental fee insofar as the nationalized road bed is concerned. 
 
I should like to say that when I think of those people who talk about the millions upon millions of 
dollars being spent insofar as the railways are concerned, the Hon. Member for Regina South seems to 
forget all about the Stol project that I mentioned the other day. He forgets about the millions upon 
millions of dollars on the seaways and the airways and all the subsidization that goes into the highways 
both provincially and federally. He seems to forget that some of that money could possibly go into road 
beds to make this country a viable country insofar as the movement of transportation is concerned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I could think of a number of other things to say, but in 
the interest of trying to get to some other business tonight, I should like now to move adjournment of 
this debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 21 - To Amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South) moved, seconded by Mrs. Edwards (Saskatoon-Sutherland): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to amend the Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act to: (a) end the present discriminatory practice of providing disability benefits for a 
maximum period of 104 weeks for all except housewives who are limited to 12 weeks; and (b) provide 
weekly disability benefits at least the equivalent of the Saskatchewan minimum wage. 

 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1195 
 

He said: I am pleased indeed to speak to this Resolution a good positive one, one that is germane, one 
that ought to be raised in this Assembly, that affects the laws of the Province of Saskatchewan rather 
than the Federal Government and the Dominion. 
 
The Resolution is with respect to a section of the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, Section 22. That 
Section provides, as some Hon. Members will remember, a weekly indemnity benefit to people injured 
in automobile accidents. So if one is injured in an automobile accident under Section 22 of the 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, the SGIO will pay that person $60 per week by way of assistance. 
 
Now under Section 22 as well, this weekly benefit is payable to persons for a maximum period of 104 
weeks. I wish the Minister in charge of SGIO were here, although I’ll draw this to his specific attention 
because I bring the Resolution seriously. 
 
The maximum period of benefit for all persons under the Act is 104 weeks except for one group of 
citizens and that one group of citizens is housewives, who are entitled under the Act to only 12 weeks. 
 
Now there are some, that’s the general rule that I’ve just outlined. There are some exceptions in 
exceptional circumstances. I could refer to those, perhaps I can briefly, although I won’t dwell on them. 
The general rule is that you are entitled to $60 a week under the Automobile Accident Insurance Act for 
weekly indemnity and it’s payable for 104 weeks for all people except for housewives. 
 
Now when the rate increases were announced recently by Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, 
we condemned those increases on three fronts. We said first, we were somewhat staggered by the size of 
the increase, 25 per cent or more and we questioned that. Secondly, we were critical of the timing of the 
increases coming as they did on the heels of a provincial election and in the eye of a federal restraint 
program. Right after the election, right before the federal restraint program. Thirdly, we thought the 
Government displayed some lack of courage in making the announcement, since it wasn’t the Minister 
that made the announcement and that is a tradition for the Minister to do, nor indeed was it the General 
Manager of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office that made the announcement, it was a 
middle-rung executive in the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office that had to make the 
announcement. 
 
Hon. Members will remember that it was Mr. Koskie who was given the task of publishing the rate 
increases. So the General Manager was avoided, the Minister was avoided. We were critical in that 
respect because we think if the Government is going to approve the increases then the General Manager 
or the Minister should have the courage to announce them. 
 
Now I say we criticized the increases in the rates in respect to those three points. I concede that each one 
of those three matters of criticism is truly a negative criticism. I concede that. 
 
Now, we in the past have very often been the subject of criticism and barbs ourselves for the manner in 
which we have 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1196 
 

criticized government. We have all heard the suggestions that Members on this side of the House are 
negative, carping in their criticism, seldom have a positive side to them. To some extent that’s a malady 
which all Opposition suffer from because it falls so often for us to examine things critically and don’t 
often have the opportunity ourselves to put forward programs. 
 
I want to say that we in the Liberal caucus intend as a matter of policy, and we have been trying to 
demonstrate this in the House up to now, that we will not be satisfied merely to criticize in this negative 
way. We intend to continue to put forward positive ideas for reform and alternatives as well. As the 
Leader of the Opposition said yesterday, we will generally and strenuously oppose those measures after 
close examination, that we don’t agree with. The potash bills are good examples. 
 
We will support those programs of the Government that we do agree with. We will always seek, as he 
said, to improve them. And if I may say it the rent control legislation before the House is an example of 
this second approach where we agree generally with what is being attempted although we are going to 
make every effort to improve the Bill. 
 
In addition to these two kinds of approaches we will be taking a third as well. That is, we will offer our 
ideas to the Government and we will press responsibly for those reforms that we think benefit the 
province as a whole. 
 
When the Government accepts our notions and our proposals we, too, will feel that we have done what 
we were elected to do. And when the Government does not accept them we will continue to press is an 
effort to get them accepted. 
 
This particular Resolution is an example of this third kind of approach, a constructive, positive approach 
by the Opposition. 
 
The Member for Wascana advanced on behalf of our caucus two motions in the same spirit. Members 
will recall he has put before the House an amendment to The Deserted Wives Act and he has proposed 
divorcement legislation with respect to service stations. 
 
We, the other day supported and offered a constructive amendment to a resolution brought forward by 
the Member for Moose Jaw North. You will recall his resolution on rail line rationalization. We 
indicated that we would be prepared to support that motion and as I say we advanced a constructive, 
positive amendment to it. The Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) has a resolution on the Order Paper 
dealing with the same subject matter, that is to say a mechanism dealing with elevator abandonment. I 
use those examples to demonstrate and illustrate the point that I was making earlier that we have 
accepted as a matter of policy in this caucus to where we have the opportunity to be helpful and 
constructive and positive. This Resolution, I say, is another example of that same kind of plan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We believe that when premiums for Government Insurance are increased we 
ought to look automatically at the benefit side of the ledger. As a matter of principle we think 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1197 
 

that to continually increase the premiums, never touching the benefits really results in our paying more 
for less. The basic level of third party liability under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, Members 
opposite will remember, is $35,000. That is to say if one is involved in a vehicle accident and is found at 
fault for the injuries sustained by another, the maximum coverage is $35,000. Now that level of 
coverage has not changed in more than ten years, more than a decade since we have looked at that 
$35,000 of coverage. And, of course, it has in the meantime been seriously eroded by inflation. 
 
The problem with this is that people don’t always realize it. Many think that the insurance that they get 
with their licence plate is adequate. And, of course, the fact is that it is woefully inadequate. Even 
whiplash injuries today which we see are so common are bringing in the courts sums in excess of 
$20,000 for mere whiplashes. For substantial injuries, $35,000 is simply no longer an adequate level of 
coverage. And the sad part is as I say, that people have come to believe that when they buy insurance 
through their licence plate they are getting an adequate level of coverage. In a sense we are now 
misleading those people. 
 
I am involved in a case today, Mr. Speaker, where the driver of a snowmobile is facing an action and a 
suit which could result in a level of damages anywhere between $100,000 and $200,000. He has 
coverage to the extent of $35,000 under his licence plates. He as so many others, when he bought the 
licence plate thought he was insured to an adequate level. He may find himself being personally 
responsible for as much as $70,000 to $130,000. Of course, that would bankrupt him. 
 
I think we have to take a very careful look at this because as I say people think that they have adequate 
protection when in fact they don’t. 
 
The other thing that is occurring at the same time is that you see people involved in automobile 
accidents and injured to the point where they can’t work for a long period of time. They are paid under 
the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, $60 a week or $240 a month. 
 
I want to draw Members’ attention to another situation, another case that I am involved in and again by 
no means is it an isolated one, but it demonstrates a point. This is a man who is employed in a liquor 
store and who was struck by a car while he and his young son were hooking up a trailer to the car. He 
hasn’t been able to work for the better part of a year. His income at the time of the injury was in the 
$10,000 to $20,000 per annum level. Since the accident he is trying to live on $60 a week. That is $240 
a month. Less than the minimum wage by an employee who was earning $10,000 to $20,000. Again, a 
man who thought that the Government Insurance in the province was adequate in those circumstances. 
Little knowing what he was entitled to was $240 a month in the event that he was disabled. He is now 
trying to live on that and has been trying to do it for some months. Believe me there is tremendous 
hardship in that. 
 
If he was a minimum wage employee he would be getting some $400 a month as the minimum wage 
now stands or $456 or something in the changes that are recommended to the minimum wage. Again 
you see what is happening. We as the Legislature and the Government through the minimum wage 
require employers to pay $400 to 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1198 
 

$450 a month to their employees. While we ourselves in the other respect and while government itself 
provides $240 a month under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Now we say that is wrong. We say as legislators what we expect of others surely we ourselves have to 
provide. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — It covers two areas. There is a third area I spoke about in introducing the 
Resolution. In a sense it is even worse because we as the lawmakers in the province say that people are 
entitled to the weekly disability benefit for 104 weeks, with the exception of that one group that I 
mentioned, and that is housewives. We say to them you are entitled for only 12 weeks, as a general rule, 
there are some exceptions. Again we say this has become socially unfair. And indeed we say it is 
degrading of housewives to single them out in that way and treat them so differently and so 
discriminatorily compared to others. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Women at home as we all know so very well, particularly in this year, but we 
have seen it developing over the course of time have been struggling and rightly so for some greater 
recognition on themselves as persons in their own right. I often hear it said in my home when I refer to 
housewives, how I would like to be referred to as a house husband. I think even the fact that in The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act we refer to these people that we refer homemakers, women at home 
and managing the children, as housewives is in itself degrading. We should have a look at that in the 
process as well. 
 
I say that there are two points here. I question whether we should be distinguishing as we do under the 
Act between housewives and others as though the others were entitled to some more substantial 
recognition that housewives. That is clearly discriminatory. In fact, it has occurred to me that one of 
these days when I have a woman who has a family and is at home, comes to me after a car accident and 
is limited to receiving a weekly disability benefit for 12 weeks, I think I am going to challenge her 
entitlement as being discriminatory under our anti-discrimination laws because it is very clearly a blatant 
discrimination. And is one that we should remove quickly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The other point is the very real hardship these women and families suffer. When 
they are disabled for several months as a result of a vehicle accident they are required to bring somebody 
into the home to help and that sort of thing at minimum wages, it is $400 or $450 a month they have to 
pay. What they in return get from Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office is $60 per week or $240 
a month. So therefore what they receive in way of weekly disability amounts to about half of what they 
have to pay out for domestic help during the period of disability. Again I say that is wrong. It is 
particularly wrong when we have seen as we have, frequent increases in the rates. I say again if we are 
going to increase the rates to cover increased costs that is one thing. In the process of doing it, let us 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1199 
 

begin to look at the benefits because the benefits are deteriorating almost proportionate to the way in 
which the rates are increasing. 
 
I want to in conclusion urge upon the Government, the amendments that we in the Liberal caucus bring 
forward and advance in this Resolution. I want also to urge upon you a recognition that we bring 
forward this Resolution in an effort genuinely to be constructive and helpful. We are not consumed and 
concerned only with negative kinds of criticism but we too are interested in reform. And may I say in 
conclusion that if you will take these suggestions and act upon this Resolution and the next time we 
meet in the late winter, early spring bring forward these amendments, we will be quite prepared to give 
you the credit for it and we will be prepared to applaud you for it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I therefore move this Resolution, seconded by Mrs. Edwards 
(Saskatoon-Sutherland). 
 
MRS. E. G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure on behalf of all 
women in Saskatchewan in seconding Resolution No. 21. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — The Automobile Accident Insurance Act as it is written is an example of the 
kind of legislation that women are fighting to have changed and updated. It is five years since the Royal 
Commission on the Status of Women reported to the House of Commons with recommendations which 
among other things, spoke out about existing legislation that clearly discriminates against women. 
 
Since that time Saskatchewan has appointed an advisory committee on the status of women. The 
Chairman, Mrs. Margaret Harris and her board have been doing a commendable job in studying areas of 
major concern to women and then proposing recommendations for needed action at the provincial and 
federal level. 
 
Another board that has been doing a great deal of work on behalf of the rights of women in this province 
is the Law Reform Commission, so ably chaired by Mr. Brian Grossman. Two major reports have been 
produced by the Law Reform Commission that will vitally affect the lives of women in this province. I 
speak of the study and report on marital property laws and the report on family law. 
 
It is encouraging to women to realize that attitudes towards women and their role in society is improving 
and changing. And there is evidence that law reform as it relates to women will indeed become a reality. 
 
I thank the Hon. Member for Regina South for bringing Resolution No. 21 to the attention of this House. 
A resolution earlier today is standing, speaks of the need to recognize the contribution made by 
homemakers to their families and to society. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1200 
 

I would urge all elected Members in this House to support this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — This Resolution asks the Government to amend The Automobile Insurance Act 
so that housewives will be eligible for the same disability benefits as other citizens in society. So that all 
those receiving disability benefits will receive benefits equivalent to that of the minimum wage. 
 
I am pleased to second the motion. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just a word or two on this motion. I 
should like to say first of all that the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
Office, The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, Mr. Whelan, will want to speak extensively on the 
motion. I think some aspects of the motion certainly merit serious consideration by all Members of the 
House. My only point in rising other than to adjourn is to also make the point that there have been some 
rather substantial benefit improvements to The Automobile Insurance Act introduced by this 
Government. I would direct Members to Chapter 10, of the 1972 Legislative Assembly where, while 
perhaps a better type of improvement could have been, substantial improvements nevertheless were 
added at that time. The death benefit increases from $4,000 to $10,000; increases in weekly payments 
from $25 to $60; payments for life in case of permanent incapacity; some changes to the reporting of 
$200 value accidents and so forth. I am not going to belabor the Members of the House with respect to 
that. It’s there, they can take a look at the amendments which have been proposed. 
 
I should like simply to say in a spirit of nonpartisanship, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments to improve 
the benefits of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act were the first amendments in a period of seven 
years. There were no amendments whatsoever to improving The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
from the period 1964 to 1971. None. And we found that when we came into office this put the 
Government of Saskatchewan at SGIO quite a bit behind the eight ball and we had a long way to come 
from, in order to try to catch up. We couldn’t do this all in one jump. The 1972 amendments . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Why not? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — The Member opposite says, why not, and this is typical of the Liberal position. 
Why not, when they want to increase the payments, but, why, when the rates go up as a result of paying 
out the larger payment award as the statute calls for. They criticize us for increasing the rates and at the 
same time they criticize us for not increasing the benefits of which the rates are very largely interrelated 
to the operation. You can’t have it both ways. I simply noticed by the Blue Paper that, for example, the 
Liberals have here on the Order Paper a motion which is currently under adjournment criticizing the 
increases in insurance rates as being inequitable. And this again is typical of the Liberal position. 
Inconsistent, I think some might suggest and I am not saying it in the case of this motion because I do 
believe the Member for Regina South and the seconder, 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1201 
 

raised it in good spirit, but one might suggest for sharp political purposes. I simply want to say to the 
Members of the House that in 1972, very substantial improvements were introduced to the AIA, the first 
improvements in over a seven year period when nothing was done, Mr. Speaker. I would certainly hope 
that the Opposition sitting in this House will reconsider the resolution that they have tendered earlier, 
which condemns the Government for an increase in rate insurance in light of these benefits which they 
similarly say should be increased. 
 
I think this Resolution warrants some very serious consideration by the Government and by the Minister 
in charge of the Government Insurance Office. He wants to speak to the motion and I, therefore beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 22 - Repeal of Bill 42 - Oil Industry. 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley) moved, seconded by Mr. Malone (Regina Lakeview): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to repeal Bill 42 thereby ensuring 
incentive in the oil industry, in order that exploration can be carried out and the province may develop 
some degree of self-sufficiency in petroleum products in the years to come. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Resolution that I place before the House is of a rather significant character I 
should think, in light of the fact it is a call to repeal what this Government felt was a rather major piece 
of legislation to deal with resource management in this province. I don’t question the fact that it was an 
attempt of major magnitude to deal with resources and the Resolution in itself is an indication that at 
least we on the Opposition side of the House feel that those steps taken by the Government, commonly 
referred to as Bill 42, were a failure. 
 
I should like to explain why I feel it is necessary to repeal Bill 42 and in effect why I feel Members of 
this House should consider supporting the amendment. In order to do that I think I should enlighten the 
House just briefly on the history of the oil industry leading up to the implementation of Bill 42. 
 
In 1953 just 2.7 million barrels of crude oil were produced in Saskatchewan and only 20 years later in 
1973 there were 85.7 million barrels produced. Sufficient to make Saskatchewan the second largest 
producer of petroleum in Canada, 13.6 per cent of the national market. Since 1953 through until 1974 
Saskatchewan was continually progressing in the field of petroleum resource development both in the 
number of exploratory and completed wells drilled and the amount of crude oil that was being pumped 
in Saskatchewan. From 1963 through to 1969, for example, we drilled in Saskatchewan an average of 
approximately 1,000 gas and oil wells each year. In 1970 this dropped to 842 wells and reached a low of 
620 in 1972. With the price of crude oil at the wellhead gradually increasing in 1973, drilling activity 
naturally began to pick up and in 1973, 660 wells were drilled. All the indicators were that there would 
be a significant upsurge in 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1202 
 

drilling in Saskatchewan in 1974, a drilling that would have, I think, adequately reflected the optimism 
by all those involved in the petroleum industry for a bright future for the petroleum industry in 
Saskatchewan. A number of companies had even indicated that it was their intention to carry out fairly 
large drilling programs. 
 
However, the malaise that struck the whole industry in 1974 because of political action was most 
apparent. The Government enacted on the first of January, 1974, what came to be known as Bill 42, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation, Stabilization and Development Act. Among other things this Act acquired for 
the Crown any petroleum leases owned by individuals or corporations which exceeded 1,280 acres, it 
increased the acreage fee on non-producing mineral rights by 150 per cent and it imposed a surcharge or 
tax of 100 per cent on the value of any production over a stated sum which this Government considered 
to be the 1973 average value. This latter provision effectively froze the price of oil and was one of the 
major contributors or the major contributor to the fact that the industry ground to a halt as far as oil 
development went. 
 
When the Act came into force the value of light crude at the wellhead was $3.90, a few months later it 
was increased by agreement of both Federal Government and this Provincial Government to $6.50. 
However, under the provisions of Bill 42 the Government of Saskatchewan took the whole of that 
increase in surcharge or tax. In fact, it took an additional 36 cents a barrel, thus reducing the producers’ 
income per barrel by 11 per cent from December 1973 income. When the impact of this legislation was 
fully realized by the petroleum producing companies, all plans for production, expansion or exploration 
were immediately dropped. There were a few exceptions to that, but very few. Most companies in 
Saskatchewan operated at a loss, for the most part of 1974, but because of some small incentives offered 
up by both this Provincial Government and the Federal Government, companies were and are currently 
operating with a field profit, or they were until the amendment suggested by the Minister of Mineral 
Resources, operating with a field profit of a few cents per barrel. In my area I believe it was generally 
about 14 cents a barrel. 
 
Amendments were introduced, as I suggested on November 20th, by the Minister of Mineral Resources 
(Mr. Whelan) which may bring the net back to oil producing companies to as much as 90 cents to $1.05 
a barrel. That is being generous, mind you. 
 
Saskatchewan during this time, in all fairness, was in trouble because of some of the geographic 
locations over oil and the fact that much of our oil is the medium and heavy grades and much of it is 
considered sour crude. This is particularly the case in the Swift Current field and because of the fact that 
there was a problem of shipping our oil across the border to Minneapolis which is the only refinery 
within a reasonable economic distance that could process high sulphuric crude. The industry down there 
ran into severe problems and a pipe line from the Swift Current field to Regina was closed down in 
April and I think there were 1,125 oil wells shut in. 
 
However, the lack of confidence in the future of the industry in Saskatchewan under the political 
constraints that were imposed on it became apparent as the year 1974 progressed. This is despite the fact 
that we were facing some natural problems 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1203 
 

with the quality of our crude oil. Drilling fell off appreciably at the end of 1974 and as a matter of fact 
fell to the lowest level in two decades. The production was down considerably in 1975 and in 1975 it 
will be well off capacity, primarily because of the method the Government introduced its incentives to 
the industry it became far more profitable, or at least it became profitable to develop production in 
marginal wells and not in high producing wells. And I think that had, certainly in the Kindersley area, a 
great deal of effect on the amount of oil that was pumped. 
 
Locally owned service companies as a result of the cutback have been hit and there has been a wholesale 
exodus of companies from the Estevan, Weyburn and Swift Current areas and to some degree from the 
Kindersley and Lloydminster areas as well. 
 
The Government in the meantime, and it is to be congratulated for at least this aspect of the entire 
business, had a banner year as far as income from petroleum resources went. The irony of this situation 
is that any increase in the price of oil under existing legislation means that an increase of payments to 
both the Federal and Provincial Governments means an even smaller net back to the producers than 
presently exists. The oil industry in Saskatchewan still appears, despite the amendments that were 
brought in by the Minister of Mineral Resources, to be in the twilight zone between the old and the new 
stance of the Provincial Government. 
 
The Hon. T. C. Douglas, Premier of Saskatchewan, wrote to the industry in 1949, and said: 
 

The province will stand by all agreements entered into and it has no intention of either expropriating 
or socializing the oil industry. 

 
We heard that in the potash . . . 
 
MR. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Who said that? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Premier Douglas, I believe in 1949, Tommy Douglas. I didn’t know him myself. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Who is that? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — That’s what Tommy Douglas said, however, despite that and we have heard that 
same story as far as potash was concerned. You are correct there. In 1974, a fellow by the name of Kim 
Thorson was the Minister of Trade and Industry from Estevan, I think he was, if I recall correctly. They 
asked the present Member for Estevan if he knew Kim Thorson, I don’t know where he is now to be 
honest with you, I don’t know even what he does, but he’s not here. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He’s in the Premier’s office. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — He must be a lawyer then. However, Kim Thorson, the Minister of Trade and 
Commerce at that time and a former Minister of Mineral Resources stated, and this was sort of in respect 
of T. C. Douglas’ statement, Kim Thorson stated while addressing a meeting at the University of 
Toronto in reference to 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1204 
 

multinational oil companies and I quote: (this is shocking) 
 

The time may have come for Premier Blakeney’s Government to nationalize the bastards. 
 
One would not have anticipated, I suspect, the Government using the blunt legislative method of 
takeover when it has in its hands the much more subtle alternative of Saskoil and that was the opinion 
that I was certainly under when Saskoil was formed and the approach was taken to set up Bill 42 and the 
implications that it had. We have seen since that time that I was certainly very reserved in my 
expectations of this Provincial Government because they have in the meantime used that blunt 
legislative method at least to attempt to nationalize the potash industry. Perhaps they don’t need to do 
that with respect to the oil industry, they have established Saskoil as a Crown corporation and as time 
progresses it seems to become apparent that this is not so much an exploration company, it seems to be 
rather inept in that respect, but a vehicle which can absorb other operating companies using the proceeds 
of the royalty surcharge for that purpose. Legislative authority has been used in the past two years to 
minimize profits and therefore discourage future activity in the private sector. In such a stalemate most 
of the small independent companies welcome the opportunity to receive cash for their reserves and get 
out. This situation sounds a little bit familiar I would suggest with what is currently going on in the 
potash industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Saskoil is certainly willing to talk to these small independent companies, they 
have apparently purchased two of them already and perhaps more by now, and have been supposedly 
negotiating on and off with some of the remaining companies. It is that rain of events which when added 
to the other problems caused by political tinkering tends not to promote any great enthusiasm by the 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is indicated by the drilling starts in the province. I think everyone in this House would agree that 
drilling starts are an indication of the kind of interest the oil and petroleum companies have in potential 
for petroleum development in Saskatchewan. In 1965 there were 1,284 wells drilled in Saskatchewan. In 
1966 there were 1,104. In 1967 there were 968. In 1968 there were 860. In 1947 there 1,000 and again in 
1969. A consistently high pattern, averaging 900 to 1,000 wells a year. In 1973 there were 660 wells 
drilled, up substantially from 1972, and as I mentioned it was an indication that things were picking up 
in the oil industry. In 1974, however, after the implementation of Bill 42, there were only 286 wells 
drilled in Saskatchewan. As of October, 1974, 239 wells had been drilled and as of October 1975, a 
matter of two months ago, only 212 wells have been drilled in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Do you have those figures? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I may have those figures here, Mr. Member for Lakeview. I’ll just see if I can’t 
come up with them here. I have some information on Alberta and I believe . . . the similar indication is 
the number of the footage drilled in both provinces in equivalent years by the number of the wells drilled 
indicated 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1205 
 

the extent that companies will go to in their search for oil. The footage drilled in Saskatchewan in 1974 
decreased by 980,846 feet and that was in Saskatchewan. I pointed out that that was probably as a result 
of government interference on the provincial level in the oil industry. Alberta, they have a different 
provincial government than we have here in Saskatchewan, they have the same Federal Government 
though. Their footage drill increased by 480,000 feet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Now the Provincial Government here states that the reason, I can quote you 
something that the Minister in charge of Mineral Resources pointed out here on November 20th in a 
statement to the Legislature before the Orders of the Day. He said: 
 

Since Bill 42 was introduced the Federal Government has made a number of unreasonable tax changes 
to the income tax structure. They are taxing provincial royalties. This has had an adverse effect on the 
return to the producer and a seriously detrimental effect on the oil industry. 

 
He also said: 
 

We had hoped that the June Federal Budget would have corrected this flagrant discrimination against 
the province. 

 
I expect he meant as well Alberta. He continued: 
 

We must now take funds from our own tax revenue to replace those unfairly expropriated by the 
Federal Government in order to keep the Saskatchewan oil industry alive. 

 
And, as has been pointed out in this House before, we on this side of the House are at least under the 
assumption that both Saskatchewan and Alberta are governed by the same Federal Government and the 
same tax laws apply to both provinces. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — It is also interesting that on the one hand, and this point I find particularly 
distressing, that Members opposite could so consistently campaign against the Federal Government in 
light of its announcement that it was going to cut back on increases in health costs on a 
federal-provincial sharing basis on the one hand and turn around on the other hand and immediately cut 
them entirely out of their tax base in Saskatchewan resources. However, that in itself may be dealt with 
in another argument. 
 
The fact of the matter remains that Bill 42 was introduced, it seriously damaged petroleum development 
in Saskatchewan to the detriment of all people in this province and not just the oil companies. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — The Government opposite apparently recognized it 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1206 
 

was at fault in the oil resource development program in Saskatchewan and the Minister opposite was 
good enough on November 20th to point out that amendments were being brought in to make all 
production in Saskatchewan more feasible for the oil companies to give them a little better return and 
that he said, and I can’t quote him here because it’s only what I remember, that there would be a flood of 
drilling rigs come into Saskatchewan as a result of this amendment to Bill 42, and please correct me if 
I’m mistaken. I believe those were the words you said. However, a flood of drilling rigs! Now had you 
been accurate on that prediction, I dare say I would not be standing here at this minute speaking on a 
resolution to entirely repeal Bill 42. I might have been satisfied that the Government opposite had 
confessed its mistake and taken steps to try and correct the situation. 
 
However, I have here a copy of the December 4th issue from the Calgary Herald and it came more than 
two weeks after your announcement in this House that the industry had indicated there would be a flood 
of drilling rigs coming into the province. This article dated December 4th says: 
 

Drilling Activity Picking up Again. 
 
However, it doesn’t refer specifically to Saskatchewan. It deals with the three western provinces of 
British Columbia, Alberta and Saskatchewan. It says: 
 

Drilling contractors are gearing up for what they hope will be one of the best seasons of petroleum 
exploration in the past two or three years. 

 
To reflect the statements of the Minister of Resources, that’s exactly what he said, a flood of drilling rigs 
will be coming into the province. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Is that Ed? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I don’t know his first name. I guess it was the Minister for Regina North West. It 
was. 
 
Now this is what they said in general about western Canada oil production. Now they speak specifically 
here about Alberta and we have already realized that oil production in Alberta may have had a 
temporary slowdown but still continued to increase during the past several years and here is the 
prediction for this winter in Alberta. 
 

Although all contracts have not yet been let, Mr. Jones, who is the General Manager of the Canadian 
Association of Oil Well Drilling Contractors states that he estimates Alberta drilling activity will peak 
at 180 rigs this winter. 

 
That’s not a 180 holes, that’s a 180 rigs this winter. 
 

Up from 158 rigs in last season’s peak in February. 
 
Interesting. That may very well be the case in Alberta and I hope Mr. Jones is correct for the sake of the 
Alberta people. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1207 
 

Now he goes on to say that: 
 

Last June there were only three rigs active in the Province of British Columbia and another 17 rigs 
sitting idle. The last time the Canadian Association of Oil Well Drilling Companies was not expecting 
much work to materialize for those idle rigs. But with better pricing spurring renewed industry 
interest, then I would also suggest that it is also a change in government that is going to spur renewed 
interest in oil production. In the northeast part of the province, the number of active rigs this winter is 
expected to increase to between 25 and 28. 

 
Now that is even before the Socialist Government in B.C. was defeated. They were still looking for an 
increase in production or at least holes drilled out there. 
 

Twenty rigs are now under contract in British Columbia, five more are moving in from Alberta and 
two or three may move in shortly. According to Mr. Jones if there had not been provincial government 
action on pricing, I don’t think there would have been any drilling there this winter. 

 
Now we had provincial action with respect to drilling here in Saskatchewan on November 20, as I 
pointed out. And did it in fact spur this flood of drilling rigs flowing into Saskatchewan? Let me read to 
you what the head of the Canadian Oil Well Drilling companies said: 
 

Mr. Jones states, in Saskatchewan the drilling industry is expecting a gloomy winter. 
 
This was stated some two weeks after your announcement that we would be expecting a flood, a peak in 
drilling, historical peak in drilling. 
 

Provincial Government involvement in the petroleum industry has seriously dampened interest there 
and it is expected that there will be a peak of only five rigs in Saskatchewan. 

 
A flood of five rigs. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — How many was that in Alberta again? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — 180 rigs in Alberta. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Five I believe, yes, it says a peak of five. 
 
Now, I suggest that your amendments may have been well intentioned, I would at least hope that. 
 
We stated here in this House, apparently Members in the Opposition did before I became a Member of 
this House that your legislation was bad legislation when it was introduced. They said slow down, at 
least let the people of Saskatchewan have a chance to look at it before it’s introduced. You didn’t. You 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1208 
 

went ahead with it and you severely damaged the oil industry directly by your own admission. 
 
You found it politically expedient or at least expedient in some degree to wait until after the provincial 
election to introduce amendments to it. Members of this House stood and particularly the Member for 
Regina Lakeview, who is our critic for Mineral Resources, stood and welcomed your announcement of 
amendments in the oil industry. He said, we were pleased that your Government had decided to take 
another look at its resource policy in Saskatchewan and hoped that the amendments would spur as you 
had put it, at least some activity in the oil industry in Saskatchewan of some increased activity. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in fact the amendment is not going to spur that great flood of drilling 
rigs into Saskatchewan as I have indicated from the paper. People in the industry don’t believe it’s going 
to spur a great flood of drilling rigs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly the people whom I have spoken to from my own area who are involved in the petroleum 
industry don’t see any significant change in activity in Saskatchewan in the coming year. 
 
For that reason we are suggesting to you that even your amendment could not go far enough to undo the 
damage that Bill 42 had done in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — We have and are continuing to see statistics from the Federal Government and 
the Energy Board that state that Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole will be in a severe petroleum 
shortage by 1980. You’ve seen all these statistics for 1980 I believe. 
 
We have a responsibility to the citizens of Saskatchewan if not to the citizens of Canada, to try and 
develop some self-sufficiency in the oil industry and petroleum products. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You made an announcement today that there had indeed been an interesting 
discovery in the Estevan area of a light grade crude at the 10,000 foot level. That was good news for all 
of us in this House. I reflect the sentiments of the Member for Regina Lakeview and the member for 
Estevan (Mr. Larter) in the hopes that this will prove to be a substantial find in Saskatchewan. However, 
that drilling was, as was stated by the Member for Regina Lakeview, likely a result of a long range 
drilling program of some years ago, using the aid of a build up of credits over a number of years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — We suggest that it is in the best interests of the people of this province to sit 
down and start over again in your petroleum resource development policies. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1209 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — For that reason, I move seconded by the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. 
Malone) Resolution No. 22. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in rising to second the 
motion of my colleague the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan). I should like to adopt his 
comments in connection with Bill 42 which he has so eloquently made this evening. It is with a certain 
sense of déja vu though, Mr. Speaker, that I rise to speak to this motion. I think it was almost two years 
to the day, that Bill 42 was passed by this Legislature. It was bitterly fought by the Opposition and it was 
just as bitterly proposed by the Government and of course, they had their way because of their majority. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . they were right. 
 
MR. MALONE: — But I think that . . . well the Member says that they were right. Well let’s just take a 
look at that, Mr. Speaker. If they had been right I don’t think we would be speaking on this Bill at this 
time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — I say to the Member, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill was bad in December, 1973 and it’s 
worse now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — But let’s go back, Mr. Speaker, and review a little of that history in 1973. The 
Liberal Party at the time indicated that if the Bill was passed that the private oil industry would leave 
Saskatchewan. That has come to pass, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were assured by the Members opposite that even if this did happen a company that became known 
as Saskoil would step in and take up the slack and that exploration would continue at even a greater rate 
than it had in the years before. That has not happened either, Mr. Speaker. My colleague the Member for 
Kindersley gave the facts, the facts are accurate, the Members opposite know they are accurate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — At the time that Bill was introduced there was a certain feeling that was drummed 
up by the Members opposite and I think by some members of the public that the idea of the Bill would 
be to get certain multinational corporations that were supposed to be very unpopular and very bad for 
the good of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what’s happened to those multinational corporations? Is Exxon losing money? Is Gulf losing 
money? Is Shell losing money? Just Saskatchewan is losing money, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1210 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Those multinational corporations have not suffered anything, but the people that 
have suffered, Mr. Speaker, have been the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers and those who were 
most concerned with the oil industry. 
 
What was their answer to that, Mr. Speaker? The oil field technical workers, shortly after this Bill was 
introduced came to the Government and pointed out just what Bill 42 had done to them. The 
Government realized, I think, at that time that this side effect was taking place, they didn’t, I guess 
realize it in December, 1973. Did they come in and step off the hard position that they had taken with 
Bill 42? Did they give some incentive to the oil companies to come back to Saskatchewan and start 
drilling again? No, they didn’t. They passed what has come to be known as the Kim Thorson Relief Act, 
in a desperate attempt to save the Estevan seat for Mr. Thorson and they offered welfare to these oil field 
workers. 
 
The only thing that kept these people going through the years was this form of corporate welfare, a 
welfare they did not want, which they don’t want now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — What these people want, Mr. Speaker, is a healthy and viable oil industry in this 
province, a healthy and viable oil industry that will help the people of Saskatchewan through tax 
revenues, that will provide jobs which will provide an income for them. 
 
I wonder how many of the people who were affected in 1973 are still in Estevan and Swift Current and 
Kindersley and the other oil producing areas. I suggest not many, Mr. Speaker. I suspect there are very 
few of them left and I suspect it will take a great deal to get them back to Saskatchewan. Not just the 
little tidbits that the Minister offered in November in his announcement about the new royalties. 
 
Now let’s look at those royalty changes the Minister offered. They are very complicated, I concede that. 
They did some good in that they changed several royalties and replaced them with one royalty. The 
result of it was that in this province an oil company still has to pay double the tax it would have to pay in 
the Province of Alberta. Until this Government comes to its senses and realizes that we must be 
competitive with the Province of Alberta, the private oil industry is not going to return. It is as simple as 
that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, they are not going to return while Bill 42 is on the 
books and I don’t think they would even return if the Bill was repealed unless they received an 
assurance from the Government opposite that in the next four years there would be no similar legislation 
placed on the books of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1211 
 

MR. MALONE: — Yes, I think we have to wait a couple of years for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would fully expect the Minister of Mineral Resources or the Minister, well he’s not 
here, I was going to say the former Minister of Mineral Resources but I guess he’s off taking over potash 
companies, to rise and complain that the reason the oil industry has failed in this province in the last 
couple of years is because of Ottawa. Well, in anticipation of that argument or those arguments, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to say this. 
 
Ottawa put on the export tax. I’m not so sure I agree with the tax, perhaps if the Members opposite 
sought in the future to change that tax they may have my support and I speak only for myself, not my 
colleagues. But remember, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of Saskatchewan went on a little trip. He went 
on a little trip to eastern Canada. He went down there and he told everybody how tough he was going to 
be and how he was going to ensure that Saskatchewan received all the gain from the increase in the oil. 
He went to universities, he went to service clubs, he went all over eastern Canada saying how tough he 
was going to be and how Saskatchewan was going to get its fair share. 
 
But that didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. Somewhere along the way the Premier either lost his toughness or 
didn’t realize what the stakes were, or he simply did not have the ability to compete with the people in 
Ottawa. But whatever happened, Mr. Speaker, he was unable to change Ottawa’s position. 
 
So if this Government is going to complain about that tax, I suggest that they had their opportunity to 
complain about it two years ago and they didn’t do a very good job of it. And it ill behoves them now to 
come and complain about it. 
 
Let’s take a look at the other tax that Ottawa imposed, that is the non-deductibility of royalties. This 
Government knew full well that if it increased the royalties to the stage that it did, Ottawa would have 
no choice whatsoever but to move in the manner that it did. It was not going to permit this Government 
to take over a traditional tax that the Government of Ottawa has had for years. There was 
correspondence from the Prime Minister of Canada to the Premier, stating that this would happen before 
the royalties were increased. You will recall about a year ago, Mr. Speaker, that after that 
correspondence had been tabled in the House of Commons in Ottawa by the Prime Minister, that the 
Premier finally got up and indicated that indeed was the case. Prior to that he had been damning Ottawa 
in the usual fashion about double crossing him and so on and so forth, we know that didn’t happen. We 
know that is not the case. So before the Government gets up and complains about the moves of Ottawa I 
think they should examine their own consciences and decide just how those moves came about and what 
they had to do with them. 
 
Now, my colleague the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) has given some statistics as to what is 
happening in Alberta. I think it is fair to say that the oil industry in Alberta is moving ahead and thriving 
at a pace that it has never known in the past, even in the boom years. It is going so well, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Government owned company in Saskatchewan, Saskoil, seems to be having more 
activity in the Province of 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1212 
 

Alberta than it has in the Province of Saskatchewan. That makes sense to me, Mr. Speaker, because if I 
was running that company I wouldn’t drill in Saskatchewan either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — The function of that company, Mr. Speaker, I understand is to develop the 
Saskatchewan oil industry, to encourage the Saskatchewan oil industry, to obtain revenues for the 
Province of Saskatchewan, not for the Province of Alberta. It would be understandable, Mr. Speaker, 
that if the Government had received a mandate on their oil policy in the last election that they would 
want to keep continuing with it but I believe the only seat where they were re-elected where there was 
any oil industry at all was in Lloydminster, the seat of Cutknife, and we haven’t seen the Member here 
since the day the Legislature was called. I’m not sure why he isn’t here, maybe he is afraid to come here 
because of the Government’s oil policy. 
 
They lost their two Cabinet Minister in Estevan and in Kindersley and they lost the entire southwest part 
of the province. It is difficult for one to understand, Mr. Speaker, as to why the Government is so 
insistent on their policy. The people don’t want it, they showed the Government that in the last election 
where they were most directly affected by their oil policy. The oil companies don’t want it and I’m not 
talking about multinationals, I am talking about the small independent oil operator who has now left the 
province or is struggling to stay here because it’s home. Nobody wants this policy except apparently the 
Members opposite and again the only reason they want this policy, Mr. Speaker, is because their 
socialist philosophy dictates to them that they must have it no matter what it does to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, just before sitting down, Mr. Speaker, I should like to comment about the Minister’s statement this 
afternoon about the new well in the Estevan area. I believe my colleague from Kindersley was correct 
and I believe I was correct earlier today when I indicated that this well was a result of a long standing 
commitment by Dome Petroleum. The Minister shakes his head, my information is different than the 
Minister’s. I think I indicated that the change in royalties the Minister announced last month has nothing 
to do with this decision and I still feel that way, although I am advised by the Minister that there have 
been some negotiations going on with Dome prior to the announcement that was made by the Minister 
in November. I am wondering whether any other negotiations are going with any other company. You 
will recall, Mr. Speaker, that I asked the Minister in Question Period about that and he refused to 
answer. 
 
But the theme of the whole situation, Mr. Speaker, is that the Minister comes into the House and he 
makes an announcement today about one oil well. Now indeed it is a different situation, it is a deep well, 
something we don’t have. He comes in and he make an announcement about one well and the possible 
success of that well two years after Bill 42 was passed. We should have had announcements, Mr. 
Speaker, of hundreds and hundreds of wells in the past two years. The oil industry in Saskatchewan 
should be booming here just as it is in the Province of Alberta. The reason it isn’t, Mr. Speaker, is 
because of Bill 42. It will not boom until Bill 42 is repealed, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1213 
 

I take great pleasure in seconding the motion and I will of course be voting for it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. C. WHELAN (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I will have some comments 
to make on this Resolution. I am very anxious to correct a very large number of errors and inaccuracies 
and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 23 - Rescind Order in Council No. 1505/75 and Amend Certain Northern Acts. 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon) moved, seconded by Mr. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to rescind Order in Council No. 1505/75 
of October 21, 1975 and further, amend the Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act and The 
Northern Administration Act, enabling unconditional grants to be made to the municipal corporation 
of Uranium City, the village of La Ronge and the town of Creighton. 

 
He said: Gentlemen, in speaking to this Resolution . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — What speaker, Oh, Mr. Speaker, I thought he meant this speaker. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you sure you know where you are. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — At least I’m awake that is more than I can say for . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Sell it to Mr. Kramer, he bought the whole story. A good auctioneer. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, I only wish I was asleep. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I think your wish was granted 20 years ago, my friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the motion to rescind Order in Council that took in the towns of Uranium 
City and Creighton under the DNS Act, I would say that I understood from the other side that the reason 
given for this Order in Council was to enable DNS to give grants to these towns. If this is the case 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1214 
 

it is another showing of how the NDP Government loves to indulge in the practice to overkill almost. 
Surely these towns didn’t have to be put under the threat with a club held over their head that their 
administration at any time be taken over by the DNS to give them a grant. In the rest of our province 
there are per capita grants given to municipal council to towns without the threat being held over them 
that if you don’t agree with how these grants are spent, if we can’t tell you where they are going to be 
spent, we can take over your government from your elected council. The Act, far better if you want to, if 
your aim is to give grants out, that you amend the Act so you can give the grants in this manner as you 
do in the rest of the province. Why treat northern towns in a different and discriminatory manner from 
the rest of the province? This is discrimination of the worst kind. If you say to the people in the North, 
you are going to be treated differently from the areas in the South, the towns and the municipal areas in 
the South of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the DNS have so little regard for the abilities of the mayors and councils in the North 
that they must hold this threat over their heads before they give them money? Do they have so little 
feeling, so little trust in the people in the North that they can’t treat them as we treat the people in the 
rest of the province? 
 
It is also interesting to note what utter disregard this Government has for the people of the North. This 
Order in Council was passed without consulting any of the mayors or any of the town councils of these 
three towns concerned. It was never mentioned to them. I talked to the mayors and councils of these 
towns and they hadn’t heard of it, they hadn’t been asked. They had met with DNS since the Order in 
Council of the 21st but never heard it mentioned. It certainly shows utter contempt almost for the 
abilities and intelligence of these people to do this. 
 
I wonder if they didn’t consult with these councils because they knew that the councils themselves 
would violently disagree with such action. I think you will find the proof of this in the fact that when the 
DNS was originally set up they petitioned to be excluded from the Act. They petitioned and they were 
granted, they were lift from under the DNS Act because the Act is very encompassing. It operates under 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan or the Northern Administration Act. The DNS now under this 
Order in Council can say to these towns, we’ll tell you how much tax to collect, where you are going to 
spend it, how your education system is going to be run, how your welfare system is going to be paid. It 
is very untruthful just to say that you are doing this just to give a few dollars out to them. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — They don’t ask them? 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — No, they don’t ask the people. Flagrant disregard. Well, putting these towns 
under the Act in this manner smacks very much of the old colonialism, the old imperial empires of 
France and England where they went down and they said to the natives, we’ll tell you what to do and 
we’ll give you the money. Now this is exactly what you are telling these people, we’ll give you a grant 
but we will tell you how to spend it because you are not quite smart enough. That’s what 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1215 
 

you have told them. The aim for which DNS was set up, the great aims, was that they were going to 
have close co-operation and consultation with the northern people so why didn’t you consult with the 
people up there, the mayors and why not consult with the councillors. This is the aim of the DNS, to 
provide this consultation. You have a deputy minister and the Minister of DNS sitting a block from the 
Mayor in La Ronge with not enough gumption or guts to walk down and talk to him, to tell him you are 
going to take him over. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Or were you afraid you would have a riot up there if they knew what you were 
doing down here in Regina? But you have your Ministers up there, you sent them there, you put all the 
civil servants there so you could consult. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They consult each other. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — You like that, do you . . . Well, it is better than sitting there sleeping, chewing 
gum and mumbling in your throat and never making a speech on anything. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — This Order in Council certainly destroys the charade that was set up under DNS, 
the charade that they said they were trying for closer co-operation. They were going to give the people 
of the North a larger voice in their destiny. 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Have you ever been up North? 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Certainly, have you? Have you? I used to work in the bush there, up in the 
North. Have you ever done that? Good. So knowing these people, and living and working with these 
people, you would show this disregard, I would be ashamed to say you’d been up North and seen those 
people and then allow this Order in Council to go through. You should be ashamed, I wouldn’t even 
brag about being up North. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — That’s all the regard you have got for the people in the North, my friend, after 
being up there. 
 
Many guises and ruses have been used by this Government to gain control over the people of this 
province and this Order in Council is one of the most recent and most blatantly used. You find the NDP 
use a very neat psychology when they wish to take over the control over the people of this province. 
They always bait their trap very effectively, be it potash or whatever. You notice this one, the bait is 
very sweet, they say, we’ll give you some money. But in doing that they put a club over your head. If 
you act up a little, if you don’t vote the way we want you to, if you don’t, just walk the line. They didn’t 
say they wouldn’t put the potash headquarters in La Ronge, but they said if you don’t straighten up in La 
Ronge we can take you over under this Act. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1216 
 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask all Members to support this motion. I now move this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): Mr. Speaker, I support this motion which arose as 
a result of an Order in Council and it came to our attention, placing the village of La Ronge, the town of 
Creighton and the municipal area, the town area of Uranium City, under the power given to the Minister 
in The Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act and Northern Administration Act. When we raised 
the question, and the Minister is unfortunately not in his place tonight, he gave us the most unbelievable 
answer. First, he actually didn’t seem to be aware or pretended he wasn’t aware that this had actually 
happened. And then to sort of cover up, he said, well, we don’t really intend this to happen we are just 
doing it so that we can grant these people some money and we won’t use the powers. He said they 
wouldn’t use all the powers, he said that they wouldn’t take over the administration of these urban areas 
unless the mayor or the councils of La Ronge, Creighton and Uranium City passed a resolution 
requesting the Department of Northern Saskatchewan to take over their administration. 
 
Well now to begin with there are a great many other powers than just taking over the administration of 
the work of the council involved and given to the Minister under The Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan Act. Just read the pertinent Section: Powers of the Minister. 
 

The Minister may provide for the investigation, planning, promotion, implementation, co-ordination of 
measures to foster and advance the social and economic development of persons resident in the area or 
areas of the province mentioned in Section 6. (2) Without limiting the generalities of subsection (1), 
the Minister may provide assistance to such persons in matters of health, education and social services; 
(b) agriculture and improvements of diversification; (c) local administration 

 
That is the only one he mentioned. 
 

and industrial development. 
 

Duties of the Department. (The Department is given further powers) The Department will take such 
measures as the Minister may deem advisable or it may be required by the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to assist any person or class of persons who are engaged in any 
program tending to benefit the person resident of the area or areas of the province mentioned, Section 
6. 

 
The Department shall exercise the powers conferred and perform the duties and functions imposed by 
the law of the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District and in such other areas or areas of the 
province that the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may designate from time to time. 

 
Now, he doesn’t mention the other sweeping powers that are given to both the Department and himself 
as the Minister. But I want to . . . 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1217 
 

MR. SNYDER: — Capital punishment. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Well, I think if you took a vote out there they might vote for capital punishment 
and that it be imposed on some of the Ministers and particularly the Minister in this case. However, 
when this Bill was passed, we stated then that under Section 6, called The Area of Jurisdiction, that by a 
stroke of the pen we said, that by a stroke of the pen, that by a Cabinet meeting held any time by the 
Government, they could take in any area of the province. Might we use the example, they could take in 
Estevan. We said then they could take in Uranium City, they could take in La Ronge or Creighton, but 
we were given the great assurance at that time they never intended to. They said, we need these wise 
powers to deal with the unorganized area in Northern Saskatchewan. We maintained then, and we still 
do that they do not need these powers for any part of the northern administration district. They gave 
themselves far more power than they needed to do whatever they wanted to do in any kind of program in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
They stand up and say you are against development in the North. You want to do away with 
development in the North. Of course this is the shoddiest, cheapest kind of nonsense. To begin with in 
spite of the fact that they have thrown millions and millions of dollars at the problems in northern 
Saskatchewan, they have done little or nothing to solve the problems to get to the root of the problems, 
little or nothing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — If you go into northern Saskatchewan and I have been there many times, you will 
find the native people are still 99 per cent of them living in shacks. The same kind of shacks they have 
had for years. If you go into northern Saskatchewan you find the only people who have improved their 
standards of living to any degree are the white southern bureaucrats they sent in there to tell those people 
how to live and how to carry on in their lives. You find, for example, that assistant Deputy Ministers are 
living in homes worth $20,000 or $30,000 or $40,000. You find that high paid member of the staff of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan being paid $15,000, $16,000, $18,000, $20,000 to $25,000 are 
actually living in very cheap homes subsidized by the people of Saskatchewan, subsidized by the very 
people they are supposed to be helping who are still living in abject poverty without hope, thanks to the 
lack of efforts by the Government opposite. 
 
What is the answer? What is the final answer up there? Of course it is difficult, no one questions that. 
But surely the answer has got to be to get some kind of development there so that they can have jobs. 
Surely that has got to be the answer. And yet, if you study the record, of the NDP Government in the 
best times this province had, no thanks to them, but with more money, more people knocking on our 
door to develop Saskatchewan and especially northern Saskatchewan. You find there was a copper mine, 
it is gone; you will find that fishing is down; you find the uranium mine that was started under our 
government is being run out of the province; you find that development of the uranium industry in 
Uranium City faces a very bleak future and is being questioned now by the Eldorado Mining Company. 
You find that Gulf Minerals that is in there and again has some hope 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1218 
 

to give jobs to some of the native people, where do you find that situation. They are now re-examining 
the whole situation in light of the threats of super taxation of this Government and there may be an 
eventual takeover as is faced by the potash industry. There isn’t one new single industry, not one job 
producing industry of any description that has been put in the North in the last four years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — In spite of the fact that they have spent millions and millions of dollars, for that I 
give them credit, they certainly haven’t held back in spending money. But 90 per cent of the money - 
very little of it has trickled down to the people that need the help. Ninety per cent of it has gone for 
buildings, staff, people flying all over the North. The aircraft companies up there never had it so good. 
Whom are they flying around? They are flying around high priced bureaucrats, they fly into one 
settlement and fly out again, fly into another and fly out. Then they are down here in Regina for a 
meeting, then up to Prince Albert. A waste of funds, the hypocrisy of the Government on the other side 
and the waste of funds is an absolute disgrace because so little of it is getting down to help the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — It is interesting why they made the fantastic effort to win those two seats. One of 
the great embarrassments of the old CCF Government . . . 
 
MR. SNYDER: — What has that got to do with this Resolution? 
 
MR. STEUART: — I’ll tell you what is has got to do, Mr. Minister, if you just sit here and listen. 
 
One of the great embarrassments of the old CCF Government was that they could never win the North. 
So when they came to power the first thing they did when they handed over the rest of the province to a 
so-called independent, and maybe it was an independent commission to re-establish the boundaries of 
the constituencies. Very interesting and it has generally been missed by those bleeding hearts who point 
to what we did and what the old CCF did and what the Conservatives did in the way of gerrymandering. 
I make no apologies for the fact that governments until they put in the independent commission, every 
government that ever held power set the boundaries to suit their own political ends. I say that went on 
with the old CCF, it went on with the Liberals and it went on with the Conservatives. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You’re admitting . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — So how come these sanctimonious people on the other side . . . and the most 
sanctimonious is that half-baked teacher from Saskatoon who should have been defeated and will be 
defeated in the next election. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1219 
 

We used to hear arguments about the pupil-teacher ratio. I looked at Herman Rolfes, and I said, they are 
right, we should reduce the pupil-teacher ratio to one on one if they have many teachers like him, 
because the more pupils you give him, the more kids he is going to louse up for their future lives. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Let me say this, very sanctimonious, they took over and said they will have an 
independent redistribution. What did they do? They divided almost half the province and they said to 
that commission, you can’t touch that part because we are going to fix it up. Then they flooded in the 
civil servants and they flooded in the money. Then they used the old power, the power of threat, the 
power of money, they used the power of literally, government bribes. They finally won those two seats. 
It wasn’t much of an accomplishment, they bought those two seats. They used every threat in the book 
to get those two seats. I predict that their victory will be very short lived. I predict that the two Members 
for northern Saskatchewan are going to be one-termers in this House, if we ever saw a pair of 
one-termers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back for a moment to this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Minister said they wouldn’t use these powers. I should like the Attorney 
General to answer this question, and I mean it quite sincerely. Once they put that Order in Council 
through they immediately and they have the right in the law and it states that right in the DNS, The 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act. Once they pass that Order in Council and have published it 
in the Gazette, the geographical areas encompassing La Ronge and Creighton and Uranium City now 
fall under this Act. I can’t find anything in the Act that says the administration of those towns will not be 
carried on by the DNS. I can find nothing in the Act that says they will not be carried on unless the 
council passes a resolution. I question, and I really mean this, Mr. Attorney General, I would like you to 
look into this and tell this House that if this is not true, fine, but if it is true, then I question what happens 
when the village council of La Ronge, the town council of Creighton and the municipality of Uranium 
City passes bylaws as they do and have the right to do? Those bylaws sometimes have to do with money 
and sometimes they might have to do with the raising of funds, setting tax levels, setting assessments 
and so on. I question seriously the validity of the actions of those town councils now that this particular 
Order in Council has been passed. It may well turn out to be that although what the Minister says, 
maybe sincerely, maybe he doesn’t intend to move in and take over the administration of those urban 
areas. Maybe he intends to leave them working with, co-operation with the Department of Municipal 
Affairs. But I would like someone, the Minister - he is not here - the Attorney General to give us that 
assurance. I can tell you that the mayor and the council of those three areas want the same kind of 
assurance. They want to know exactly where they stand and they don’t know that today. 
 
The Member for Shaunavon who introduced this Resolution, I think, brought out a point that is very 
valid. To begin with there was no consultation and this is unbelievable that any 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1220 
 

government could by the stroke of the pen take away all the powers or move all the powers from a duly 
elected local government and then use the lame excuse that they want to help them with some financing 
and yet admit that they haven’t even talked it over with them. They have talked over what they intended 
to do, they haven’t talked over the aspects, they have not talked over what might result from this act that 
the Government has perpetrated on these northern areas. 
 
But what is even worse, and the Member for Shaunavon alluded to it, is the threat that hangs over these 
three urban areas. At any time they can be called - the powers of those councils can be absolutely wiped 
out and they don’t even need to have a Cabinet meeting for it. Ted Bowerman goes up North and 
decides that he doesn’t like what La Ronge is doing, he doesn’t like what the town of Creighton is 
doing. If they happen to speak out like the Board of Trade or the Mayor of Saskatoon, against some of 
the abuses of power, that they may feel of this Government, Ted Bowerman can walk in or his Deputy 
Minister and just say you are finished. You don’t have to come to the council, they don’t have to come 
to the Cabinet, they don’t have to go to anybody. That threat is now hanging over the three urban areas 
in northern Saskatchewan and they are aware of this, they are angered and they don’t like it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know very little changes from the old CCF to the new so-called NDP 
Government. For years the North was ruled by the Department of Natural Resources. At that time the 
now Minister of Highways was one of those Ministers. I can tell you that there was never a more 
dictatorial Minister who ever ruled with such an iron hand over the North than the present Minister of 
Highways when he was in the Department of Natural Resources. As a matter of fact the feeling against 
the DNR was so strong and so deep in northern Saskatchewan that was the basic reason why they could 
never win an election up there. 
 
I tell you that the only difference between the old DNR and the present DNS is the Minister and the 
several millions of dollars flooding up there. But the threat - and the threats are far worse - because not 
only do they have it from the present Minister, but they have got it from the largest group of power 
hungry bureaucrats that ever subject a people. You talk about colonization, you just go North and really 
talk to those people. They fear the DNS, they fear this Government. They are into every aspect of their 
lives. Most of them are on the payroll in one way or another. If the Government flicks its finger, people 
in northern Saskatchewan are out of business. They are doing this to all kinds of people in the fly-in 
camp business, they are putting them out of business right now. If any merchant, if any person who is in 
the flying business or any person who in the oil business, any person in the hotel business or café 
business, you name it, if they dare to cross the DNS they are out of business. 
 
I can tell you if we go up to hold political meetings there, I am sure if the Conservatives hold political 
meetings our Members are afraid to show up because your people . . . and that mouthy one in the back 
would be just the kind of a guy if they ever sent him up there that would make a perfect bureaucrat, he 
knows nothing but he has got that instinct for power to put people under his thumb. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1221 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I can tell you, you may pride yourself and you can sneer and giggle and laugh, you 
may pride yourself on being a democratic government, your actions in northern Saskatchewan are a 
disgrace for any government that calls itself democratic or open. You rule by fear up there, there is no 
question about it. You stand up and say, look at the number of people we got off the social welfare roll. 
What a pile of garbage. You have taken them off the welfare rolls, you have just put another name on it. 
They are now working for the Government. They are now getting a government handout only in a 
different form. 
 
MR. ROLES: — That won’t get you anywhere Dave. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Oh yes, it will get me somewhere, Herman. It will get you, it will get most of you 
over on that side if you keep it up. 
 
If it wasn’t for my deep feelings for the people in the North I would hope that you would keep it up. We 
are trying to bring you to your senses, we are trying to save you. As a matter of fact our best interest 
would be to let you do what you are doing. If you keep on doing it you will be run out of there and the 
rest of this province. 
 
I am saying to you those people up there are helpless. They haven’t got the resources that people in the 
South can turn to for some kind of help. There is only one government up there. There is no other 
department. If you cross the DNS in northern Saskatchewan you are finished. In southern Saskatchewan 
you might fall out with the Department of Highways, you might have an argument with the Department 
of Health, you might be at cross purposes with the Department of Education, okay it might be a 
problem. But all the other departments probably don’t know you exist, you’re not touched. But up in 
northern Saskatchewan the DNS is the be-all and end-all, it is everything. It is all the power. 
 
You look in that Act, you look at what goes on and they have absolute dictatorial power over everybody 
who is up there. You can put them out of business with a stroke of a pen. You can set up a competitor. 
You can do anything you want. Let’s recognize when any government gives itself that kind of power, no 
matter what the cause is, no matter how good the cause, and I don’t say that they haven’t tried to do 
some good up there or that they haven’t spent a lot of money, but I am saying to you, go and have an 
honest look. Your elected people - go and take an honest look at what those bureaucrats are doing that 
you have hired in your name. If you take an honest look as we have done, you will find some of those 
people up there are dedicated civil servants, especially the ones who have been there for years. You will 
find some of the new ones are dedicated civil servants. You will also find that a great many of the new 
ones have built their own little empires and they are keeping those people under their thumb. For what? 
For their own ego! You will find that they are not in any way carrying out the programs as you people 
lay them out in this Legislative Assembly or lay them out to the people of the province. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1222 
 

What we are saying really in this Resolution is we are asking you to take a hard look and there is another 
resolution along the same line. We are asking you to find some other way immediately to help those 
northern communities without taking on this fantastic amount of power over their everyday lives. 
 
If you want to help Creighton, if you want to help La Ronge, if you want to help Uranium City, good. 
They need help and I am sure they would welcome it. But I am equally sure that they are extremely 
disturbed and extremely concerned about this bulldozing method, this shotgun method you are using to 
give them help by hanging this threat over their heads. Any power of the local people who were elected 
up there by the local people can be wiped out by the stroke of a pen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Members opposite for once to bury their bias and take an honest look at what 
is happening, and take an honest look at that Order in Council, read the Act and then see if you really 
aren’t as concerned as any other person would be about the powers that those frontbenchers have given 
themselves. Maybe they have done it with good intentions, but no matter what the intentions are that is 
what they have done. I ask you to look into it and I am sure if you did that most of you would support 
this Resolution. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief before asking leave of 
the House to adjourn this motion. Just simply to comment that for some of the new Members of this 
House you will not have heard this speech before. You will accordingly forgive those of us who have 
heard it for about the fiftieth time in the last one or two years from the Leader of the Opposition, if we 
fail to respond as much as we should with the same sort of vigor and vitality that we normally respond to 
on a resolution. 
 
I want to tell the Conservatives and some of the new freshmen Liberal MLAs that this is the same old 
speech from the Leader of the Opposition. In fact I should say same old speeches, because I was 
surprised to see the relatively new Member from the newer than brand new look Liberals take the same 
line - fear, Communism, everybody is afraid for their livelihood, Mr. Bowerman is the Tsar of the North 
and so forth. I really say to the Legislature and to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan that I 
don’t think there’s very much need to rebut that type of a speech yet again because it would mean that 
I’m making the rebuttal speech for the fiftieth time. I would say that no government in the last two or 
three year period has done more for housing, has done more for schools and for hospitals, and yes, more 
for local government in northern Saskatchewan than the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and this 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, there have been many mistakes. You can’t try to set about a new way of 
life for an area of the province that has been for years ignored by all governments, and there will be 
some difficulties with Orders in Council or others, although I don’t admit that to be the case in this 
Order in Council. But to listen to the Liberal Party and their speech about DNS, simply underlines the 
point that I make again, that the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan simply has no credibility. Certainly not 
with the 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1223 
 

people of the North and certainly not with the people of Saskatchewan, because as I have said, it’s the 
same old speech, same old position of the Liberal Party. One time they were going to do away with 
DNS, now they are for it, so they say. Same old speech, and I want to even tell the Member for Maple 
Creek (Mr. Stodalka) the same old predictions. Predictions that the Member for Saskatoon Buena Vista 
(Mr. Rolfes) would be gone after the last election, 1975, and I just want to tell the Member for Maple 
Creek that there is only one prediction that was right and that was the prediction that we made and that 
was that both Liberals would lose in the two northern seats as a result of the last election. And so the 
proof of the pudding, I would tell the new Members of the House, both Liberal and Conservative, it is 
not the old cliches and the worn out positions of the Liberal Party, lost battles of lost years, by lost 
people on the northern Saskatchewan issue - that’s not the issue, don’t be concerned about that, the 
proof of the pudding is in the elections. The people of the province in northern Saskatchewan chose two 
New Democratic Party MLA candidates as a result of the actions of DNS and that my friends and 
Members of this House speaks far louder than any words of the Leader of the Opposition or any 
Member for Shaunavon constituency. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Now the Leader does raise one point with respect to the question of the legality 
of some aspects of the Order in Council, which I’m sure that the Member for northern Saskatchewan 
will want to address his mind to specifically, that is the one point in the speech that perhaps might have 
a fresh angle to it, and since the Minister is not here I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, would the Attorney General permit a question before he takes his seat 
and perhaps test his credibility as Attorney General since he is questioning our credibility? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Fire away! 
 
MR. MALONE: — The Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart) raises a very good point, 
Mr. Attorney General, which you, I think, finally realized. By passing this Order in Council, whether 
you intended on doing so or not, you took away the right of the villages of Creighton, La Ronge and 
Uranium City to govern their own affairs. Now my question to you; have you considered this? It has 
been raised in this House before, have you considered it, and what is your considered opinion as to 
whether or not this is true? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — In have indeed considered it. I believe that the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan will want to talk at length about this, because I don’t think it’s a matter which has a 
simple or easy answer. While I am on my feet, I just simply want to say that the Leader of the 
Opposition for example, says everybody is afraid and opposed to this and I have here my good old 
friend, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix from which I get a very good press from time to time, and I note that 
the Uranium City mayor David Spence says, according to this reliable newspaper, that, "We have done 
some investigation and there appears to be nothing 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1224 
 

out of the order except the matter of correcting legal jurisdiction for money DNS has already spent," he 
said, and that’s the position I take. That is on Friday, December 12, 1975. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 24 - Use of Public Money to Carry on Potash Campaign in the News Media 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview) moved, seconded by Mr. Stodalka (Maple Creek): 
 

That this Assembly deplores the use of public money by the Government of Saskatchewan to carry on 
in the news media of Saskatchewan what is essentially a political campaign, and an effort to 
manipulate people’s thoughts in support of the takeover of the potash mines in the province. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of regret that I rise to speak to this Resolution, mainly 
because I regret that it’s necessary to put such a resolution on the Order Paper, and also because I can’t 
think of a stronger word that ‘deplore’ to say how much contempt I have for the action of this 
Government in using the people’s money to try to brainwash the people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — The Government advertising campaign in recent weeks, especially since the Speech 
from the Throne, insofar as it concerns Saskatchewan minerals, potash and other industry or resource 
related advertising, is nothing more than an attempt to brainwash the people to come around to the 
Government’s way of thinking. I think there is one thing that can be said for the advertising, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s this. I think it can be considered by all people in the Province of Saskatchewan as an 
admission by this Government that it had no mandate whatsoever to take the actions that they propose to 
take against the potash companies. For if they did, the advertising surely would not be necessary. For if 
they had done the moral and proper thing and gone to the people in June, with this as part of their 
platform, and explained to the people of Saskatchewan just what the situation was, they would not be 
needing now to advertise and try and sell their argument in this manner. In fact, Mr. Speaker, even if the 
Government allowed for public hearings as we have requested, or would indeed even allow for a 
committee of the Legislature to hold public hearings, this advertising would not be necessary. I say once 
again, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is afraid to let the people speak out on this and they are trying 
at this time to do their utmost to twist and use the leverage and muscle of government to get their 
message across, the message that is one-sided and a message that I believe is false. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that any other government in Canada, be it provincial or federal, has ever 
taken steps of this nature. The example that comes to mind immediately is the fact that the Government 
of Canada now has some very controversial legislation that it is proposing dealing with inflation. The 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1225 
 

Government of Canada has risen in the House of Commons, or the Members of the Government have 
risen in the House of Commons, time and again in the last few weeks to explain that legislation. They 
have gone across the country trying to explain that legislation. But I cannot recall seeing an ad on radio, 
TV or in the newspaper, nor have they tried to use the money of the people of Canada to try and sell 
their side of the story. At least the Members of the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, have had the 
courage to stand up in the House of Commons and state their views, which is more than can be said for 
the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek), which is more than can be said for the Minister in charge of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan (Mr. Cowley). These Ministers have yet to enter this debate, and I 
predict, Mr. Speaker, that unless something happens within the next day or so we will not hear from 
them. 
 
Now the Government will no doubt get up to try to justify this advertising. I suppose the Attorney 
General or somebody like him will do it. I think it should be borne in mind, Mr. Speaker, that while they 
are trying to justify the thousands of dollars that are being spent, the same time they are doing that, they 
are condemning other people of spending their own money, that is Boards of Trade and potash 
companies to try to tell their side of the story. 
 
I don’t think the Attorney General really believed what the reaction was going to be when he made his 
famous speech now about Saskatoon and the head office of the Potash Corporation. He tried to extricate 
himself today from the remarks that he made, but the hole got deeper and deeper and deeper as he kept 
talking. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the headline that resulted from the Attorney General’s comments in the 
Star-Phoenix, "Potash Opposition Brings Threat of Reprisal". The threat of reprisal, Mr. Speaker, was 
made by the Attorney General. Now I would ask the Members opposite to consider the Attorney 
General’s remarks in this light, and consider when he justifies your advertising how he has been 
condemning the advertising of others which at least is not paid for with the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting you know when you are getting to the Attorney General because he 
starts yapping and yapping. My advice to him is to wipe off his tongue and let it rest for awhile. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the advertising that was in the newspaper was in any way correct, or in any way 
told the full story, there may be some excuse for it. But in the ads I have seen and the ads that I have 
heard, I have seen no mention whatsoever of the risk involved in this potash takeover; I have seen no 
mention whatsoever about the cost - possible cost of $1 billion; I have seen no mention of assurance of 
the markets in the future; all I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, are innuendos and slanders of the potash 
companies. I have seen no mention of the potash companies’ proper defence of their position, nothing 
whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, if this type of advertising is to continue I would at least ask the Government 
opposite to be fair and at least to give to the Opposition parties a similar amount of money that they are 
spending for this type of advertising so that at least both sides of the story can be told. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1226 
 

MR. MALONE: — So that at least the people will have a choice as to whom they are going to believe, 
so that at least the people will know all of the story and not just the story that is being told by the 
Attorney General and his colleagues opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with these few remarks, I move, seconded by the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. 
Stodalka) accordingly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened with some interest to 
the comments of the Member for Regina Lakeview. I know that when he started out he said that it was 
with regret that he rose to speak and it was certainly understandable when one had to listen to his 
speech. I listened with some regret. I listened with some interest to some of the points the Member for 
Regina Lakeview mentioned. He made quite a bit about something about a mandate that he felt this 
Government might not have for this particular policy. And he used the example, liberally throughout his 
speech, of the Federal Government. Now I find it difficult to see how any Liberal could talk about 
mandates and the Federal Government in the same breath. 
 
It seems to me that the Federal Government which we have in Ottawa now, which has just introduced 
wage and price controls, not only doesn’t have a mandate for it, but was elected basically on the 
argument that they wouldn’t do it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — I don’t recall the Members opposite suggesting to the Prime Minister in any of their 
speeches that there should be a six month hoist there or a special parliamentary committee, or whatever, 
to consider wage and price controls or even indeed as the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) suggested 
that there might be an election called on that particular question, although that would be an interesting 
experience to watch the Conservatives and the Liberals change positions with such regularity as they do, 
it being of no difference to them which side of the same fence they stand on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Member’s comments about the ads being put out now by Sask Minerals 
and I suppose and I can understand why he is irritated about hearing about the success of a particular 
Crown corporation. I don’t know why it should be unusual that a Crown corporation would advertise 
and in that advertisement indicate the financial success of that particular Crown corporation, and I can 
understand why a Member who in basically opposed to Crown corporations would feel that that kind of 
advertising should not be allowed because it might give another side of the story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he also spent some time mentioning some Members who spent not too much time debating 
certain legislation and he mentioned Trudeau and the Federal Government and how much the Prime 
Minister has spoken and supported wage and price controls. I suggest to the Hon. Member that if he 
checked I doubt if there is any Member on this side of the House who has spoken less on any bill before 
this House than the Prime Minister has within the 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1227 
 

House of Commons on the question of wage and price controls. I suggest to the Hon. Member that the 
Minister of Finance undoubtedly, with respect to potash, spent more time on it in the Throne Speech 
than the Prime Minister has within the House of Commons on wage and price controls in all the debates 
since they have been introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member also said that if told the whole story that perhaps it would be worth it, and he 
seems to suggest that we haven’t told all the things we should in the various advertisements that have 
been carried in the newspapers. I can only say to the Member opposite that we will certainly try to 
correct that in the future with some further advertisements to tell the rest of the story as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he mentioned a little comment about giving the Opposition parties the same amount of 
money. Well I have been noticing a fair amount of advertising with respect to the potash question in the 
various newspapers. I noted for example that there is one group, a Concerned Citizens’ Committee, 
some group out of Toronto, who are advertising. They have left shoes or right shoes, both for the same 
foot and they are spending some of their money out of Toronto to convince the people of Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s their money! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — That’s right, it’s their money. Whoever they are, Mr. Speaker, they obviously are 
not proud enough of whatever they are saying to put their names on it. I notice another group in 
Saskatoon doing the same thing. Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, the name Government of Saskatchewan is 
prominently displayed in its ads. I think most people in this province know who the Government of 
Saskatchewan is. I noticed another group advertising, the Saskatoon Board of Trade. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Whose money are they using? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well that’s an interesting question. There are some people who suggest that it’s the 
Board of Trade’s money and there are other people who suggest it’s not the Board of Trade’s money, 
that it is some other people putting up the money. I don’t know whose money it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I looked at those ads, Mr. Speaker, with some interest, it may be pure coincidence and I don’t want to 
suggest any more, but they were very similar to some ads that we saw five or six months ago in this 
province. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Whose ads? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Those ads of the Board of Trade, those ads with the cartoons. I think, but I am not 
sure, that they had the same cartoonist. I can’t be sure of that, the same initials scattered on them, maybe 
pure coincidence, nothing more. They may have had the same advertising agency, but I can suggest 
nothing more than pure coincidence, happened to have the same line . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I don’t want to interrupt the Member, but it is 9:30. 
 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1228 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, there was an informal agreement, to which Mr. Speaker was not a 
party, to stop the clock for 20 minutes. We beg your indulgence. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the ads look very familiar. 
 
They took the same line as the potash industries have taken in their ads, they took the same lines 
surprisingly as the official Opposition has taken. I don’t know whether they have taken the same line as 
the Members of the Conservative Party, I haven’t concluded what that line is yet. I am sure one of these 
days we’ll all be enlightened. Mr. Speaker, one wonders if the Members opposite have not already 
undertaken some advertising under the guise of some other name, be it concerned citizens, or some other 
group. 
 
I feel strongly that any government has a duty and the responsibility to explain to the public it serves, the 
reasons and the many facets of any program it introduces or any action it undertakes. The people of this 
province have the right to know, not only the view of the corporation, not only the view of the Board of 
Trade, not only the view of the concerned citizens of Toronto, but they have a right to know why their 
government decided to acquire the controlling interest in the potash industry. It is a duty of this 
Government to ensure that the necessary information is made available to the public in a most accessible 
and the most effective manner. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Everyone . . . 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, the Member for Lakeview, I remember him saying just a moment ago, you 
can always tell when you are getting to someone. I certainly seem to be getting to a lot more than one 
over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are few people in today’s society who would deny that 
one of the more effective methods of disseminating information is through the media, whether it be the 
print media or the electronic media. When this Government introduced the Family Income Plan, which 
some Members may be familiar with, we publicized the program. We wanted everybody who was 
eligible to be able to apply for it. When we brought in the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 
program, commonly called SAIL, we publicized the fact. When we brought in the hearing aid plan, we 
publicized the plan. All used by the people, just as the benefits from the potash industry will be used by 
the people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, it was our duty to publicize those plans. It was our duty to ensure that 
the public was able to take advantage of those programs. It does not seem to me to be wrong for a 
government to spend a very small sum of money to let the public know exactly how it is handling the 
affairs of 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1229 
 

the province. If a government were to operate in isolation, as the Resolution would suggest, it would be 
unable to look at its programs, it would become alienated from the people and indeed the people might 
become and would become alienated from their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these comments in mind, I move, seconded by the Hon. Paul Mostoway, the Member 
for Saskatoon Centre, that Resolution No. 24 be amended as follows: 
 
That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for providing the people of this province with 
information concerning the programs, activities and policies of their Government and thereby creating 
an aware public and an atmosphere conductive to responsible government. 

 
MR. MERCHANT: — Would the Hon. Member permit a question? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a great joy to Members on this side of the House to find out that that Minister can 
speak. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What’s the question? 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I am just gently in the prologue which sets the question well. We discovered 
today that the Minister knows some details about where furniture was purchased. I wondered if the 
Minister now knows how much money has been spent on the campaign to date and can indicate to the 
people of this province, and the Press how much has been spent, and what is anticipated will be spent in 
the future? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the member’s few comments that he prefaced his 
question with, although they were entirely unrelated. I want to say that the amount of money spent to 
date is Nil, which would not surprise the Member, as we have not been billed for it as far as I know. 
With respect to the amount of the campaign, the estimate I have is that it would be in the order of 
$55,000 all told. 
 
The debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — I would like to thank the Hon. Minister for finally 
revealing the figure that we have been trying to get for potash advertising. I noticed earlier in Saskatoon 
he had referred to it as an insignificant amount. In my particular books $55,000 is certainly significant 
and seeing that there is going to be even more advertising done in this particular program, I wonder if it 
isn’t going to exceed $55,000 by a considerable amount. 
 
In listening to the remarks, my main criticism is the type of advertising is really full of half truths, filled 
with insinuations and innuendoes. After listening to the Minister I was more convinced as to why these 
innuendoes and insinuations are in the advertising. For instance, his reference to the advertisement 
coming out of Saskatoon. I think that anybody who lives in Saskatoon and is acquainted with the area do 
know 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1230 
 

that the Saskatchewan Liberal metro-council in Saskatoon spent their own money in circulating some of 
the homes. I am sure the Hon. Attorney General knows about that. The insinuation that seemed to come 
across the floor was that Liberal money was involved in the Saskatoon Board of Trade, was highly 
unfair. Evidence of that is the fact that they paid for their own advertising. 
 
I feel there is a questionable morality and half truths, when I read some of these particular 
advertisements. The one for instance says, "The market is there." Certainly the statement is made and the 
implication is and the insinuation is that this market is going to be available to Saskatchewan people. We 
really don’t know that, I think that has been established. How can you guarantee that a market that other 
companies have had is going to be brought back here to Saskatchewan? 
 
Again, moving along, I see, "Our reputation is good." There is an insinuation here about the amount of 
money you can borrow. What bothered me in reading this, is that you make a statement that the amount 
is going to be paid back through the revenue from the resources. This, of course, is not fact, it is a 
possibility, but the tone of the advertisement seems to indicate that this is fact. As you go through these 
two advertisements, the one "head office Saskatchewan", the same trend emerges in each and every one 
of them. I think certainly it is an attempt to make people and to persuade people to the government 
position by really not being completely truthful. 
 
The one particular advertisement that really annoyed me, was the one about Saskatchewan Minerals. As 
I was driving along in my car one morning, I listened to the number of jobs that were created through 
Saskatchewan Minerals and the amount of money that was contributed to the Provincial Treasury. I 
couldn’t understand which market they were appealing to. Saskatchewan Minerals, of course, produces 
sodium sulphate, and certainly the people of Saskatchewan are not purchasing the sodium sulphate. 
What was the intention? Again I think, what bothered me most, is that it was a deliberate attempt of 
advertising in a rather informal way. But it seemed deceitful. I just don’t think that this is a correct way, 
if you are going to advertise, come out and be factual and be straightforward with it. 
 
As I said I didn’t have much to say when I started in this particular debate. But in the advertising, we 
have heard the Government’s position and we have heard the potash companies’ position. People of 
Saskatchewan have had an ample opportunity to see and to listen to both of them. Again, I have the 
same feeling as our Whip, that really it is quite unfair to other people when there is a third side to the 
story and that is our side. We certainly feel it is different than the people in the potash industry and also 
the Government. We don’t have the funds to be able to tell the people our side of the story. With that I 
should like to conclude. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to rise for a moment to speak 
on this particular Resolution. The Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) brought up a point in his 
rebuttal against the original speaker in which he mentioned certain programs, government programs, 
which did in fact require public information. I 



 
December 16, 1975 

 

1231 
 

suppose, Mr. Speaker, to a certain extent, that there is some justification for a government advertising 
government programs and informing the people of government programs. Certainly this is not an 
uncommon thing to do, certainly this is done and done every month of the year by governments at all 
levels. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, in his justification the Hon. Member for Biggar attempted to compare the 
Government’s program of the nationalization of the potash industry in the same cup of tea as hearing 
aids and so on, is utter nonsense. The Government on that side must know that that’s utter nonsense. 
 
The Government opposite had an opportunity to explain their nationalization program of the potash 
industry to the people of Saskatchewan. They had from the day of the writ until June 11th, the 
opportunity to do so, but they did not dare take the opportunity at that time because they didn’t want to 
risk their political future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, government programs, yes, require advertising from time to time. But 
no government of any political party once they are in power and when they come to an issue that has 
been hidden, secretly hidden, during the course of the election campaign, and can now stand before the 
people of this province and justify thousands of dollars in advertising. It is a shame, to hear a Minister of 
the Crown make a statement like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I doubt whether the people of Saskatchewan will ever know the total cost of this 
advertising that this Government is carrying on. I doubt if we’ll even know the true amount. Let me say 
this. A government seldom gets defeated, a government seldom loses the popular vote when the 
economy is buoyant. But that government did. That government dropped in popular vote, it dropped in 
its seats, and so with the most expensive election campaign that has been conducted in this province and 
with a chance, Mr. Speaker, that if the people of Saskatchewan had an opportunity right now, on the 
potash issue alone, they would lose another 14 seats. There is no question about it. Now they are saying 
up until this point they have spent $55,000. Mr. Speaker, I doubt if anyone can buy the advertising that 
they have bought for this amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have an editorial from November 22, this was taken from the Financial Post. Mr. 
Speaker, I think there are a few statements here which explains why the Government is so concerned 
that they must continue an extensive campaign at this time. I quote: 
 

However, Saskatchewan Premier Allan Blakeney’s unseemly grab at that province’s potash industry is 
a sad spectacle. Here is an NDP Government that plays with loaded dice and arbitrarily changes the 
rules while the game is in progress. It is a sure-fire formula for scaring away serious investors. 

 
To continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 

To justify his billion plans to gain effective control by negotiating price or outright expropriation, 
Blakeney 



 
December 16, 1975 
 

1232 
 

accuses the companies of declining to proceed with expansion, required to meet anticipated future 
demands. But when an industry is taxed to the point of no return, as Saskatchewan’s potash industry 
has been, how can it find the wherewithal to expand or indeed the slight incentive to do so. 

 
The awful truth is that policies of confrontation damage existing development and endanger sensible 
future development. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason; that is not a service to the people, this is nothing but taking 
taxpayers’ money to promote the NDP in Saskatchewan. It has now cost us $55,000 and how much 
more we don’t know. Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, I think it hypocrisy of the highest degree that a 
government has engaged in an intensive campaign all because to cover up a little game they have got 
going in their attempts to rally the party together over an issue and they happened to select the potash 
issue in doing so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the amendment I want to 
say that it isn’t very often that I agree with anything that’s been said by Members sitting on my left. I 
assume that the reason that I agree with the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) is because we are 
both school superintendents and we can see through what’s going on. 
 
I make that statement because I don’t think that it’s only school superintendents who are able to see 
through what in fact is going on in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I want the Members opposite to be aware of the fact that while I deplore the 
advertising campaign that they have undertaken because it hasn’t represented in actual fact what’s 
happening. It’s done one thing and I am sure that if they are prepared to admit it they will say it in the 
same way I am, that they are beginning to get calls from people who are suspicious and who are saying, 
what in the world is going on? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker interrupted proceedings and the Assembly adjourned at 9:40 o’clock p.m. 
 


