
























































Hansard: March 12, 1975


732 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Seventeenth Legislature 

16th Day 
Wednesday, March 12, 1975 

 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. R. Gross (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, Mr. David Lange 
(Assiniboia-Bengough), who is away today, I should like to introduce to you and to Members of this 
Assembly, 28 Grade Seven to Twelve students from Kayville. They are accompanied today by their 
teachers, Mr. and Mrs. Sanders. I understand they plan to take a tour around 3:00 o’clock this afternoon. 
I should like to meet with them on behalf of Mr. Lange and extend our welcome in attending the Session 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce 25 Grade Nine to Twelve students 
from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan. They are here with their teachers, Mrs. Simon and Mr. Berge. I am sure 
all Members will wish them a pleasant stay here in Regina. I hope to meet with them later on at 3:15 
o’clock. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
CROWN CORPORATIONS 

 
Mr. J.G. Richards (Saskatoon University): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to beg leave of the House to 
introduce a very simple procedural motion, the effect of which would be to permit the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations to review the activities of that Crown corporation during the entire 
calendar year 1974 as opposed to merely the fiscal year which terminated on March 30th, which is fully 
12 months from our present date. I should like leave, Mr. Speaker, it is a very simple procedural motion 
to introduce and to pass it at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: No. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 

LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO SETTLE GRAIN STRIKE 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, if I may rise. I am sorry that happened, 
John, I would agree with you — very democratic move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier, or to the Attorney General, or the Minister 
of Agriculture or the Minister of Labour but they are not here. So I will 



 
March 12, 1975 

733 
 

direct it to the Minister in labor, the Minister of Health. I wonder now, if he is prepared today (after the 
SARM have asked the Federal Government to take legislative action to settle these strikes) to send a 
message to Ottawa to get the grain moving. All the farm organizations have done the same thing. The 
Premier was on the radio today, he got up to the verge but he backed away. He evidently now says he 
hoped the Federal Government would address themselves to this problem. Will you join us, will you talk 
to your colleagues and join us in a telegram or a phone call or some sort of direct immediate 
representation to Jean Chretien and the Federal Government asking them to take legislative action to put 
these people back to work and get the grain moving and end this strike. 
 
I want to say this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I just want to preface this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We can’t preface questions, please ask your question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I can see I should have said it before. I’ll preface the next question. 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, the House did consider the matter on 
Monday last. The Leader of the Opposition said that he was sending a telegram, the Government sent a 
telegram to the Government of Canada as the Leader of the Opposition very well knows. Those disputes 
come under federal jurisdiction not provincial jurisdiction. And it seems to me that the best place to 
direct the problem to is the Federal Government and specifically to the Federal Minister of Labour, who 
is apparently much more in labor than I am, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Not only is he in labor, he is also in some harbor difficulties these days. Mr. Speaker, 
it is a federal matter. And certainly we as a Government are deeply concerned about the movement of 
grain and we have now referred our request to the Federal Government, we hope that they will listen and 
that they will take appropriate actions to resolve the disputes and get the people back to work and to get 
the grain moving. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. It is interesting that half this Order Paper is the 
NDP Government whining to Ottawa, so don’t tell us that you are not willing to talk to Ottawa, you do 
that most of the time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s your question? 



 
March 12, 1975 

734 
 

 
Mr. Steuart: — My supplementary question is this; while we recognize and I am asking you if you 
recognize it is not the workers’ fault, the Federal Government involved themselves in a grain handlers 
strike, now they should expect to involve themselves in this one and give the same kind of settlement to 
these workers that they gave the grain handlers. But will you now . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Will you ask the supplementary question please? 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I will get to it immediately, first thing. Is the Minister aware that the SARM have asked 
for this; Unifarm, the Wheat Pool of Alberta, is he aware that the Wheat Pool of Manitoba have asked 
for it; is he aware that the only people who can settle this is the Federal Government to face their 
responsibility and end this strike immediately? Is he aware that the people of this province are expecting 
that kind of leadership? They are totally dissatisfied with the lack of courage and leadership your 
Government is showing, and in view of that will he take some action to ask those missing Cabinet 
Ministers whenever they get back from wherever they are, to show some leadership and ask the Federal 
Government to settle this immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the difficulties. This Legislature did consider the matter 
on Monday. The Leader of the Opposition was here. What he is trying to do is catch some newspaper 
story, that is his main concern. Mr. Speaker, we are concerned and we have taken action that we thought 
was appropriate. We have made representations to Ottawa. And in case the Leader of the Opposition is 
questioning where some of my colleagues are, the Premier is at the SARM convention today, they have 
invited him, he is speaking at 3:00 o’clock this afternoon. Also the Minister of Agriculture is attending 
the SARM convention. The Attorney General is presently in Ottawa attending the convention of the 
Attorneys General in Ottawa. The Minister of Labour had to attend a funeral at Moose Jaw. If he wants 
to check the name of the person whose funeral he is attending, I will be glad to provide him with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue is a matter of concern to us. We have made representations as I said earlier. We 
hope that the Federal Government will get off their butt and do something about it. As he has said it is 
not the workers that are to blame, it is the industry and others. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Are you asking them to take legislative action to end the strike, to get off their butt, are 
you asking that? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We can’t have a debate on it. We have had some discussions. 



 
March 12, 1975 

735 
 

COMMUNITY COLLEGES IN REGINA 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to 
address a question to the Minister of Education, to congratulate him for being here as one of the few 
Cabinet Ministers in attendance today. 
 
The question is this, Mr. Speaker: I believe you are of course aware that there are plans underway to 
have a community college established in the city of Regina. I believe in conjunction with those plans a 
series of meetings have been held in Regina at local high schools where interested parties have been 
invited to attend and give their opinions and views as to the desirability of the community college in this 
city. It is my information that at those meetings, the consensus of opinion by all those who attend was 
that a community college was not necessary in Regina because of the existing facilities, such as the 
University of Saskatchewan Extension program, Board of Education program, YMCA and YWCA and 
so on. In view of these meetings and in view of the fact that the people who attended these meetings by 
your invitation apparently do not feel a community college is required are you intending on still 
proceeding with the development of a community college in this city? 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, we have got more Cabinet Ministers here than they 
have Members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question from the 
Member for Lakeview, we do in fact plan to proceed. The series of meetings in the high schools were 
part of just a series, we plan to hold further meetings throughout this city in terms of talking about the 
community college program. The fact that we have run into some concern in both the city of Regina and 
the city of Saskatoon should not be surprising since there has been a very broad adult education program 
being offered but its delivery has certainly not been under the philosophy of the community colleges 
which is not only to deliver programs but to concern itself with development of community. One can 
look at Regina and see the opportunities for community development along with an additional 
educational delivery system. Our plans as I said are to proceed, in fact we hope to appoint the college 
board early in April. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary question, I believe these colleges have been 
very successful in the rural areas. The Minister has also referred to more meetings being held. May I ask 
the Minister if at those meetings as well as the meetings that have already been held and that the opinion 
of the people attending is that the college is not required, how he can justify going ahead with the plans 
for the college. Because obviously the people whom he has consulted through his Department don’t 
want the college. So why proceed with it if it is against their wishes? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, as we were to discover in the successes as you talk about in the 
community college program in rural 



 
March 12, 1975 

736 
 

Saskatchewan, that they were reaching all kinds of people that were not reached previously under adult 
education programs, I say and I say emphatically that this is also true in Regina and it is also true in 
Saskatoon. Once the program is underway we shall see the additional opportunities being available to a 
broad section of Regina people, including many of the Métis and native people and ethnic people who 
simply have not organized themselves into any kind of educational programs. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A second supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, what is the projected cost of the 
college in Regina, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — The projected costs are difficult to estimate because the costs are related to the 
delivery of the program and that is all. It is not like the program of the Liberal Party which we inherited 
when we came into office . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Allow me to finish, Mr. Speaker, which was a centralized, institutionalized type 
of approach. So we cannot estimate accurately the costs in the city of Regina. You can estimate it in 
terms of what the costs are now in delivery of an adult education program which will be carried on. But 
one cannot estimate very accurately the response to the college program beyond what is presently being 
offered unless one relates it to rural Saskatchewan and that would be difficult. 
 

HAS GOVERNMENT INCREASED INVESTMENT IN INTERCONTINENTAL PACKERS 
 
Mr. T. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to direct a question to the Minister of 
Industry (Mr. Thorson). Approximately two years ago the Government invested $10.2 million in 
Intercontinental Packers, at that time the Government had an option with Mr. Mendel to further buy 
shares in the company of Intercontinental Packers. The question I should like to ask is: has the 
Government exercised any option or increased their investment in Intercontinental Packers since that 
time? 
 
Mr. K. Thorson (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — A supplementary then, Mr. Speaker. Now that the company has been in operation 
for this length of time is the Government going to be prepared at this Session to file a financial statement 
of Intercontinental Packers to the Assembly so that we may discuss how the public’s 45 per cent interest 
in the company is faring? 
 
Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, there is a proposed Resolution on the Order Paper on that subject and I 
suggest we deal with it in due course. 
 

FOURTH QUESTION NOT PERMITTED 
 
Mr. D. MacDonald (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker . . . 



 
March 12, 1975 

737 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. We have had three questions; is the House prepared to permit a further one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: No. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We have had three questions as has been requested. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I have a . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the House prepared to permit another question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: No. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The House says no. I heard several no’s. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to direct to the Minister of Health, he 
wasn’t here yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have no control over that. The House has refused any further questions, so we must 
continue on the Order Paper. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I wonder if the Minister of Health wouldn’t mind answering one more question, as 
I say he wasn’t here yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I shall ask the Members again, is the House prepared to permit another question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: No! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — They say no. There are a number of no’s. You will have to speak to the Minister 
privately or else reserve it for tomorrow. I am sorry. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, are you directing that I may not ask a question? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, because the House refuses to do so. It was not the Speaker, but the House that 
refuses to permit another question. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The House has refused any further questions. I am sorry. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, surely to heavens at a time like this with the Session two months old 
we should have an opportunity to catch up on the negligence of that Government . . . 



 
March 12, 1975 

738 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the Government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Chair cannot facilitate those requests because the tradition of the 
House does not permit it. The House has decided that it will not permit another question at this time. So 
there is nothing the Chair can do about it. We have to abide by the decision of the House. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend the Election Act, 1971, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I’m only going to speak for a few 
minutes on this Act and then I’m going to ask leave to adjourn it because I want to discuss it with the 
Attorney General. Members on both sides of the House, I presume, certainly those on this side of the 
House, are agreeable and support the principle of making it possible in some cases and making it easier 
in other cases for handicapped people to vote in subsequent elections. We all received the brief and the 
representation asking that this be considered. I applaud the Government for the spirit behind what 
they’re trying to do, however we are concerned that they may have opened up the Election Act to a 
tremendous number of abuses. And these abuses can happen to anybody. When you open up an election 
act to abuses, they can occur by any group or by any individual. Now surely the purpose of an election is 
to get as wide an expression of opinion from as wide a group in the community or in the province or in 
the nation as possible. The idea of a universal franchise is an old one, a sacred one, and is in many ways 
the bedrock and foundation of our democratic parliamentary system. However, I think it is possible to go 
only so far in an effort to make absolutely positive that no one, under any circumstances, misses their 
vote before the electoral process is abused and possibly set the stage so that the will of the majority is 
not expressed. 
 
I’m going to use an example. Between 1960 and 1964 the CCF Government (the Bill was piloted by the 
Attorney General of the day) made tremendous changes in the Election Act and they made it possible for 
the people to vote on election day, regardless of where they were in the province; they didn’t have a 
transferable ballot but they had an absentee ballot and I well remember the problems that followed the 
1964 Election. It was a very, very difficult thing to sort everything out. I sat in on election counts and I 
talked to many Returning Officers, and they were Returning Officers who had been appointed by the 
CCF Government, and we discussed the problems inherent in that Election Act and I think it was almost 
universally agreed that the Act needed to be tightened up. And so, while there were many things that we 
might have done to the Election Act that were controversial and that the Opposition didn’t agree with, 
certainly when we took out some of the amendments that had been put in before 1964, there was no 
opposition from the CCF or NDP who sat in the Opposition. Because it was recognized that in an honest 



 
March 12, 1975 

739 
 

and sincere effort not to disenfranchise anyone, even though they have to get away from their place of 
residence in the time of an election, we had made the election machinery so cumbersome that, as a 
matter of fact, it was almost 24 days before the government of the day was prepared to hand over the 
reins of government to the new administration. And they held on for, I think, a very sound reason — that 
we didn’t know the results of that election. We didn’t know because there were thousands and thousands 
of people who were in Regina, who lived in Prince Albert or Saskatoon, people who were all over the 
province, who had voted outside of their constituencies because they had not bothered to take advantage 
of the advance polls. Those votes had to be held for seven days, then had to be transferred to the 
constituency where they belonged and then you had to proceed with the counting. They held up the 
envelope and they stated the name on the envelope, you could challenge that envelope, the individual, if 
you had any reason, there wasn’t much information, then the envelope was opened and the votes were 
put in. It was by common consent, recognized that in an effort to give everyone the opportunity to vote 
with ease that we went too far. As I say, we, in the broadest sense of the Legislative Assembly. And so 
changes were made. Now I don’t say we’ve gone that far in these amendments but I note the Member 
for Lakeview pointed those out when he spoke on this Bill in the first reading before the Session 
adjourned for Christmas and the month of January. 
 
So I should like to discuss this very seriously. I’m going to suggest this be referred to the Law 
Amendments Committee. I think before we make this move, and I say this most sincerely, we should 
take a second look at what we’re doing because we all may regret it. Most of us are standing for 
re-election and if there is one thing that I think we should have in any electoral process that is a 
straightforward way to vote, enfranchising as many people as possible, and making it as easy as possible 
for people to vote. We can find some way to allow handicapped people to vote. The suggestion was 
made that we have in each constituency a sort of mobile poll. I was told by Mr. Romanow when we 
discussed this that they had looked at this and the difficulties of it in the rural seats were almost 
insurmountable and I take his word for it. I presume they were. However, there may be another way of 
doing it or we may be able to do it particularly the way it was suggested here, just tightening up some of 
the loopholes. I hope Members believe me when I say that I want to see the handicapped people 
accommodated and I want to see, as much as anyone else, that their ability to vote in subsequent 
provincial elections should not be impaired. But I have a real fear of what we’re doing here. 
 
I hope that the Attorney General returns before we have this Act under discussion, while we’re 
considering that we also look at the limitations placed on the spending by political parties. There has 
been some discussion that this may be raised and I know from discussions that there are other problems 
inherent in the changes that have been proposed or passed. There have been some second thoughts about 
some of them and so I hope we do not give this second reading even though I recognize that you can 
make amendments in committee. We shouldn’t give it second reading until we’ve had a chance to see 
the whole picture and I would then hope that it may be referred to one of the standing committees that 
we have, that that committee could be convened with all possible haste, have them take a hard look at 
this, call witnesses if necessary and then, if they’re satisfied, 



 
March 12, 1975 

740 
 

bring it back. If they think some changes should be made to do what we want to do and still protect one 
of the basic principles of an election, which is to make the election as ironclad as possible so that as little 
tampering can take place as possible, then I think we will better serve the interests of the people that we 
represent in the next election. So with these words, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Hon. Mr. Romanow that Bill 
No. 5 — An Act to amend The Married Women’s Property Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one word about Bill No. 5. I want to go on 
record as opposing this Bill in principle. I believe it is just another link to the chain that will make it 
easier for family break-up and I’m sure that we have enough links in that chain as it is. I just want to 
make that point that I’m opposed to this Bill in principle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E. Tchorzewski (Minister of Culture and Youth): — I just want to make a few comments on this 
Bill but first of all say that I don’t agree with the Member for Rosthern. I respect his right to have his 
opinion, of course, but I don’t agree with what he says in that, in his view, it will further lead to family 
breakdown. Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that in today’s society as it is, problems in the area that he 
speaks of, in the area of family breakdown and I, as I’m sure every Member in this House, views that 
with some concern. But I don’t think that this legislation, which will provide equality between men and 
women and make the law on matrimonial property or lead to the making of the law on matrimonial 
property fairer is going to lead to that, in fact it will help in situations where there is family breakdown. 
What we need to do is look at those kinds of situations, whether it be because of family breakdown or 
whether it be because of death or whatever the circumstances. We have to consider the situation of both 
parties to a marriage to see that they are both dealt with or treated equally in those kinds of 
circumstances. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every Member who has spoken on this Bill has stressed or most of the Members who 
have spoken on this Bill have stressed the great importance of the issue that is before us. And I, too, 
want to spend a little while this afternoon to indicate that in my view this a very important Bill which 
deals in a temporary way with a very serious shortcoming in matrimonial property laws that exist today. 
I’m not saying that it is by any means the final solution. We have made that very clear. The Government 
is not looking upon it as the final solution. The proposals before us are an interim measure only until we 
are ready to proceed with legislation arising from and acceptance of the final recommendations of the 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. But nevertheless, until the final recommendation, until 
those final recommendations, the Government feels that there is a need to give the court the power to 
make a fair and equitable division of matrimonial property in this province. The present law in the 
division of matrimonial property is unfair because it does not allow the recognition of a 



 
March 12, 1975 

741 
 

wife’s role in the earning of money or the acquisition of property through her work as a homemaker or 
as a mother. And the Government asked the Law Reform Commission to give this matter top priority to 
research thoroughly into the law as it relates to matrimonial property. And in my view that Commission 
has done an excellent job in the period of time that it a very short period of time compared to similar 
work done by other law reform commissions in this country. 
 
It has produced a number of working papers that have outlined proposals for the consideration of the 
public. The Law Reform Commission has held public hearings. All those, whatever their point of view 
might be, have had an opportunity to present their points of view on their ideas to the Law Reform 
Commission to assist it in making its final recommendations. And so the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan has been consulting with anyone interested. And there have been many who have been 
presenting their views to it. In this way the Government Law Reform Commission has undertaken to 
review the law in the area of the distribution of matrimonial property upon the ending of a marriage, 
whether it is by separation or whether it is by divorce or whether in fact it is by death. And I think that 
by using this approach it will have benefited from the views of many people and, therefore, these 
recommendations will be of that much more value. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a tendency at times that I know we all as legislators . . . and I know of people 
in general who feel that a problem such as the one that has been highlighted by the Murdock and 
Rathwell cases can be dealt with immediately. But I think we have to watch ourselves when we tend to 
do that or we tend to think that way, because often in many or most cases or in a lot of cases there is a 
great deal more involved. The law as it is now is not only unfair but it is also very complex, and if this 
Government or any government were to jump into amendments very quickly without giving full 
consideration to the implications as is being done by having it referred to the Law Reform Commission, 
there are certainly the chances that new problems would be created that might be of greater magnitude 
than the problem that we have before us right now. And as the Attorney General mentioned when he 
introduced this Bill he has been advised by Mr. Grossman, the chairman of the Law Reform 
Commission, that there could be as many as 20 bills that will be affected by the recommendations. And 
until all of those things have been considered and considered carefully it is necessary to provide this 
interim measure that is encompassed in the Bill that we have before us. 
 
So while all of this is being thoroughly researched, our Government has felt that there is a great need for 
at least this temporary measure. It has been recommended by the Law Reform Commission and I just 
want to quote to you a statement issued by the Commission. The Commission said in its third working 
paper on the division of matrimonial property that marriage is a partnership of equals and that division 
of property ought to reflect that partnership. Therefore, the Commission is proposing that legislation 
providing for the exercise of judicial discretion be passed immediately to apply to property in any 
marriage solemnized prior to the adoption of any possible different participation scheme. In other words 
the Law Reform Commission has said that there needs to be this temporary measure while it is 
proceeding to put together its final recommendations and our Government is acting on that 
recommendation. This has been supported by the advisory council on the Status 



 
March 12, 1975 

742 
 

of Women and by other organizations throughout the Province. In a submission presented to me in 
Saskatoon on December 5 at the Public Library by the Saskatoon Co-ordinating Committee on the 
Status of Women it was stated that they commend the Government of Saskatchewan on their proposed 
amendment to the Married Women’s Property Act. And they support the Government’s proposal of 
immediate legislation to amend this Act so as to leave to the discretion of a judge of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench the division of property between spouses on a marriage breakdown. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is any doubt and I am sure that most of the Members 
opposite will also agree that there is support for this particular Bill throughout Saskatchewan on the part 
of most people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, since the report of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women was made in 1968 
there are a large number of very significant achievements that have happened in this area nationally and 
provincially. But that is not to say that all is done and that legislators or industry or unions can reduce 
the priority that this matter of the status of women in our society deserves, because although a lot of 
achievements have come about, I think we all have to recognize that to some extent in some areas there 
is still a significant degree of inequality of opportunity that does exist. This amendment is one more step 
in finally achieving equality of opportunity for all people in society. It is International Women’s Year, it 
is a time for reassessing where we are at, it is a time for establishing the new emphasis or the new 
priorities that we must be looking at into the future. I think in that light it is very appropriate that in 1975 
this Bill should be introduced and passed. With this the Government is providing necessary temporary 
provision for judiciary discretion but it is also reaffirming our commitment to bring about the required 
changes to legislation, the policies that are needed and to policies to bring about equal status for men 
and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these words I will support the Bill and at this time, and because I know there are other 
Members who wish to speak on it, I wish to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski that 
Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Department of Culture and Youth Act, 1972 be now read a second 
time. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I had, as mentioned by the Member opposite, a great deal to say on this Bill the 
other day and therefore I shall not be taking a great deal of time today because I did say the things that I 
wanted to say which I think were worth saying. I think there are many accomplishments that this 
Government has had throughout these years since June 1971 and I outlined only those accomplishments 
that were involved in the area for which the Department of Culture and Youth is responsible. Because 
there are so many accomplishments even in one department it took me a great deal of time to say that, 
Mr. Speaker, and I am glad I was able to have the opportunity to do so. 
 
Now, I was a little surprised at the sensitivity of the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) when he 
rose and made his 



 
March 12, 1975 

743 
 

comments. I didn’t think I was being controversial in my remarks. I certainly was not being critical of 
the Opposition in my remarks, I was just stating the facts as they were and putting them on the record of 
those achievements and really I was quite amazed at his sensitivity when he got up and made his 
remarks. I don’t know why he is so sensitive, except that maybe he’s feeling a little bad that in the years 
from 1964 to 1971 the Members of the Opposition who were then on the Treasury Benches never 
thought of or never really cared to undertake implementing many of the things that have happened in the 
last three and a half or so years. 
 
But I want to make one or two short comments on the remarks of the Member who spoke at that time. 
He said that we did away with the Provincial Youth Agency, Mr. Speaker. Well, I never denied in my 
remarks that we did away with the Provincial Youth Agency. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — His father was a priest. 
 
Hon. E. Tchorzewski: — That’s quite interesting. It’s too bad his influence did not help the son. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we did away with the Provincial Youth Agency and in fact made it 
not an agency but a provincial department of government which tended to provide a new emphasis, as 
we were committed to do in the field of cultural, recreational and amateur sport development in the 
province. We’re proud of having done that and because we did that there are certain results that I think 
are evident to everyone. 
 
Now, he also mentioned a number of other things. He referred to, and I will quote from his remarks: 
 

The real thanks for cultural development in this province is to Mr. Ross Thatcher. He took the Arts 
Board to which the NDP at that time were giving a mere $100,000 or so and made it a real and viable 
operation. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I did not refer to Mr. Thatcher, the Member for Milestone did. Neither did I say that 
during the time of the Liberal Government there were no funds provided for the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board. I’m glad that there were and so there should have been. What I want to say is that there was a 
considerable difference in the amount of funding that was increased from 1964 to 1971 and the amount 
of increased funding to the Saskatchewan Arts Board that was provided from 1971 to the present time. 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the increasing funding for the Arts to the Saskatchewan Arts Board 
under our term of Government since 1971 will increase in 1975 by over 100 per cent, which I think is 
very significant and is a clear indication of the priority which we have put in the development of the 
Arts in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, it is very well for the Member for Milestone to say that their Government during that day did a 
great deal for the Arts. As I said earlier, I am not saying they did not provide additional funding, they 
did. But they did nothing, they did nothing to provide cultural opportunities to all communities 



 
March 12, 1975 

744 
 

throughout Saskatchewan who wished on their initiative to do something to make those opportunities 
possible to all residents in their communities. Our Government did that through the department. It did 
that with the community cultural project grant program which is now in existence for two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mention was made about the doing away with the Provincial Youth Agency which our 
Government incorporated in the Department of Culture and Youth with all the activities that it was 
carrying out, but I think it might be worthwhile to place on the record that between 1966 and 1971, ’66 
being the year when the Liberal Government of the day established the Provincial Youth Agency and 
’71 being the day when things in this Province changed for the better with the election of an NDP 
Government, that between that period of time, the amount of funding for the Provincial Youth Agency 
increased from $426,000 to $682,000, an increase of $250,000 in five years. Well, that may be fine and 
good except I think along with that it’s worthwhile noting that the funding in the Department of Culture 
and Youth in its first year, 1972-73, was $1,500,000. 
 
So I think there is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that it was worthwhile speaking of the things which I spoke of 
the other day because they are very major achievements. 
 
I just want to touch on one other point, Mr. Speaker, before I close the debate and take my seat and that 
is the matter of the opportunities for participation from the point of view of the games that are in 
existence nationally. Now the Member for Milestone in his remarks talked of the first Canada Summer 
Games which were held in 1968 in Saskatchewan. Well, I have looked and searched and read and really 
scrambled around and I am unable to find when there were Canada Summer Games that were held in 
Saskatchewan in 1968. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, that’s what you said, Mr. Member. I don’t know, maybe I should have a chat 
with him later and he may find them, but there are no records of them anywhere included in the records 
of the old Youth Agency as it existed at that time. 
 
I must say that in 1968 there were events that took place such as a lacrosse tournament in North 
Battleford and that was good, and a basketball tournament in Yorkton and that was excellent, and there 
were other sports in communities throughout the province and I do not deny that that was a good thing. 
But those kinds of events, Mr. Speaker, are still continuing today, in fact, are better because our sports 
organizations are stronger, they have larger memberships and they have better funding, not only from 
government, Mr. Speaker, but because of the strong volunteer help and the dedication that exists in those 
organizations that are able to raise other funds such as the Western Canada Lottery which SaskSport is 
now an agent of from the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I think besides that other things happened and those things that have 
happened have increased the opportunity for people to participate in the activity of their choice. Because 
not only are there now the National Young 



 
March 12, 1975 

745 
 

Canada Games every four years, there are also the Saskatchewan Summer and Winter Games every four 
years in between and there is also a further extension of that, regional games that are being held in 
various regions in the Province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think once again I am indicating a great number of significant things that have 
occurred and that have benefited a lot of people in this province and made greater opportunities for 
people to take part in activities of their choice, whether it be in amateur sports or whether it be in 
cultural activities or what not, but they certainly have significantly increased. 
 
Now I don’t think I want to say a great deal more. I tried to make a comment on some of the remarks of 
the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). As I said I was a little surprised at how sensitive he was. I 
certainly was not at any time critical of some of the achievements of the youth agency, as small and few 
as they might have been, but there were some. 
 
With these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I once again want to say that I move second reading and I will support 
the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E.I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipal Elections Act, 1968. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a very short amendment to The Urban Municipal Elections Act. Under the 
present Section it stipulates that the number of persons voting in a poll cannot exceed 400. The cities 
have found this a little difficult to handle because sometimes there are only one or two persons over the 
400, then it turns out it is an illegal poll and the whole process has to be withdrawn. They have requested 
that the wording be changed to “approximately 400” which would make the situation much easier for the 
city officials to handle. 
 
I thereby move that this amendment to the Urban Municipal Elections Act be given second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 — FREEZE ON RAIL LINE ABANDONMENT 
 
MR. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats) moved, seconded by Mr. Oliver (Shaunavon): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to extend the freeze on rail line abandonment due 
to expire on January 1, 1975; and that it not be lifted on any branch line without due study and 
consultation with those affected and without the express consent of the Government of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 12, 1975 

746 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in introducing this Resolution I make note of the fact that a number of 
circumstances have changed since the notice of motion was given in December. You will note that the 
Resolution urges the Government of Canada to extend the freeze on rail line abandonment past the 
January 1975 deadline. As you will know that date has now passed and the total freeze on rail line 
abandonment has been replaced by a new directive which extends the freeze on 12,413 miles of line in 
western Canada which are classified as protected lines until the year 2000. A further 6,300 miles are 
temporarily frozen until January 1st, 1976 and 525 miles became eligible for immediate abandonment. 
Of these miles approximately 4,900 are in the first category, 3,500 miles in the second and 167 miles in 
the third category are in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, if you don’t mind. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Is this not Private Members’ business? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It rules on Private Members’ day, if we go through Private Members motions you go 
the Government business. On Government day if once you’ve gone through the Government paper, you 
can come to Private Members’ business. If Private Members are prepared to go ahead, they may, if they 
don’t wish to they can ask you to stand until Private Members’ day comes up. If this normally comes on 
the head of the paper on Private Members’ day it comes on the latter half of the paper on what is known 
as Government day so that the debate is in order but it follows Government business first. The 
Government would have to have leave of the House to revert back now to Government business. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order if I might. I accept your ruling. I find it 
very strange that at 4:30 there is no Government business and none of the Members on this side of the 
House have been informed or instructed that we’re going into Private Members’ business which is 
normally Friday and Tuesday. Today is Wednesday and most of the private Members are — were 
unaware that this was going to happen and I find this very strange proceeding and as another indication 
why what we’re doing here and why hasn’t the Government got some Government business on the table 
that we can turn around and proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Further to the Point, I believe the debate is in order. If a Member is not here or hasn’t been aware of it he 
doesn’t have to proceed. If some other Member is prepared to proceed and other Members wish to speak 
too, it can be adjourned and held over until it does come up again. 
 
Mr. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, since this Resolution does not deal with those lines only 
that are temporarily frozen to January 1st, 1975, one of my colleagues will be introducing an amendment 
to change the date on line two to read January 1st, 1976. 



 
March 12, 1975 

747 
 

To the extant that this new directive clarifies the future of the protected lines for at least 25 years, it will 
now be possible for the grain companies and the communities on those lines to proceed with some 
confidence in planning for the future. The 167 miles which are now slated — have been slated for 
immediate abandonment have been for all intents and purposes already abandoned and do not constitute 
any real problem. 
 
This Government is seriously concerned however, with the undue haste which seems to be apparent in 
determining the time frame in which the decision to abandon or protect the balance of the system has 
been set. It is totally unrealistic to believe that the in-depth studies which are required to make such a 
determination could be completed by January 1976. The stakes in these decisions are far too high to 
allow them to be forced on rural Saskatchewan until all possible alternatives are examined. A railroad 
abandoned now will in all likelihood never be replaced and the community and economic repercussions 
related to such closures will be irreversible. 
 
It must be recognized however, that it is imperative that a decision be made soon with regard to our 
entire transportation network to prevent further piecemeal deterioration in the rural areas. We are 
presently suffering from the deterioration of rail lines and elevator facilities because of the uncertainty 
which surrounds the future of those lines. We are also confronted with a serious depletion of rolling 
stock and motive power for the hauling of grain, deliberately brought about by the railway companies in 
their attempt to force rationalization of the network and removal of the Crow’s Nest rates for grain. 
 
We have a rail system which has through the years managed to move large volumes of grain to export 
markets and as recently as 1972-73 moved close to one billion bushels in spite of snow slides, labor 
disputes, shortage of cars and the inefficiencies resulting from back-hauls and slow turn-arounds at 
ports. Given any kind of a reasonable chance there is little doubt that the country collection system could 
do the job for many years to come. 
 
However, because of rapidly increased operating costs it has become apparent to the elevator companies 
that some reduction in their overall system is necessary to remain financially solvent. It is also obvious 
that, because of the neglect of maintenance on many rail branch lines, either a major job of upgrading 
must soon take place or these lines will become inoperable. 
 
Because of these factors there is some urgency to expediting the rationalization process. However, this 
rationalization must take into consideration more than just the lowest cost of handling and moving 
grains for the railways and elevator companies, but must also be very cognizant of the economic and 
social problems which would be faced by the farmers in increased trucking and handling costs and rural 
communities through loss of revenues and population. 
 
We are being asked to believe that the railways are losing large amounts of money on the hauling of 
grain. They have supplied the Canadian Transport Commission with documentation showing what their 
losses are. However, at no time have they been required to disclose their full financial statements so that 
those losses could be identified and verified. The losses we have are those supplied by the companies 
with no proper breakdown as to 



 
March 12, 1975 

748 
 

the source of their loss. In view of this it is interesting to note that a graph I have here compiled from 
statistics taken by Statistics Canada shows that over a period of 20 years, from 1951 to 1972, the net 
operating revenues of the railways have very closely coincided with the volume of grain handled. In 
years when grain handlings were down, net revenues are down and you can see that on the graph here 
and in years when grain handlings were high, net revenues increased correspondingly. The relation of 
one to the other is too consistent to be accidental. There is, therefore, an urgent need for a full disclosure 
of railway costs before any major decisions are made in changing the system. 
 
The Federal Government under the direction of Otto Lang, Minister in charge of the Wheat Board, has 
set up a series of proposals for rationalization of the system. 
1. Substantial rail line abandonment. 
2. Flexible tariff for handling grain. 
3. Use of inland terminals. 
4. Removal of Crow’s Nest rates. 
 
The key to the rationalization process as envisaged by Mr. Lang appears to be the flexible tariff 
approach, which would free elevator companies of government restrictions on what they could charge 
for handling grain at any given delivery point. The initial action to bring this about was taken last year 
when maximum tariffs were increased from four and one-half to ten and one-half cents per bushel, in the 
hope that elevator companies would use this lever to discourage service at low volume points by 
applying the maximum tariffs and on the other hand reducing the tariffs at preferred points to attract 
additional deliveries. 
 
This kind of rationalization, if it can be classed as such, would have fitted well with the promise of Mr. 
Lang that no points would be abandoned as long as farmers chose to deliver to that point. However, it is 
quite obvious that as a differential is applied, the farmers on low volume lines would eventually be 
forced to abandon them in favor of the more distant points with a more favorable rate. 
 
However, because the bulk of the elevators in western Canada are farmer owned and controlled, the 
producers through their local representatives very quickly assessed the implications of such a proposal 
and chose rather to apply an across the board increase of eight and three-quarter cents at most points in 
the province. 
 
More recently Mr. Lang has been proposing that the Crow’s Nest rates for grain should be removed and 
that the railways should be free to charge whatever rates they required to meet the full costs of moving 
grain in the western provinces without subsidy. This again he suggests would also lead to 
“rationalization,” since the railways would be free to set their rates at any given point to encourage or 
discourage deliveries to specific points. 
 
No real choice is open to the producer in such a system since even a small differential in freight rates 
between points on a line or between one branch line and another adjacent line would lead many 
borderline farmers to choose the cheaper point. As a result the higher cost point would become 
progressively more uneconomic until the producers there would have no choice 



 
March 12, 1975 

749 
 

but to change delivery points, which would certainly mean much longer hauls and much higher costs to 
many of them. 
 
Certainly these two proposals would lead to a reduction in the number of branch lines and delivery 
points. Unfortunately however, it would leave the “rationalization” process in the hands of the railway 
companies and to some extent the elevator companies, based only on their economics without regard to 
the increased trucking costs of farmers or the effects it would have on the communities involved or on 
the costs to municipalities and the provincial governments to provide the necessary roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to enter into a long debate at this time with respect to the removal of 
the Crow’s Nest rates as proposed by Mr. Lang, since this is already a subject of a Government Motion 
before the House. 
 
I should, however, like to make some observations which I believe are relevant to this Motion. Based on 
information supplied by the railways, it would appear that if the Crow’s Nest rates were removed, the 
costs of moving grain to export positions would be in the neighbourhood of 50 to 60 cents per bushel as 
compared to the present rate of 12.5 cents. Because farmers on the prairies must remain competitive on 
the export market, this would mean that the full increase would have to be borne by the producers, 
which would be an intolerable burden. In return he has suggested that this difference could be made up 
by some hazy, unspecified direct payments to producers. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what simpler way 
could he find to put this money into farmers’ hands than by the method now employed by subsidizing 
the Crow’s Nest rates? 
 
Mr. Lang would have us believe that this would result in major improvements in the rail system, in 
equipment and improved performance in grain movement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that our Otto Lang? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Yes, that’s our Otto Lang. However, experience based on performance in the United 
States where rates are four to five times higher than the Crow’s Nest rates do not indicate that this would 
necessarily be the case. In fact even with those high rates their rail system appears to be experiencing 
many of the same problems that we are in western Canada. Necessary rationalization has not taken place 
and their turn-around time even with unit trains has not been satisfactory. It would appear that on the 
contrary any savings or profits which might accrue would be siphoned off instead into subsidizing other 
non-related hauls or in duplication of unnecessary facilities. 
 
In addition to the above proposals made by the Federal Government through Mr. Lang, there continues 
to be a subtle but unrelenting pressure being exerted by the Liberals to facilitate the move to inland 
terminals on the prairies. There can be little doubt that the move to build an inland terminal at Weyburn 
has been proceeding with the full co-operation of the federal Liberals, first in financing the feasibility 
studies and later in setting up the financing through DREE. 
 
Because of the high capital cost involved in building these terminals and the large volumes of grain 
which would be required to make them economically feasible, it would be necessary for them to draw 
grain from a wide area. In most cases the 



 
March 12, 1975 

750 
 

required volumes would be such that all the grain produced within a 60 mile radius would be required to 
maintain an economic operation. 
 
Under normal circumstances it is highly unlikely that farmers would be willing to move their grain for 
these distances unless some external economic pressures were applied. Here, of course, the strategy of 
flexible tariffs at the local elevator and variable rail rates at individual shipping points would really 
become a tool for diverting deliveries to whatever point the railways wished. 
 
Once again one is led to suspect that there is more behind this proposal for removal of Crow’s Nest rates 
than just to assist the railways. The move by Cargill and Continental into western Canada and the move 
by the federal Government to return the marketing of feed grains to the commodity exchange system all 
point to a concerted effort by the federal Liberals to bring the entire grain marketing system back under 
the domination of the open market. The international grain traders, as exemplified by Cargill and 
Continental, can only thrive properly when operating in a speculative climate where their profits are 
made, not so much by their return from the handling of grain physically as from the manipulation of the 
market place. 
 
There is little doubt that if the move to inland terminals were to gain ground, that these international 
companies would be in a favourable position because of their worldwide activities to become owners of 
a substantial number of them. With added pressure applied through flexible tariffs on handling and 
railway rates, the farmers in the sphere of each of these terminals would soon become captive to them 
and the farmer owned system they have so painstakingly built over the years would be in jeopardy and 
any control they now have over the handling system would be lost for all time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to quote from an article which appeared in the Prairie Messenger recently 
dealing with this subject which states the situation admirably: 
 

In the North American food industry, at either end of it, transportation is the name of the game. A 
small number of giant food chains have all of North America locked into one continental marketing 
system. They can control it mainly because they have the resources of money and equipment to 
transport products around at will. Their centralization of the system is either taken off the price the 
producer gets for his product or added to the price the consumer pays either one or both. 
 
Far more important than efficiency is the strict control and utter predictability of every link in the 
grain food chain. Since transportation has been made such a big link, only those who have the 
resources to indulge in transportation at will can survive in the industry. 
 
It is quite irrelevant that Mrs. Beryl Plumptre and her Food Prices Review Board have found no great 
individual rip-offs in the food industry. It is the planned inefficiency of the system which is the villain. 
 
In spite of that inefficiency, in spite of the fact that it requires huge capital resources and consumes 
huge 



 
March 12, 1975 

751 
 

quantities of petroleum products, the system has been adopted because it lends itself admirably to what 
John Kenneth Galbraith would describe as “The Planning System”. 
 
The complete integration of the North American industry into one centralized system has only one 
major hold-out. 
 
To the chagrin of the United States based multinationals the gathering system for gains in western 
Canada is largely in the hands of Canadians and much of it still under the jurisdiction of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. The powers of that Board are being steadily eroded, from within and from without, but 
the Board is still there. 
 
To the further chagrin of the American corporations, the Crow’s Nest freight rates enable the Canadian 
farmer to move his grain to export position in Canada much cheaper than if it were integrated into a 
continental gathering system. 
 
This unfair advantage of the Canadian farmer, it is felt, will soon have to be remedied. All that stands 
in the way are the Crow’s Nest rates, the railway branch lines and the country elevators. The 
Americans, Cargill and Continental feel that these obstacles can be eliminated just as effectively as 
Safeway and its cohorts are eliminating the corner grocery and the independent wholesaler. 
 
Cargill and Continental have found Weyburn to be the logical place to start their onslaught. Weyburn 
is on the Soo Line, a railway which was originally built to bring settlers and products into western 
Canada, either from the United States or via the United States. Because other rail lines in the area run 
parallel with the Soo, few points around Weyburn have easy rail access to Weyburn. If the Weyburn 
inland terminal goes in, branch line abandonment in the Weyburn area has ready access to Weyburn 
only by road. 
 
The Soo Line gives the added advantage of excellent rail and road connections to the United States. 
There is already talk of unit trains composed of Continental hopper cars bringing Canadian grain for 
export to Continental terminals on the Gulf of Mexico. From there, of course, Continental ships will 
be ready to bring the grain to its final destination. 
 
This is a good economic reason for the unseemly haste with which inland terminals are being pushed. 
Given the fact, which Canadian proponents of inland terminals try not to see, that it takes some three 
and a half times as much diesel fuel to move grain by truck than by rail, the inefficient inland terminal 
system must be rushed in now, before we become more keenly aware of the limits of our energy 
resources. 
 
Once the inland terminal system is in, it will be too late to push for economy and efficiency. We won’t 
have the capital or the political will to set up or restore an alternative to the Cargill and Continental 
inland terminals. 



 
March 12, 1975 

752 
 

More exactly, as Dennis Gruending pointed out on CBK radio on February 4, the shift to inland 
terminals is irreversible. It can be made to work only if it destroys alternatives. Phrased another way: 
“Once inland terminals are in the alternatives will shrivel up and go away”. 

 
I would recommend to all Members of the House that they get a copy of this series of articles in the 
Prairie Messenger. They have a real message to all the people in western Canada who are concerned 
with the survival of the rural community. 
 
And who, Mr. Speaker, do we find out in the country promoting these inland terminals? 
 
Mr. Weatherald: — I’ll send you a copy of the Free Press. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — That’s fine. That one is about as irresponsible as one can get. 
 
For the most part they are friends of the Liberal Party opposite, who have for years opposed the orderly 
marketing system. We see them come out of the woodwork at every inland terminal meeting held 
throughout the province. Often they come out, not openly as Liberals but as Members of the Palliser 
Wheat Growers or some other organization, but they are readily recognizable wherever you go. 
 
Even if it were possible to operate inland terminals at a reduced cost, which is unlikely, it is also 
unlikely that the full additional cost of extra miles of trucking could be fully compensated for in the rate 
structure alone. However, there are huge additional costs which are implied by any such change in grain 
movement patterns. 
 
1. Greatly increased hauling distances would encourage the use of larger trucks and the additional ton 
miles required to be moved over these rural roads would impose an intolerable cost on the rural 
municipalities. 
 
We now have completed our rural grid road system. A program is well underway to further assist 
municipalities in an oiling program to further improve that system. Under normal loads and normal 
traffic the estimated cost of such an oiling program would be in the neighborhood of $7,000 per mile. To 
rebuild these roads and provide the kind of surface necessary to carry heavier loads and heavier traffic it 
would likely cost at least five times that figure. Also visualize if you can a loaded semi-trailer of grain 
meeting a school bus on a soft road in the spring. I think that would make your hair stand on end. 
 
An indication of the tremendous cost which could be involved is clearly demonstrated by the damage 
done by large 800 bushel grain trucks used to empty elevators at the Yellowhead and Yellow Creek last 
summer. Approximately 90,000 bushels were moved over 13 miles of oiled highway in this movement. 
The additional maintenance and repair cost resulting from this haul amounted to over $2,000 per mile, or 
almost 30 cents per bushel of grain hauled. Just try to imagine, Mr. Speaker, that kind of a situation 
developing all over the province. 



 
March 12, 1975 

753 
 

2. Of even greater concern to this Government is the fate of the large number of rural communities 
which would be left without rail service and where the railways were closed down. Many of these small 
communities have a very fragile taxation base and the loss of tax revenue from the railways’ right of 
way and the elevators would reduce the revenues to a disaster level. In many of these towns there is an 
elevator, a hotel, a store, a service station, maybe a café and a curling rink. The community revolves 
around these services. With the loss of the elevators and rail lines, the tax burden will increase and some 
business will drift away as the trucks haul to larger centres. The local businessmen are caught in a trap. 
With declining populations the value of their property becomes less and less. In fact, in many cases, 
there is no salvage value since no one is willing to purchase the property regardless of dollar value. 
These are the people who will bear the brunt of rail line abandonment. 
 
I have painted a dark picture, Mr. Speaker, but one which could well be repeated over and over again in 
western Canada if rationalization is left in the hands of the railways. 
 
Those Members of the Legislative Agriculture Committee who visited some areas of North Dakota two 
years ago will recall rather vividly some of the experiences related to us in the town of Mott, which had 
just been through such a rationalization process. Surely we can learn from the unfortunate experiences of 
our southern neighbors. 
 
What then, Mr. Speaker, are the alternatives? 
 
Well, first of all, there is an urgent need and long overdue need for a national transportation policy 
which recognizes: 
 

1. The need for freight rates which encourage maximum processing of products within areas where 
they are produced and will protect the interests of producers where no alternative competitive 
transportation is possible. 
 
2. Maintenance of a rail network adequate to ensure the produce can be transported from those areas. 
 
3. Sufficient rolling stock and motive power to move the required volumes of the various commodities 
efficiently. 
 
4. A recognition that the railways should be retained as an instrument of national policy to provide 
adequate transportation, particularly in those areas where competitive opportunities do not exist. 

 
In my own opinion, Mr. Speaker, before such a transportation policy can become a reality it is 
imperative that the entire western system be directed by one authority. If this can only be achieved by 
nationalization of the CPR, then this should be done immediately so that a proper rationalization of 
existing lines can take place. It is totally unrealistic in my opinion to expect that the two major railways 
will undertake such rationalization if left to their own devices. 
 
A less attractive alternative would be the nationalization of the road beds with the power in the hands of 
the Canadian Transportation Commission to direct proper integration of lines on the prairies. Under 
either method it would be possible to eliminate the tremendous inconsistency presently existing in the 



 
March 12, 1975 

754 
 

system. Situations such as the completely unnecessary cross hauls from Edmonton to Calgary by CPR 
and from Calgary to Edmonton by CNR, simply to stay on their own lines, is an example. A total of 4.2 
million car miles are wasted in this area alone annually. Duplication of trackage from Saskatoon to 
Macklin add another 160 miles of needless hauling. The cross haul to Churchill is a glaring example of 
inefficiency where communities only a few hundred miles from that port have their grain shipped out to 
Vancouver or Thunder Bay because they are on CP lines, while grain from Churchill is drawn from the 
southern part of the province because they are on CN lines. 
 
Integration of switching yards in several inland areas could lead to greater efficiencies, and a whole 
series of bottlenecks exist at the terminals at the West coast which could be resolved at least in part by 
integrating the two railroads. Again I repeat, this kind of rationalization will not likely take place unless 
there is a complete integration of the two existing railways. 
 
It is quite logical to assume that, if such integration could take place, that there could well be several 
hundred miles of rail lines that could be abandoned with little real hardship to rural communities. It is 
absolutely essential however that, before any such abandonment takes place, that full consultation and 
study take place on a regional basis to ensure that the best possible balance be achieved with the least 
amount of community disruption. 
 
We, in this Government, are prepared to assist any community affected with all the assistance they need 
in preparing a defence on the abandonment issue. Our goal will continue to be to resist all rail line 
abandonment until it can be shown that removal of services is acceptable to the rural communities 
involved. In such cases where abandonment is deemed to be in the best interest of the community, the 
Federal Government must be cognizant of its responsibility to financially assist those who might suffer 
hardship because they have to relocate. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I urge this Assembly to support me in presenting this Resolution which I 
now move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, again this afternoon we have witnessed another demonstration 
of blind, uncontrollable rhetoric from that side of the House, the same kind of rhetoric we have heard in 
this province for the last three and a half years. The same kind of rhetoric we have heard since 1964 
when the Members opposite happened to lose an election. 
 
The Resolution which was just introduced is just an example of that rhetoric. I say (and I might read): 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to extend the freeze on rail line abandonment due 
to expire on January 1, 1975. 

 
For the information of the Member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) this has already happened. 



 
March 12, 1975 

755 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think that it’s supposed to be in the House that when the Member reads 
that point and points it out that this would be changed. The Member has already specifically stated. I 
should like to stay on the debate. 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — The Resolution, I understand, that was presented by the Member definitely stated 
January 1, 1975. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, but I think the Member specifically stated that he had made arrangements for 
amendment to that section. 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Well yes, fine, I will take the Member at his word, but we are debating the Resolution 
which is now before us, there has been no amendment put before us to change that, so until then I must 
go according to the Resolution as presented before me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, the Resolution goes on and says that no branch line be abandoned 
without any due study and consultation with those affected in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, this has 
already happened. There have been no branch lines abandoned. Before any branch lines will be 
abandoned in Saskatchewan full consultation will be held with the people of Saskatchewan through 
regional hearings. The present freeze does not necessarily mean that it is for only a one year period. 
Further extensions of one year will apply. It seems to me that here again this speech which we have just 
heard is another example of what we are going to be witnessing in this Session in the months that 
follow. It’s strictly a political Session. Sixty Members of the Legislature of this Province have sat idle 
for the last two and a half months, the Government opposite has had ample time to draw up legislation to 
present to this House, the problems that now face Saskatchewan are just unlimited, we’ve got people 
leaving our farms, we’ve got industry leaving this province. As well, the cattle producers are in dire 
straits. I see no Resolutions on the Order Paper urging the provincial Government to help the cattle 
industry in this province. So what has this Government done? We have sat here now for three days, 
Monday we adjourned early because there wasn’t enough business to do; yesterday was Private 
Members’ day, and they at least have been active and have presented Resolutions; today we aren’t even 
supplied with enough Government business to carry on and we have to go back to Private Members’ 
business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — As well, look at our front benches. How many of the Cabinet Members are here? Where 
is the Premier of the province? What’s his concern for the cattle industry of this province? What’s his 
concern for normal debate to take place in this Legislature? Again, it is strictly a political game and they 
intend to use politics wherever they can. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is anyone in this province who wants rail lines abandoned, 
with the exception of the railway companies and the NDP Members opposite. They are 



 
March 12, 1975 

756 
 

the only ones that want rail lines abandoned in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Everybody knows why the railroads want the lines abandoned. Why do the NDP want 
them abandoned? Strictly because of politics. All we have to do is go back to 1958-59-60. The only rail 
lines that were ever abandoned in this province were abandoned when we had a provincial CCF 
Government and a Conservative Government in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — Let’s make that point very clear and let’s make another point clear. The only 
government or political party in Canada today that has done anything to protect rail lines has been the 
Liberal Party and the Federal Liberal Government. 
 
In 1964 it was a Federal Liberal Government that froze rail lines. In 1970 it was a Federal Liberal 
Government that froze rail lines and in 1975, again, it was a Federal Liberal Government that froze rail 
lines in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — What have the Members opposite been doing during that period of time? Strictly nothing 
but politics, but they are certainly prepared to spend money. Just like they have done Friday. Some 
goodies for each and every person in this province. They are going to try and buy the voters’ support in 
this coming election. I might advise Members opposite that the people of Saskatchewan are much more 
intelligent than that. 
 
But what have they done in terms of rail line abandonment and this entire issue? They have spent 
$260,000 of the taxpayers’ money and come up with a book like this that is full of nothing but statistics, 
no recommendations, no alternatives as to what the transportation system should be in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I must make a few comments on some of the remarks made by the 
Member for Saltcoats regarding his comments on inland terminals, and the inland terminal at Weyburn 
specifically. 
 
He says that it’s a Federal Liberal Government and the Saskatchewan Liberal Party that is building the 
terminal at Weyburn. Where is his proof? Let me point out that it is a group of individual farmers who 
have got together to try and build an inland terminal (something different). Now, if they condemn that, if 
the Members opposite condemn that, are they then in the same voice condemning a group of farmers 
who fifty years ago got together and formed the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, exactly the same way as this 
is being formed? If they condemn what’s happening in Weyburn today, they also condemn what a group 
of farmers did fifty years ago. And that, Mr. Chairman, was done by a group of individual farmers who 
thought they had an idea that was good and they were going to explore that idea. 



 
March 12, 1975 

757 
 

What’s happening in Weyburn is being made to happen by a group of farmers who think that they have 
a good idea. They are going to try and see if that idea works. If that idea doesn’t work, who loses? Not 
the people of this province, not the Provincial NDP or the Federal Liberal Government. The only people 
who lose are those who invested their time and their money in that inland terminal at Weyburn. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, while the Member for Saltcoats was talking about all the terrible things he thought 
was going on in this province, I didn’t hear any of his suggestions as to what he felt should be done. I 
didn’t hear what his position was on rail line abandonment and the transportation system, as well I 
haven’t heard it from the Premier of this province or the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Gross), although 
that could be explained. 
 
I would at this time like to give the Members of this House, for the record of this Legislature and for the 
people of Saskatchewan, the position of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in terms of rail line 
abandonment in this province. 
 
First of all if the gentlemen will excuse me I should like to read our policy, and I sincerely hope that 
they will be enlightened by what they are about to hear. Again, Mr. Speaker, the decision regarding rail 
line abandonment and our entire transportation system, it is a decision that will be made by the National 
Government in Ottawa. That decision, Mr. Speaker, will affect each and every resident of this province 
and it will have a direct effect on Saskatchewan much more so than any other province in Canada. A 
Saskatchewan Liberal Government after June, or whenever the election is called, will work together 
with rural municipalities, town councils, grain companies and farm organizations to assure that the 
decision made must be satisfactory to our farmers and help protect our rural way of life. I have yet to 
hear or to see one offer of co-operation from any Member on that side of the House to any group, 
organization or to the people of this province, in trying to formulate a recommendation that we could 
make to Ottawa. 
 
Let’s just look at that. I introduced an amendment to the Resolution proposed by the Attorney General 
asking for the Members opposite to co-operate together to form a legislative committee to listen to the 
people of this province and to present a united front to Ottawa. What is the response by those Members 
opposite? No, we don’t want to co-operate. No, we don’t want to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 
A very interesting point I might bring up at this time, that Members opposite might consider when they 
get around to debating that particular Resolution. About three weeks ago the Member for Gravelbourg 
and myself were fortunate enough to attend the Wheat Pool Meeting in the town of Herbert. At that 
meeting in Herbert I proposed much the same resolution. We then had an opportunity to debate that 
resolution. I of course presented the resolution, I spoke in favor of it. The Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 
Gross), when he got up to speak, stated that he represented the position of the Provincial Government. 
He spoke against that resolution. He spoke against that resolution not only once, not only twice, but 
three times. I might point out that when that resolution came to a vote, that there were three people who 
voted against the resolution and the majority of the people voted in favor of it and passed it, just about 
unanimous. 



 
March 12, 1975 

758 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — If that is the position you take, I would reassess my position when it comes to debating 
that Resolution in this House again. 
 
Going back, Mr. Speaker, to the position which we have taken, let me just continue. There is no doubt 
that changes will have to be made in our transportation and elevator system. But we must ensure that 
these changes are beneficial to all people and that before changes are made we will all have a chance to 
know what the alternatives will be and that everyone has a say as to how those changes will be 
implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes that the debate on such things as the Crow Rate 
Agreement, inland terminals, rail line abandonment, high through-put elevators must continue. And full 
information as to changes, implementation and effects must be aired and made available to all people of 
the province. 
 
Before any changes are made, full consideration and study must be given to each and every aspect. We 
believe that one cannot look at the different aspects of the grain handling and transportation system as 
piecemeal. To be effective it can only be looked at and dealt with as a total package. To be included in 
that total package the Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes and recommends that no branch lines be 
abandoned until the railway companies reveal their costs of operating branch lines and also that they 
reveal the criteria that are used to determine the freight rates that are charged on those branch lines. As 
well, we believe that no branch lines be abandoned until full expanded regional hearings and full public 
discussion is held throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that those branch lines that are not scheduled for 
abandonment after the hearings are completed be immediately transferred into the permanent network 
and frozen to the year 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiebe: — As well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that senior governments, railway companies and grain 
handling companies be more specific about what they are proposing so that the people can look at the 
alternatives. We believe, we recommend and we encourage the continuation of branch line subsidies to 
maintain services on those branch lines which are still uneconomic but considered essential to the 
well-being, economic and social life of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal Party as well believes that a national transportation policy is long overdue. 
And it feels that the Federal Government should provide a comprehensive statement of their 
transportation policy to include, first; freight rates which encourage maximum processing of products in 
areas where they are produced. As well, sufficient rolling stock, engines and hopper cars to ensure 
adequate rail capability 



 
March 12, 1975 

759 
 

to move anticipated volume. We believe that the Federal Government’s responsibility is there for 
upgrading and maintaining of needed railway road beds in this province. 
 
We believe and recommend the integration of railway operations to include the exchange of ownership 
of particular lines between railway companies to reduce back-haul which now exists because of 
ownership patterns, and also to increase the joint running arrangements by several railway companies 
over a single track where this would be advantageous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be general agreement that to maintain the existing network of elevators 
would be too costly when measured against the services rendered, or the services received. Of course, 
factors other than operating costs such as development of a road system, location of services such as 
schools, hospitals, banks and so on have some influence on the grain delivery patterns and in turn the 
structure of the elevator network. From the grain producer’s point of view adequate service is measured 
in terms of hauling distance and service that he receives at the elevators. It seems evident that a more 
consolidated network of elevators is required if service is to be kept to a reasonable cost. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal Party believes that some of the factors that should be considered in 
identifying the required elevator network and of course rail lines should be as follows: 
 

1. Producer hauling distance that no farmer should be more than 25 miles from an elevator with an 
average of 15 miles. 
 
2. As well, road system. In instances where rail lines have been abandoned and as a result have created 
an increased burden on the rural municipality to maintain road services, senior governments, both 
provincially and federally, should provide the financial assistance required to maintain those roads. 
 
3. Consideration should be given to the trade service patterns such as medical, educational, social and 
recreation and these should be given as much priority as to the area served by the farmers themselves. 
 
4. We must consider in this entire program the community settlement patterns to protect settlement 
patterns based on ethnic, religious and other social groups. 

 
In summing up the policy of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, a provincial Liberal Government after 
June 18, or 25th, whatever will work with rural municipalities, town councils, grain companies, farm 
organizations to have the maximum amount of rail lines transferred into the permanent system in this 
province. As well, we will support a system based on the criteria that no farmer be more than 25 miles 
from an elevator with an average of 15 miles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more comments which I should like to make in regard to this Resolution 
and because of that I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
March 12, 1975 

760 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 6 — FAMILY INCOME PLAN 
 
MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Nutana South) moved, seconded by Mr. Comer (Nipawin): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to follow the leadership of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in the Family Income Plan, by setting out appropriate work incentives in future income 
programs without discrimination or the bias of disability or employability. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Resolution which is before us, certainly the substance of the Resolution which 
is before us, is not new to anyone in this House nor I think is it new to people of Saskatchewan or the 
Canadian people because it has been discussed and debated at length for a number of years. 
 
Before I get into the substance of the Resolution, Mr. Speaker, I should like at this time to pay tribute to 
a man whom I certainly got to admire in my few years in politics, the late Hubert Prefontaine. 
 
When I was serving on the Welfare Committee in 1973 I took the occasion to discuss with Hubert the 
social security programs that were then in existence in Canada. We discussed at that time a guaranteed 
annual income and also his working with security programs in other parts of Canada. I think Mr. 
Prefontaine had much to do with getting implemented in Saskatchewan the Family Income program 
which will stand to his credit and which has been praised by many people who have felt its benefits in 
the last little while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, the idea of having one social security program as I have said and the 
advantages and disadvantages of it have been discussed by church groups, it has been opposed by 
certain church groups, it has been advocated by others; it has been opposed I believe by Members on 
this side of the House and Members on the other side of the House. I think it crosses party lines and 
there is not one solid support for or against the idea of one security program for all people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it behooves us that we do spend some time examining the present situation in all parts 
of Canada. There are many people who through no fault of their own but, basically, I believe that 
because of the economic system in which we live that many people will remain below the poverty line 
through no fault of their own. They may have come into this world as handicapped people, handicapped 
physically, emotionally, mentally or whatever way in which they may be handicapped. These people 
certainly should not suffer throughout their lives either because of the selfishness of certain people in 
society whereby, for example, in 1971, 43.3 per cent of all income in Canada was taken by 20 per cent 
of the top echelon in Canada. On the other hand the lowest 20 per cent only received 3.6 per cent of the 
total income. We find, for example, Mr. Speaker, that these people will not be able to improve their 
situation because of the economic situation or the standards that we use, these people will relatively 
become poorer in society. Because today we seem to 



 
March 12, 1975 

761 
 

reward people almost entirely for their economic contributions that they make, and not for some of the 
other contributions that they make. 
 
If someone helps to make this place better in which to live, a more humane society, we seem to simply 
slough it off, and there are no real rewards. 
 
A comment was made in the House earlier today whereby someone said I would question a doctor who 
would move into an area where he was deprived of the advantages that he would find in urban society, I 
would question his ability as a doctor. This was mentioned by a Member in this House. I certainly can’t 
agree with that individual. Why shouldn’t someone want to go into a deprived area of society for maybe 
half the salary, half the economic income because he happens to believe that there is more to life than 
making money, that maybe the goal of an individual should be to improve the lives and conditions of 
those impoverished groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Resolution that is before us is a very simple resolution. It does not condemn the 
Federal Government, it does not condemn any provincial government. It simply urges the Federal 
Government to take some leadership, more leadership than it has in the past and follow the example of 
the Saskatchewan Government when we implemented the Family Income Plan. We ask them to 
implement a program which would set out appropriate work incentives, without discrimination on the 
basis of disability or employability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most provinces have taken some initiative to assist impoverished groups, but I believe that 
unless there is a concerted united effort, spearheaded by the Federal Government, we will once again 
end up with large disparities among provinces because certain provinces have greater resources at their 
disposal. They will be able to offer higher financial benefits, improve conditions for the lower income 
groups than will the less able provinces. It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that in a Confederation like 
Canada, we cannot allow this to happen. 
 
The ideal social security system, in my opinion, must include at a minimum the following three 
principles. First, the minimum income must be sufficiently high to permit the individual family to live in 
dignity in the community in which they reside. Secondly, there must be adequate work incentives. 
Thirdly, it must be based on the invaluable worth of each individual. 
 
Incomes received by individuals or families must be such that they will be able to purchase all the 
essentials of life without severely jeopardizing their position in the community in which they live. 
Families should not need to constantly worry about whether there is sufficient money to make ends 
meet. The level of income must take into account regional disparities in the standard of living and must 
be based on the cost of living increases. 
 
We know, for example, Mr. Speaker, that on the prairies today it is much cheaper to live than, for 
example, in Toronto or Montreal. And that really has nothing to do with the type of government I 
suppose that we have because it is just as cheap to live in Alberta where we have a Conservative 
government. 



 
March 12, 1975 

762 
 

But it just so happens that at this time we have a booming economy and we have a fair amount of goods 
available at our disposal that are needed by the rest of society. I would think, Mr. Speaker, that we 
should take advantage of the situation that we have and improve the conditions of the impoverished 
groups in Saskatchewan and in this regard I certainly want to congratulate the Hon. Mr. Taylor for 
acting so quickly on the report that was submitted in 1973, the Special Committee on Welfare Report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Which, Mr. Speaker, for some reason that still amazes me, Members of the Opposition 
did not support. In being fair, however, to the Members opposite they did state in their reservations that 
there were many things that they would agree with. Which particular ones they disagreed with I don’t 
think is amply clear in the Report. I would hope that Members opposite would agree with me that we 
need today some form of social security program. Not just in Saskatchewan, not just in Manitoba, where 
the Federal Government is experimenting now, not just in British Columbia, but what about 
Newfoundland where over 17 per cent of the people are unemployed today? I think we need a security 
program that goes right across this country so that when we have ups and downs in the economy these 
people will be protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second principle that I should like to see in such a security program is work incentives. 
The social security system should contain sufficient incentives so that it is truly worthwhile for the 
individual to seek gainful employment. 
 
Most people who have done any amount of work or research on such a security program recommend 
that 50 cents of every dollar, beyond a certain basic income, should be retained by the individual. Even 
this ratio, Mr. Speaker, may not be sufficient to offset some of the expenses incurred by the individual 
who decides to work rather than draw unemployment insurance or stay on welfare. 
 
The financial gain for working as opposed to not working must be, in my opinion, very substantial, 
otherwise people will refuse to seek employment and will be prepared to do without the added 
advantages. In this respect I should like to ask the Provincial Government to continue to monitor the 
Family Income Plan to determine if the present incentives are sufficient and the level of income 
sufficiently high. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third principle, and probably the most important that should be contained in such a 
social security program, is the invaluable worth of the individual. In today’s society where there seems 
to be such a total disregard for the worth of an individual and such little regard for those people 
especially who are handicapped, we say — ‘well they have nothing to contribute’. I am sure that those 
of us who believe that way, that we changed our minds just a few weeks ago when we watched a 
program by Roy Bonisteel on “Man Alive” when he interviewed a young lady who had a severe case of 
cerebral palsy and who, at many times in her life, had been told that it was not worth it. It was not 
economically worth it to keep her alive. She struggled to continue to make her contribution and I 
believe, if I am correct, today she is studying to get her Master’s Degree or Doctor’s Degree at some 
university. 



 
March 12, 1975 

763 
 

There was one point in the interview, Mr. Speaker, that really got to me and that was when she said that 
every individual, every individual has a right to some kind of enjoyment in life, even if it is just a feeling 
of the blanket against his skin. 
 
I happen to know also, Mr. Speaker, another individual in Saskatoon who has been bedridden for a 
number of years. My colleague says 30 years. He has a severe case of arthritis, and can barely dial the 
telephone, but he is a very, very sharp individual. The first time he phoned me I had a mental picture of 
what he was like and I said to myself, he must be a very intelligent human being, a very capable human 
being. I was awestruck when I went to his home and asked for this individual and he said as he lay in his 
bed and could not move that he was the man I was looking for. I think we so often judge people without 
really examining first what they are capable of doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the depth of the third principle which I should like to discuss, could I call 
it 5:30? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — You must move your Motion today or otherwise it will have to drop because you are 
speaking to it doubly if you don’t move your Motion. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, I will do so then and try to wrap it up as quickly as possible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ll never make it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I can do it. Mr. Speaker, in April of 1973 the Federal Government put out a working 
paper on social security in Canada. Since that time, Mr. Speaker, there have been discussions between 
provincial Ministers and the federal Ministers and some progress has been made. I am disappointed, 
however, that not sufficient progress has been made so that we could announce in 1975 that there would 
be one social security program across Canada. Especially, Mr. Speaker, when you look at today’s 
disparity in unemployment of 2.6 per cent to over 17 per cent in some parts of Canada. In some areas, I 
am told that over 50 per cent of the people live below the poverty line. These conditions do have an 
adverse effect on families and individuals. Such conditions are probably one of the main causes for 
family breakups, of increased crimes and the increase in the number of alcoholics in this country. With 
continued increase in inflation and the consequence of erosion of the buying power of the dollar, the 
living conditions of the low income group is nothing short of being deplorable. It is imperative that an 
agreement be reached soon between the provinces and the Federal Government so that a unified social 
security system be implemented for all Canadians, a system which is based on adequate income to meet 
escalating costs, a system which has good work incentives so that people would seek employment, and 
lastly a system which truly recognizes the invaluable worth of the individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize that the Federal Government has done something and moved in this area and I 
realize that the provincial governments have also done so. But in order that all people will have an equal 
opportunity I ask this Assembly to support me in the Resolution. 



 
March 12, 1975 

764 
 

I now move this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, but I want to inform the House that one of the Members on 
this side will move a slight amendment to this Resolution later on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mostoway (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak to the Resolution, so I beg leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:33 o’clock p.m. 


