
























































Hansard: April 14, 1976


1101 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

24th Day 
 

Wednesday, April 14, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today to introduce a fine group 
of children. They are Grade Eight students from Middle Lake. They are led here by some of their 
parents, Mrs. Barbra Nienaker, Mrs. Rose Baker, and Pastor Mil Murray, and Mr. Kurt Demmert, and 
their teacher, Mrs. Sharon Doepker. 
 
They visited the museum this morning and they are going to see the RCMP later on this day. I will be 
meeting them at 3:00 o’clock. I hope that their stay here today is going to be very educational and that 
they will take home with them very pleasant memories of their trip to Regina. 
 
They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you a group of 
students from Peart School who for some reason are behind me in the west gallery. They are with their 
vice-principal, Terry Appenheimer. This is the school in which my wife teaches from time to time when 
she teaches and where she will presumably be teaching if she goes back, if she goes back and talks to the 
man in charge soon and goes back to earning some money for me. 
 
I know that all Members of the House welcome them to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, am very pleased to introduce to you and through you to 
the Members of this Assembly approximately 20 Grade Seven and Eight students from the public school 
at Success. It is my understanding that this is the first time that Success School has had any students 
attending the Provincial Legislature and I welcome them here. 
 
They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Dave Sullivan and also their bus driver, Mr. Roy 
Oldenburger. They have had an extremely busy day. I understand they haven’t even had time for lunch. 
They will be having lunch at 3:30 o’clock this afternoon. I look forward to meeting with them at 4:00 
o’clock later on today and wish them a good trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1102 
 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, should like to welcome the students from 
Peart School with their teacher. It’s a very fine facility there and one of our newer schools. It is in my 
neighborhood and I don’t know if some live in my constituency or not but my nephew is in the group 
there to my right. I don’t know if Mr. Merchant will have much success from the standpoint of political 
persuasion or not some day. 
 
But I do want to welcome you and I hope you gain much from the proceedings here this afternoon. We 
are pleased to have you with us. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Renfrew Teachers 
 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Hon. Attorney General. Some days ago I 
asked the Attorney General about the intervention of this Government in the Renfrew Teachers’ case, 
the case that will deal with the question of whether the Federal Government’s Anti-inflation program is 
constitutional. I wonder if the Attorney General would now indicate to the House whether the 
Saskatchewan Government as an intervenent will be supporting the right of the Federal Government to 
carry on their Anti-inflation program or whether our intervention is for the purpose of taking the position 
that the program is an improper program and not a constitutional program? 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, no decision has been made as yet finally with 
respect to whether to intervene or not to intervene. Once that decision is made, then will follow the 
subsequent decision, namely, the posture to be taken by the Provincial Government. I would simply say 
that the matter is not quite as simple as the Hon. Member for Wascana presents it in the light of the 
Peace, Order and Good Government clause, emergency doctrines and so forth in provincial powers. We 
are looking at all of that and we will be making a statement, hopefully, on the matter within the next two 
or three days. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Correct me if I’m wrong, but is the Attorney General 
saying that you have not as yet applied to the Supreme Court of Canada to intervene and you have not 
been accepted as an intervenent? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Not yet. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Attorney General is aware of certain press reports and 
whether the Attorney General will be taking steps to deal with those press reports. I am looking at a CP 
story which says that five provinces, Ontario, British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Next question. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1103 
 

Flood in Estevan Area 
 
Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister in charge of EMO. Is it the policy of this 
Government to assist in a disaster such as the recent floods in the Estevan area after the RMs live up to 
their required commitments? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think that I indicated to the 
Member for Souris-Cannington that we would be announcing our policy with respect to the flooding 
situation in due course. 
 
Mr. Larter: — A supplementary. What I was trying to get at, Mr. Minister, was that we have been led 
to believe that after the RMs do live up to their commitment, the two mill commitment on floods, that 
there is a possibility of getting some help on dyking to prevent floods in the future. I wonder if this 
would be part of that program? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — I really can’t indicate specifically to the Member the policy at this time but, 
hopefully, I will be able to make an announcement both for the Members opposite and for the people 
involved in the flooding very, very quickly. 
 

Deputy Minister for Department of Urban Affairs 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs. Is it a fact that you have already engaged the services of a Deputy 
Minister for the Department of Urban Affairs in spite of the fact that the Bill is not even into second 
reading and has not passed this House? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — No. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Have you not taken on, as a matter of fact you have taken on Mr. Brooks in your 
Department and that his duties will be as a Deputy or the head of that Department? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken on Dr. Harold Dyck who is advising us on urban 
development. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying that you will not need a deputy minister 
of the new department? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Will you tell us if he will be then. I asked you the question, will he be the Deputy 
Minister? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — We have yet to make a decision on the Deputy Minister of Urban Affairs. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1104 
 

Mr. Steuart: — A final supplementary. Will you be giving Saskatchewan people an opportunity to 
obtain this position if and when this Bill is passed. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — We will look around in Saskatchewan when the time comes to make the 
appointment. 
 

Teachers’ Salary Agreement 
 
Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Education. Teachers 
are presently voting on a settlement negotiated between themselves and the Government and the 
Trustees’ Committee that calls for an increase of 19.9 per cent without annual increments and probably 
between 22 and 23 per cent if the annual increments are included. Due to the fact that the figures exceed 
the $2400 guidelines by providing over $3,300 per year for teachers with degrees as a maximum, will 
this tentative agreement which exceeds both the percentage and the maximum federal guideline, have to 
be submitted to the Saskatchewan Public Sector Price and Compensation Board for approval? 
 
Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, first of all may I make a correction on 
some figures that the Member uses. I am not commenting on the contract which is now in the process of 
being ratified but he stated that increments cost somewhere from two to three or five per cent. It shows 
that in fact the cost of increments is negligible because of the people who retire on the higher end of the 
salary classes and so on. But there is not that kind of percentage increase because of increments across 
the province. 
 
The Member’s question was whether the contract would be referred to the Provincial board, the answer 
is, yes. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it also not possible that due to local agreements that 
are being negotiated at the local level that there could possibly be another increase of five to ten per cent 
depending on the demands of the local committee? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have no knowledge of what local agreement settlements are shaping up, so I 
cannot really say yes or no to that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that school 
boards didn’t anticipate such a large increase, which I would estimate is going to be anywhere from 25 
per cent up by the time your final agreements are concluded, is the Minister contemplating any further 
funds for school boards. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — At this time, no, Mr. Speaker. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1105 
 

Youth Employment Service 
 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Question to the Minister in charge of Youth and Culture. Why 
were local government boards not informed of the new policy under the Youth Employment Service at 
the same time that the applications were forwarded to the local government boards? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The local government boards were informed at the same time as the application 
forms, as far as I know, were forwarded because the brochures should have gone along with the 
application forms. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary question. This didn’t happen in our particular case. Is the Minister 
aware of the problems that the new policy under the Youth Employment Service is now causing local 
government boards across the province? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If the Member would tell me what problems I might be able to comment on them. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The policy has been changed and literally the policy, is 
the Minister aware that the new policy pretty well wipes out any opportunities for local government 
boards to make use of young students which they have formerly done in the last few years? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I am not aware of that, Mr. Speaker. The terms of the criteria have certainly 
been changed and I agree with that. Local governments employ students every summer for purposes of 
increasing and providing opportunities in the areas of culture and recreational activities so, therefore, 
local governments certainly can qualify under those criteria. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware most of the use that was 
put to Youth Employment Service in the past were for students to become actively engaged in work in 
helping local government boards which had nothing to do with the cultural aspect? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in the last two or three years local governments have been able to 
employ students under the youth subsidy by the Youth Employment Service for functions and purposes 
other than recreation. This year the criteria has been changed because there is only a certain amount of 
funding because of the restraint program and so the Member is correct. 
 

Amendment to The Election Act 
 
Mr. E.C. Malone (Lakeview Regina): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t like to interrupt the Attorney General 
when he is reading about his stock portfolios in the newspaper but if he would give me his attention for a 
moment I should like to ask him a question. I hope your stocks are 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1106 
 

going up, at least those types of stocks. 
 
The Attorney General indicated some time ago that he was going to bring in amendments to The 
Election Act especially as it affects election spending and election expenses. My question to him is, is 
such legislation planned for this Session and if so when can we expect to see the Bill? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, no legislation for this current Session. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Would the Attorney General then agree with me when I say that it is most difficult for 
parties other than the NDP to conduct any kind of electioneering at all at this time because we don’t 
know the rules of the game and that you are the only party that knows the rules and have been taking 
advantage of it by having ads in newspapers about potash and so on, and we can’t react because we 
don’t know what . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the Member is putting a debate. 
 

Swift Current Government Building 
 
Mr. D.M. Ham (Swift Current): — A question for the Minister of Government Services. Has your 
Department and the construction companies involved with the Swift Current Government Building 
reached a settlement on cost and are the costs being shared? 
 
Hon. G. T. Snyder (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, the Member refers to the Swift 
Current provincial office building and whatever additional costs might be involved. There has been an 
evaluation done. I am intending to provide the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and the Member for 
Swift Current with that information as they have both indicated an interest in this particular program. I 
think I should tell the Member that the cost of the pilings, which failed, will be the responsibility of the 
prime contractor. Whatever arrangement he reaches with Western Caissons will be an arrangement 
which he will work out with Western Caissons. There will be some additional expenditures over and 
above the original estimate because of the fact that a different type of piling is going to have to be used. 
That in itself shall represent additional cost. No more, I might add, than would have been the case if the 
original pilings had been substituted for the ones that will be used in the provincial office building when 
construction is recommenced. 
 
Mr. Ham: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister you are in fact assuring the House then that 
extra expenditures regarding the new pilings will not be involving taxpayers’ money? 
 
Mr. Snyder: — I am saying that there will be additional costs because the pilings that are being 
substituted for the original pilings will be more costly, by the very nature of the construction work that is 
involved in the type of pilings that will have to be used. The decision has been made that the original 
advice that was received as to the type of pilings to be used has been inadequate. Evidence has indicated 
that those pilings were 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1107 
 

inadequate under the circumstances. A different kind or style of pilings will have to be used and they 
will be somewhat more expensive than the original pilings. 
 
Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Minister indicate 
whether the contractor used the pilings it specified in the architects drawings? 
 
Mr. Snyder: — The decision was made to use the particular type of pilings, and I think we are getting 
into a lot of detail here, Mr. Speaker, but the kind of pilings that were used had been used on numerous 
other contracts and had proved to be satisfactory. The procedure involved a boring of a hole, the 
inserting of a tube, the insertion of wet concrete and packing the concrete in to bring into being a 
rounded out elephant foot at the bottom. This is the type of piling that was used in this set of 
circumstances. It proved not to be satisfactory, accordingly we will be going to another set of pilings, 
another style of pilings and these were the type of pilings that were recommended. My understanding is 
that the prime contractor is responsible for whatever costs that have been involved but the additional 
cost for inserting the new pilings will be an additional cost in terms of the overall construction expenses 
in the provincial office building situation. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. For the Minister’s benefit, I shall repeat the 
question. Did the contractor put in the pilings as specified on the tender by the architect’s drawings. 
Would you care to answer that? 
 
Mr. Snyder: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — If the contractor complied with the specifications of the tender, why is he being held 
responsible for the replacement. Obviously your architect is in error, is he not? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Member is aware of the Interim Report which specifies that the Minister does not 
have to answer if he does not want to answer. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Would the Speaker get the Minister to indicate that he is not going to answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think he has given the indication. I can’t drag it out of him. The Minister takes it on 
his own responsibility what he does. 
 
Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — A supplementary question to the Minister of Government Services. In regard 
to the correspondence which I had with you last week in regard to the Government building, did you 
indicate earlier that you would be reporting to myself and also to Mr. Ham by letter or by statement in 
the House regarding your findings. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1108 
 

Mr. Snyder: — I indicated to my departmental officials that the Member for Morse and the Member for 
Swift Current should be provided with the information relative to the inquiries that I received from you I 
believe yesterday or the day before. 
 

Renfrew Teachers 
 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask another question of the Attorney General along 
the same lines. Would the Attorney General agree with the position taken by the Premier that the 
Province of Saskatchewan will likely be an intervener in the Renfrew teachers’ case? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Has the Government of Saskatchewan given the 
preliminary notice required which would keep open the right of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
become an intervener and if one of the five provinces who have that preliminary notice? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I am not sure of that. I don’t believe preliminary notice has been given. I could be in 
error but in any event that story that you refer to originally was in error. We did not intervene nor had 
we given a preliminary notice at the time that CP story was written. There may have been something in 
the last couple of days for preserving some right on this but I don’t think so. I am not sure. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Government agree that there is a danger 
in the anti-inflation program because of its ability to move into provincial rights. I am thinking of areas 
such as Consumer Affairs and other areas that are related and that in all likelihood the Government of 
Saskatchewan will, therefore, be taking the position that the anti-inflation program is not constitutional 
and is not proper? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat what I said earlier. In due course, we’ll be making a 
full Ministerial Statement to the House and give the Member a full chance to comment on it. 
 

Amendments to Criminal Code 
 
Mr. S.J. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Attorney General. I gave him 
notice yesterday of a series of questions I want to ask in connection with recent amendments to the 
Criminal Code. I don’t know whether the Attorney General has had the opportunity yet to consider 
them, but I want to ask, in view of the recent changes to the drinking and driving sections of the 
Criminal Code, providing for roadside screening, are Saskatchewan police now being equipped with 
appropriate devices to have roadside screening in the province? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the position is that our department has not yet been informed by the 
Federal Government of the approved 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1109 
 

roadside screening device. Until such time as that device is identified and approved within the 
provisions of the law, the proposed law, it’s difficult for us to move. We are in constant communication 
with the officials I am advised and we’ll be taking appropriate action as we can. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — May I follow up, Mr. Speaker, with a supplementary on that. Is it your intention in 
due course to draw and provide the police with guidelines on the application of that section, which as 
you know is open to some misuse rather readily? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — May I ask you as the last supplementary, if you might give me some indication of 
when you expect to have those guidelines drawn and published, in rough terms? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I am sorry I cannot. I don’t anticipate that we will be in a position with respect to the 
actual device until some time into summer or later. We may be wrong on this because it does involve the 
Federal Government as well. Accordingly there is no sort of immediate timetable, like in terms of days 
or immediate weeks. They are working on them and all that I can say is that in due course it might even 
be some time after the sections are actually proclaimed and the devices are actually approved that these 
are outlined. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Last supplementary. May I ask whether or not you do agree with me that rather 
careful guidelines will be necessary, that is we have to provide the police with rather careful guidelines 
because the sections are indeed open from a civil libertarian point of view, to abuse? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, I would agree generally without getting hung up in the semantic words what 
careful means in terms of the guidelines. I believe that no matter how “careful” or otherwise guidelines 
are or aren’t, in the end result it will, to a large extent, depend on the discretion and the abilities of the 
police officer on the spot. 
 

Guaranteed Annual Income Plan 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Social Services. The 
National Welfare Council says that the provinces and the Federal Government are dragging their feet on 
the guaranteed annual income plan. Why would they make the allegation that Saskatchewan among 
others would be dragging its feet on the implementation of such a program? 
 
Hon. H. H. Rolfes (Minister of Social Services): — I can simply answer the Member that we are not 
dragging our feet. The next meeting of the federal and provincial Ministers of Social Services is on June 
1st and 2nd. The Hon. Marc Lalonde has asked us at that time to indicate whether or not the provinces 
would support the new income security supplementation program. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1110 
 

Mr. Lane: — Is the Province of Saskatchewan going to support the implementation of a guaranteed 
annual income for Canadians? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, that question was asked the other day and I said that I personally support it. 
I have, however, not made a proposal to Cabinet. I haven’t had an opportunity to discuss in detail with 
my deputy to see what changes the Federal Government has made since our February meeting, but if 
there are no substantial changes, my recommendation to Cabinet will be that we support it. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Do you expect to get Cabinet support for your position? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I will announce that in due time. 
 

Sand Infested with Leafy Spurge 
 
Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — I did have a question for the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding) and/or the Minister responsible for the Department of Highways (Mr. Kramer). Neither one of 
them are in the House, but I would maybe ask the Minister responsible for the Environment, would it be 
the Government’s policy or could they justify the use of gravel out of provincial government pits for 
road surfacing in the province that are totally infested with a weed, leafy spurge which is under The 
Noxious Weed Act? 
 
Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Would you state the last part of your question? 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Quite simply, you are using gravel out of a provincial gravel pit that is loaded with 
leafy spurge. You are putting it on the roads and spreading it all over the countryside. I’m just 
wondering, I know some of the measures which you have been taking, and I want to know if it’s right to 
continue using gravel out of those pits until you get the problem cleared up? 
 
Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, for the most part the gravel pits from which the Department of Highways 
extracts gravel are owned by the Department of Highways and are used for gravel purposes on the 
provincial highway system. Municipalities own their own gravel supplies and their own gravel pits and 
to the best of my knowledge municipalities do not extract gravel from Department of Highways owned 
pits or vice versa. Therefore, it would seem to me that if municipal governments were transporting 
gravel from their pits to put on their roads, that that would come within their jurisdiction. The 
Department of Highways would take all precautions in moving gravel from their pits to their highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1111 
 

Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Supplementary to the Attorney General. Would it fall in 
the jurisdiction of the RM government’s to prevent the Department of Highways from hauling gravel 
from a government gravel pit to prevent the spread of leafy spurge in their municipality? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You need a good lawyer for that and I’ll take notice. 
 

Amendments to Criminal Code 
 
Mr. Cameron: — A further question of the Attorney General with respect to recent amendments to the 
Criminal Code. The recent amendments provide for an absolute discharge in the case of an impaired 
driving charge. Can I ask him, if in Saskatchewan an absolute discharge were granted to a person 
charged with impaired driving, whether that person would still be subject to automatic six months’ 
suspension of driver’s licence? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member for giving me notice. I believe that if those 
sections are, of course, proclaimed and enacted and become law, that there is an argument which could 
be advanced that the six months’ suspension provision of The Vehicles Act would not apply. 
Accordingly we are contemplating appropriate amendments to our Vehicles Act. I don’t know if they 
will be coming in this Session. I hope so. If not certainly as soon as we can thereafter. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Well as a matter of supplementary just to clarify that. Do I gather from your answer 
that you would want to see to it that people remain subject to an automatic six months’ suspension even 
though they were given an absolute discharge? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I believe that here we are looking at the licensing powers of any province, 
including the Province of Saskatchewan. Up to now our policy has been, both the former administration, 
which Mr. Steuart was a member and ours, one I think of, fairly tough approach to drinking and driving, 
using the licensing power. I believe that absolute discharge approach in the Criminal Code is one that I 
support. I think, however, when it comes to the mounting death toll on highways and the like, that that’s 
something which we have to very carefully examine. 
 

Employment of Individual in Potash Corporation 
 

Hon. E.L. Cowley (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, last day I took notice on a question by the 
Member for Regina South with respect to the employment or possible employment of an individual with 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. In response to those questions I wish to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
I was contacted by a third party with respect to this individual by telephone outlining that he had certain 
qualifications etc. and that he might be of some use to the Potash Corporation. The dispensation of 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1112 
 

that was that I briefly discussed it with one of the officials in the Potash Corporation and that was the 
end of the matter. The Corporation nor myself have not contacted the individual and have not received 
an application from him. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Has the Government, apart from the Potash 
Corporation itself, been in contact with the individual? Is there a likelihood of the person being hired by 
the Government apart from the Potash Corporation? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! That’s a question that’s likely to require a detailed answer, since when the 
Member phrases it as the Government, that means all of the Departments of the Government must be 
checked before an accurate answer can be given. 
 
Mr. Cowley: — If I may respond for the Potash Corporation, the answer is no, on behalf of the 
Corporation. 
 

Amendments to Criminal Code 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask a further supplementary to the questions asked by my 
colleague from Regina South to the Hon. Attorney General? Would you contemplate then that someone 
who had received an absolute discharge on an impaired driving charge would not be subjected to a one 
year automatic loss of licence on the next occasion, or if someone were on a second conviction and 
would ordinarily lose his licence automatically for a year, would he miss a jump, if I may put it that 
way, and not move the following time to three years? Would he be missed from the leapfrogging effect 
of subsequent convictions? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Again, you ask if whether we contemplate, and it’s in that sort of sense that I make 
the observation. The basic contemplation is that we maintain the licensing suspension powers under our 
Vehicles Act as they presently are, hoping that they will not be affected by the conditional discharge, 
absolute discharge provisions for the social reasons. Also for the reasons that I have outlined earlier in 
the question to the Member for Regina South. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Uranium Royalty Structure 
 

Hon. E. Whelan (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 
should like to take this opportunity to outline for the Members of this House, the Uranium Royalty 
Structure which will come into effect May 1st of this year. I should like to outline the reasons for 
introducing a new structure at this time, as well, the process whereby we arrived at this particular 
structure. 
 
First, let me outline some important aspects of the industry which will help paint a background picture 
against which the need for a new royalty structure can be viewed. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1113 
 

As oil and fossil fuel reserves began to deplete and with the radical increase in oil prices by the OPEC 
countries major utilities across the world began giving increased attention to alternative methods of 
producing the energy required for their residential, commercial and industrial uses. One method which 
received increased attention was nuclear generated electricity. 
 
The raw material for this source of energy is uranium, a resource with which Saskatchewan is well 
blessed, but a resource of which our ultimate potential is not known. As utilities in various countries b 
began shifting their planning from oil generated towards nuclear generated electricity for their future 
requirements, former demand for uranium increased as did the price of uranium. Specifically the price 
increased from between six to eight dollars a pound of U308, (called yellow cake), in the early 1970’s 
until today when spot prices in the $40 to $50 pound range have occurred, with the long term contract 
price presently being between $25 and $30 a pound. 
 
This radical price increase has created a situation whereby companies are able to obtain what this 
government considers to be excess profits on the development of some rich uranium ore bodies, profits 
in the excess of what they could earn in other equal risk investments. 
 
Therefore, a year ago, a decision was made to develop a new royalty system which would return to the 
people of Saskatchewan what we consider to be a fair amount of this increased revenue created by the 
radical rise in the value of our resources. 
 
Six months ago we set out an initial proposal for the industry’s consideration and comments. In that 
proposal we outlined our policy objectives as follows: 
 

(1) To ensure that a fair share of the excess profits from uranium minerals is captured by the 
province as owner of the resource. 
 
(2) To provide the producers with an adequate rate of return on investment, bearing in mind that 
mineral exploration is a relatively risky proposition and that market fluctuations have been 
substantial. 
 
(3) To leave marginal production decisions as unaffected as possible. 
 
(4) To guarantee a minimum payment to the province in return for its resources so that resources are 
not given away just to maintain production. 

 
Since that time we have been meeting with the companies in order to take into consideration the 
concerns of the industry. Let me say that the co-operation which we have received from the industry in 
developing this new structure has been excellent. Discussions which we held with those who are now 
producing and those who will be going into production in the near future have been most fruitful. There 
has been an open and free exchange of financial sales and production, as well as an exchange of views 
on what the future might bring in terms of the supply and demand for uranium. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1114 
 

These discussions have been held in confidence by both the producers and ourselves, even though, at 
times it was difficult. As a result of these meaningful discussions the government has arrived at the 
following two part uranium royalty system. 
 

1. There will be a basic royalty of three per cent on the gross value of sales. 
 
2. There will be a graduated royalty with the marginal rate of tax to be determined on the basis of the 
rate of return on monies invested in the project. 

 
(a) In the calculation of the capital investment figure for the determination of the ratio of operating 
profits to capital investment, computed interest during the exploration and pre-production period 
will be included. 

 
(b) In the calculation of operating profits all real costs will be deducted from gross value of the 
sales, for example, marketing costs, operating capital, and head office expenditures will be 
deducted. 

 
(c) All social capital costs will either be capitalized in the investment base or will be deducted in 
determining the operating profit figure. 

 
(d) Amount paid to the Crown as a basic royalty will be deducted from gross value of sales and the 
determination of operating profits. 

 
(e) The amount of graduated royalty paid each year is determined with reference to a formula 
which is contained in the copies of the statements which I have sent across the floor. Basis for this 
formula is that the higher the ratio of operating profit to capital investment the higher will be the 
royalty rate. 

 
However, no graduated royalty will be payable until the producer or producers have accumulated 
operating profits equal to their investment base. That is, the graduated royalty does not come into effect 
until payout has been achieved. This particular provision should be most beneficial to the industry in 
financing the development of resources. 
 
In conjunction with these provisions a tax credit equal to 35 per cent of new exploration expenditures 
will be provided for those companies who carry out work in Saskatchewan. This credit will be allowed 
against graduated royalties. Mr. Speaker, with this particular royalty package and with the geological 
potential which exists in northern Saskatchewan, I am confident that the present high level of joint 
public — private exploration activity will continue and, indeed, accelerate with the discovery of each 
new ore body. 
 
I would once again like to express my thanks to those in the industry for the open minded manner in 
which they have entered into joint ventures with the Crown and the co-operation they have shown in 
providing the background, fiscal and operating data so necessary to the development of an equitable tax 
system which treats all producers in a fair and consistent manner, while taking into consideration the 
wide divergence and operating conditions which exist within the uranium industry in Saskatchewan. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1115 
 

Mr. Speaker: — While no objection is being taken to the Minister’s statement, I do want to take this 
opportunity to remind the Minister of the practice of the House. And the practice is that statements of 
this nature should be brief, factual and specific. I realize there might be some limitations with regard to 
getting that type of statement into as brief as possible a form, however, I think the Member should keep 
that in mind in the future. And also, the responses that are given to these are to be brief, strictly relevant 
and a debate cannot take place. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I do thank the Minister for sending me a copy 
of the statement just prior to rising to give it. While this is appreciated, it’s such a complicated type of 
statement I would have hoped that in matters of this nature that we could get the statement before it is 
made in the House so we could consider it and reply properly after the Minister makes his statement. In 
saying that, I do thank the Minister for sending this over to me, which has not been the practice that has 
been followed by other Members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first reaction in reading the statement and hearing the comments of the Members, while 
there is reference made all the way through, the comments to co-operation with the uranium industry, 
there is no indication whatsoever as to whether the uranium industry has accepted these proposals. I 
guess they are now more than proposals, these new laws that are being imposed by the Government. It is 
significant in my mind that the Minister did not make any reference to this whatsoever and I’ve been 
waiting with interest, what the uranium industry has to say about these proposals. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it’s with some suspicion that we look on this side of the House to any 
government proposal in the mining industry or mineral resource industry. Their record in the oil and 
potash industry is anything but admirable. In fact the record is such that both of those industries are in a 
state of chaos at this time. I note, however, that there has been some acknowledgement in the Minister’s 
statement as to 35 per cent tax credits on new exploration and this is certainly welcome. It would seem 
on a quick perusal that the provisions are not as stringent as those contained in the reserve tax for the 
potash industry. I think perhaps that one thing I could comment on, Mr. Speaker, is that it appears that 
the Government has finally learned its lesson. And that it’s trying to now attempt to be fair with the 
uranium industry. I only wish that they could make the same attempt and do the same things with the oil 
industry, potash industry and other hard rock mining industries in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Progressive Party, I should like to 
comment to the Minister. We’re pleased to see that on the surface it looks as if they have come to 
agreement with the mines and the meeting of the mines on percentages. We’ll be looking forward to 
seeing just what the industry has to say and, indeed, we hope the people of Saskatchewan are getting the 
best possible deal on our resources, and that we can give a fair return on the investment dollar and have 
a good working agreement with these mines. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1116 
 

Statement on Oral Question Period 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I have two statements which I wish to make. 
 
Initially I want to say that I regret the undignified verbal outburst by the Member for Thunder Creek 
during the Oral Question Period yesterday wherein he was, then and there, insisting on an explanation 
for being cut off by a call for the next question. 
 
Let me direct the Member to Recommendation No. 3 of the Interim Report. 
 

Mr. Speaker will not entertain Points of Order during the Oral Question Period. Points of Order may 
be raised later on Orders of the Day. 

 
Before Orders of the Day the Member properly asked why he was cut off. In that regard, I have now 
examined the verbatim transcript and confirmed my reasons for calling for the next question. 
 
The Member for Thunder Creek was, contrary to the Recommendation of the Interim Report of the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedure, 
 

(a) giving information 
 
(b) giving his opinion 
 
(c) doing it in the nature of debate 

 
therefore, I passed on to the next question as is specified in the Interim Report. 
 
The second Statement is as follows: 
 
We proceed through the business of this Legislature on the basic premise that all Members are 
honourable Members. 
 
I will concede that most, if not all, Members hold strong views and often express them strongly. That is 
to be expected and in fact protected. As Parliamentarians we all share a responsibility to preserve the 
forum wherein all Members can express their views on a continuing basis. 
 
The office of Speaker plays a part in this noteworthy endeavor. If the credibility of the office of Speaker 
is devaluated, without just cause, then, in the long term, our democratic institution will suffer. 
 
This brings me to the specific observation I want to make. On Monday April 12, 1976 the following 
statements were made during Oral Question Period by; 
 
(1) Leader of the Opposition in reference to the Speaker, “I wish you would quit protecting the 
Government.” I immediately asked the Leader of the Opposition to show from the record how I was 
protecting the Government. His immediate response was, “I will be very happy to do that Mr. Speaker.” 
I report now, that has not been done. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1117 
 

(2) The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley said: 
 

“Just protecting them,” which was a remark following my ruling that the Member for Regina 
Lakeview was debating an issue rather than placing an oral question. The Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley’s remark was obviously a remark similar to the charge by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

 
(3) The Member for Regina Lakeview said, before Orders of the Day, while raising a Point of Order, 
 

“The only conclusion that we can come to properly is that you are indeed protecting the Government 
from these embarrassing questions.” 

 
Later in the same statement the Member for Lakeview repeated his charge by saying in part: 
 

“The Government has been in our view, protected by the Chair from proper questioning.” 
 
These most serious charges if allowed to remain will be a blot on and an irritant in our Legislative 
processes. 
 
I have invited Members many time to see me about such situations, however, the invitation has not been 
accepted. 
 
Therefore, I propose the following order to assist the return to a normal legislative climate as specified 
in the rules established by you for the use of this Chamber: 
 
(1) That if the Members herein named establish proof from the record of their charges I will apologise to 
this Assembly. 
 
(2) That if the Members do not establish convincing proof then the onus will be on them to respond 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Before the Orders of the Day, I should like to reply briefly to the statement that you just 
read. 
 
I made the charge that you were protecting the Government a few days ago. I didn’t realize there was 
some time limit on it in supplying the proof. However, I have some examples here if you wish me to 
read them. What I’ll consider very seriously is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I want to interrupt the Member and say that I will not accept debate on this particular 
issue now. I’ve offered the Members the opportunity to come and see me and that offer stands and has 
always stood. I don’t intend to debate these particular statements at this time. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I’m not debating them I’m just — you’ve made a pretty serious charge, I want to point 
out two things: 
 
(a) I am prepared to give you the proof 
 
(b) I didn’t realize there was some time limit 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1118 
 

(c) Who is going to be the judge, who is going to be the judge if these statements are true . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The Member is debating the particular issue that is before us by his 
statement. There is no time limit, I never said there was any time limit. And I am willing to be 
convinced if the Members want to come and convince me that I was in error and I will apologize for it. 
But I am not going to take up the time of the House, nor, is it proper at this time to take up the time of 
the House on this matter. My door is open, I’ve invited the Members to come. Members cannot deny 
that I have not invited them before today. I don’t intend to debate that now. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Then I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you make it public, you ought to have phoned me, I 
expected you to bring me this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The Leader of the Opposition will realize that the slur is on my name 
and my office. And I’m suggesting that the Leader of the Opposition come and see me about it as he 
said he would in this Chamber and he hasn’t done. Order! I suggest to all Members that matters of this 
gravity should be dealt with as soon as possible, because they are of top priority with regard to the 
functioning of this Chamber. My door is open, I’ve invited the Members to come. Members cannot deny 
that I have not invited them before today. I don’t intend to debate that now. 
 

POINTS OF ORDER 
 

Question Period 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to raise a fresh Point of Order out of today’s Question 
Period. I asked, by way of supplementary, the question of the Minister of the Potash Corporation, about 
whether the Government in addition to the Potash Corporation had made any approach to a certain 
individual. Your response to my question, and you ruled it out of order, was because that encompassed 
the whole Government. Yesterday you ruled a question out of order for the same reason. I ask Mr. 
Speaker to bear in mind I was asking the Provincial Secretary, a Member of the Cabinet, that question. 
Now I want only to say that, Mr. Speaker, there are two ways in which one can interpret the rules. One 
is in a narrow legalistic technical way, which is unacceptable. The other is to give them a fair, large and 
liberal interpretation which is acceptable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with every deference . . . 
 
Mr. Allen: — Acceptable to you. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — That’s acceptable to the House and it is the only way the Question Period is going to 
operate properly. With respect, I say that the way in which my question was ruled out of order yesterday 
is applying the former interpretation, strict, narrow and legalistic. And the result of it is, Mr. Speaker, 
that it appears to us though the Government is protected from embarrassing questions. 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1119 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again, I want to express the opinion that I think we are getting into a 
very unfortunate habit, not habit but circumstances, with respect to Question Period. No doubt the 
Members opposite feel they are justified on this thing. Maybe this Question Period isn’t working. I don’t 
know. I simply want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that with respect to the Point of Order raised by the 
Member for Regina South, it certainly has been the custom of this House for the nine years that I have 
been in it, that when a Member asks a question, the effect of which is, has the Government hired, or 
contacted, I’m not using the exact words but the key word being “Government”, an individual, Joe Blow 
or whoever he happens to be, directs it. The custom has been when the question has appeared on the 
written blues or whites or in any other fashion, that the Minister or the Speaker now under the new rules 
says, it doesn’t pertain to Roy Romanow, Attorney General. It pertains to the Government as a whole, 
seventeen Ministers, seventeen Crown agencies, some one has to check that out and that is the 
Provincial Secretary. 
 
It seems to me with respect, again, I am leery of doing this because of what the Opposition is trying to 
say. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — All he need say . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — He said it was out of Order, no, no. Mr. Speaker, we are talking to the Hon. Member 
for Regina South. The Member for Regina South is now changing the ground rules of the debate. The 
ground rules of the debate as he raised in his Point of Order was Mr. Speaker’s ruling, not what the 
Minister should or shouldn’t have answered, that is one issue. You are arguing on the purposes of this 
debate whether or not Mr. Speaker had a proper Point of Order ruling you out of order. I am trying to 
simply say to you, that he did have by virtue of the established tradition of this House for those types of 
questions. Anybody would substantiate that. Even the Leader of the Opposition, I am sure. We argue 
that, I say with respect, that is not a proper Point of Order to be taken in this particular case. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I have heard points from both sides of the House on this, I don’t think I require 
any further comments . . . 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, with all respect . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — . . . I don’t require any further comments. 
 
Mr. Lane: — You have to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I don’t have to take any further comments, as a matter of fact and the Member for 
Qu’Appelle knows that. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — May I speak to the ruling myself. 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1120 
 

Mr. Speaker: — No, the Member cannot interrupt now. I will give the Member an opportunity. I have 
made the statement and the statement is not subject to question. The Member for Regina South is asking 
me for a ruling on a decision today. And I am about to give him my comments on that. 
 
Members will recognize that the origin of the oral question is the written question. That is, I believe 
quite clear, if you go back hundreds of years in parliamentary tradition. What does the written question 
have to do? The written question has to conform to certain rules. If it asks for information over a long 
period of time or covering a number of departments, it has to be converted to an Order for Return and 
dealt with in that manner. 
 
Those same ground rules apply to the oral questions so that when a Member asks for an answer which 
will in fact require a survey of all the departments of Government, then that question is out of order as 
an oral question. I think parliamentary tradition will show that. 
 
So, therefore, I reject out of hand the comments of the Member for Regina South that I am protecting the 
Government. The Member is confusing the restrictions that are imposed on him by the rules and me 
enforcing the rules in the House. In fact if the Member had submitted that as a written question, it would 
have been changed to an Order for Return. The Member will have to admit that that is what would 
happen. Therefore, it is not a proper question for this Oral Question Period. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — I asked if he would . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I don’t intend to get into the detail of the particular incident. I am just saying that we 
cannot survey all the departments here in the Oral Question Period. That is an impossibility. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order in connection with your statement today, I should like 
to advise you, that I would be glad to comment on the remarks that I made which were covered by you 
at any time, including right now in this House. The remarks that you brought into question were made in 
this House, your statement of today was given in this House, if you want me to respond about my 
remarks in your statement today, I will give it in this House, but I will not be giving it to you in your 
office, because the statements were made publicly, your statement was publicly. And I believe the 
people of Saskatchewan are entitled to hear my remarks publicly. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I rise on a Point of Order from yesterday. Mr. Speaker, for the first 
session if anyone had challenged you during that first session, I would have been the first to stand up to 
defend you. I would have been the first to stand up and defend you for a good portion of this session. In 
addition, to a good portion of the first couple of weeks in the new Question Period. Mr. Speaker, I am 
not capable of theatrics in losing my temper. When I lose it, I lose it very genuinely. I wish I did have 
the capability for the theatrics that some of the Members across the way do, but I don’t . . . 



 
April 14, 1976 

 

1121 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I am not going to allow the Member to continue. The record will show 
that the Member is debating the issue and not raising the Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, is that in this House we have a double standard, we have 
a set of rules for this side of the House, we have a set of rules for that side . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Member is debating the issue. He is not stating the Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — You call the same set of rules over there that you do for here. I agree with you, 
questions should be brief and to the point as much as possible. But you certainly don’t enforce answers, 
brief and to the point. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Member has to bring that up at the time that it occurs. You are getting into 
a general discussion. If the Member wants to refer to some specific answer today, I will deal with it, not 
after weeks have gone by. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer to this business of a 24 hour ruling. I asked a 
question yesterday and you said I will give you an answer tomorrow, that is like a referee calling back a 
touchdown pass and saying I will take a look at the video tape and see how it went . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! That is not a Point of Order. The Member is not making a Point of Order now. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, raising a matter that was raised immediately with regard to the question 
period. The Attorney General again has impliedly threatened to do away with this Question Period by 
saying, maybe this thing is working, maybe it isn’t. Every time we get into a hassle as to making this 
thing work, the Attorney General gets up and makes threats that the Government is going to pull this 
Question Period and the new form of question period out. I don’t think that is proper for the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I don’t know when the Attorney General said that, maybe he did say it. There are all 
kinds of comments in the House and some of them are quite regrettable. Maybe that is regrettable. I 
didn’t hear it. The Attorney General or any other Member has the right to say we should do away with 
the Question Period, you have a right to say that if you wish. It is not a Point of Order that he says that. 
 
Mr. Lane: — If you start letting the Ministers answer, I think the Question Period should go to an hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I am not stopping the Ministers from answering 



 
April 14, 1976 
 

1122 
 

them. The Member is confusing the rules with the enforcement of the rules now. If you don’t like the 
rules, then you should change the rules. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to rise on a Point of Order. That is to speak to the point made by 
the Member for Qu’Appelle. The remark that I said, I admit I said it. These Members attribute that I’m 
trying to use it as a threat. I shouldn’t have said it, perhaps. In retrospect I was trying to do it in a 
conciliatory fashion, to say maybe it isn’t working as well as it should. Everything with these fellows 
opposite is politics. But the simple fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the Question Period is 
experimental. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I listened patiently to the Member for Qu’Appelle, just finished listening to him and he 
wasn’t making a Point of Order. Now give the Attorney General the same courtesy. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I will forget it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It is out of order as a matter of fact the same as the Member for Qu’Appelle was. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It is okay, Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw my remarks. 
 

MOTION 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved, seconded by the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek): 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 15, 1976, it do stand adjourned until 
Monday, April 19, 1976. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:37 o’clock p.m. 
 


