






















































Hansard: January 05, 1976


 
  
 

1473 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Monday, January 5, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to the Members of this Assembly two very distinguished 
gentlemen, one the Hon. Alvin Hamilton, Member of the Privy Council and Member of Parliament for 
Qu'Appelle-Moose Mountain, and secondly, Mr. Frank Hamilton, Member of Parliament for Swift 
Current-Maple Creek. They are here to assist all of us I am sure in our endeavours. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SOME NOVAPHARM DRUGS NOT ACCEPTABLE 
 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I have a 
question I should like to direct to the Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins). The question, Mr. Speaker, deals 
with a drug firm known as NovaPharm and I would ask your indulgence for a moment because I have to 
preface my question with a few facts. 
 
The question deals, Mr. Speaker, with a publication put out by the Department of National Health and 
Welfare called Quad Review Four, I am not sure if the minister is familiar with this publication, but 
what it does is rate drug companies and the drugs that they produce and sell to the public. In the 
introduction it says briefly: 
 

This information is presented so that members of the health professions may decide on 
the basis of scientific and technical facts which drug product to select. Your appraisal and 
use of these data will enable Canadians to obtain lower price drugs at high quality. 

 
Now, in view of the fact that the Government is considering either purchasing this company in its 
entirety or an interest in it, Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw the Minister's attention to the report and 
indicate to him that in the report there are some 63 items or drugs that are sold by NovaPharm that are 
listed in the review. Out of those 63 items, 46 of them are rated as unsatisfactory according to the 
standards set by the Department of National Health and Welfare in this review. They are unsatisfactory 
for various reasons but they are unsatisfactory, that is 73 per cent of them. I understand that any 
physician or pharmacist who would look at this review before prescribing a drug would note the U 
rating and in that event would likely prescribe another drug, because of the U rating. My question to the 
Minister, is he aware of this publication and the facts that are contained therein? 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1474 
 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen the publication but I must 
inform the Member that there is a committee of pharmacologists and pharmacists who review all of the 
drugs that go into the formulary. They are constantly reviewing these drugs on a continuing basis and 
obviously they would take into account all of the facts that he presents in that particular article in 
relation to NovaPharm. I am positive that this committee is very careful in the scrutiny of the drugs that 
are approved for the drug program of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. The Quad Review Four which I have 
here and I will send it over to the Minister, also indicates that because of these U ratings that the Federal 
Government has a number of options ranging from a warning to the drug company or advice to the drug 
company to change their procedures to the other extreme of prosecutions. The Minister has indicated 
that he is not aware of the review but would he undertake in the not too distant future to check to see if 
NovaPharm has been prosecuted or if it hasn't been prosecuted, what steps have been taken by the 
Federal Government to have their U ratings on the various drugs changed? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I am not absolutely certain that I have clearly in my own mind what 
the Member has in mind with relation to this particular question, but I would point out again that the 
committee reviews and the committee is certainly going to make certain that every drug that goes into 
that formulary is one that is approved by that committee which consists of pharmacists, pharmacologists 
and physicians in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A final supplementary, I don't think the Minister is following me and I apologize. I 
am not talking about the review committee that looks after pharmacare in Saskatchewan, I am talking 
about a publication of the Federal Government that rates various drug firms and it doesn't matter to me 
what the Saskatchewan review committee does so much as what this publication says, so my question 
finally to the Minister is, in view of this information, in view of the findings by the Department of 
National Health and Welfare, would you at least undertake to check to see how far you have advanced in 
trying to buy this company and if you find that the company has been prosecuted, or if their products are 
unacceptable, would you at least change your mind and not buy this company which is shown to be 
unsatisfactory by this publication? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I propose to respond to that on behalf of the Government. The 
question states a fact which is not a fact. The first question presupposed that the Government was 
considering buying NovaPharm. That is false. The final question asked us whether we will change our 
mind. The answer is, we have not made up our mind. There is no decision to buy NovaPharm. There is 
no consideration by the Cabinet or the Government to buy NovaPharm and any questions asked on that 
assumption are erroneous. 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1475 
 

RECONSIDER GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSAL RE POTASH 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Before the Orders of the Day I have a question I would like 
to direct to the Premier. In view again of the magnitude of the Government's proposals with regard to the 
potash industry and the Premier's recent indication that in his own view perhaps as much as half the 
province is opposed to the Government's proposals, is the Government prepared now to reconsider its 
position and hold a series of public hearings across the province with respect to the Government's plan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Government policy will be announced in due course. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — May I ask you specifically, if I gather from your comment you may be 
considering that, you may be considering a series of public hearings. We had put forward a second 
proposal and would like to ask you if you are now prepared, through the Speaker, to consider the 
alternative which we put to you and that is to have the matter together with your studies, financial data, 
market analysis and so on, put through a committee of the Members of the House and to have them take 
a careful look at the proposal and report back to the House? Are you prepared to reconsider that one? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — My last supplementary. Are you prepared as a minimum, assuming you reject the 
first which I gather you are considering, to initiate a series of public information or discussion forums 
around the province in various centres to which would be invited spokesmen for the potash industry, the 
Government and the Opposition, to lay the thing before the people of the province in some more 
satisfactory way than what has been done to date? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt whether there would be much profit in having government 
spokesmen on the one side and potash spokesmen on the other side and in a very redundant way, having 
representatives of the Opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It is rather clear that one potash industry has at least two spokesmen other than 
itself in this province and I wouldn't want to load the meetings in that unfair way. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I think you responded to the first part of the question, Mr. Speaker, not the 
balance. I asked him, is he prepared to initiate public discussion forums of this kind, would he answer 
that one? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I have no further comment to add to what I addressed to the House. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1476 
 

USA TO TRADE WITH USSR FOR POTASH 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, a question directed to the Premier. Is the Premier 
aware that the United States is making arrangements with the Government of the USSR to trade potash 
for surplus American wheat? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No. 
 
MR. HAM: — First supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Premier aware of the implications for 
Saskatchewan agriculture and the Saskatchewan potash market if the proposed agreement is entered 
into? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not aware of any such proposed agreement. 
 
MR. HAM: — Second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In light of the proposed agreement, will the 
Premier withdraw this legislation before it is too late or call a general election and let the people of 
Saskatchewan pass judgment? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — In light of my absence of knowledge of a proposed agreement I am not prepared 
to withdraw any legislation. 
 

PROVINCIAL ANTI-INFLATION PROGRAM 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 
the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek). I am not sure if the Minister, would he indicate whether he has 
seen this CUPE Saskatchewan Division newsletter, 'Pressure Needed on the NDP': 
 

The NDP Provincial Government cannot ride the fence forever. If wage controls are ever 
implemented in Saskatchewan the Provincial NDP must be held responsible. . . 

 
What I am really asking the Minister, could he inform the Members of the House when and if the 
Government of Saskatchewan is going to introduce to this House an anti-inflation program? Already two 
and one-half months have gone by and I think the people of Saskatchewan, trade unions, collective 
bargaining negotiations now underway are waiting very, very anxiously for information as to any date. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member made reference to 
some letter, I have not seen the letter he is referring to. As far as the Government's anti-inflation 
program, I might inform the Hon. Member when the regulations were announced, I believe on 
December 18th, by the Prime Minister, together with the 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1477 
 

Hon. Mr. Macdonald, these are regulations under Bill C-73. I regret to say that those regulations didn't 
reach us until December 23rd. They chose to make them known to the Press but yet did not see fit to 
provide them to the Provincial Governments, at least not to us, and it is expected that the provinces are 
to respond quickly. The regulations as Mr. Macdonald described are complex and complicated. At the 
present time we are reviewing the regulations very thoroughly and their implications for the 
Saskatchewan economy. Certainly we as a government have indicated that we are prepared to work with 
the Federal Government to see that all steps are taken to control inflation to a minimum. Our 
Government policy will be announced in due course. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Really what this article says is that you 
are going to get saddle sore from riding both sides of the issue. I should like to ask the Minister, is it the 
Minister's intention or the Government's intention to set up their own anti-inflation board so that the 
people of Saskatchewan will have an indication, particularly those now in the process of negotiation, as 
to whether they will be dealing through the Provincial Government or not? Is that a fact? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, just to the first part of that question, may I inform the Hon. Member 
there is no province I am aware of that so far has entered into an agreement with the Federal 
Government, so if he is trying to blame the Saskatchewan Government may I inform the Hon. Member 
to the best of my knowledge, based on our checking, certainly as late as December 31st, no province in 
Canada has entered into an agreement with the Federal Government or has made any firm commitment. 
So our position is no different from that of any other province and we are, as I said, studying the 
problem, it's a complex problem, and we will be announcing our position fairly soon. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary question. A few weeks ago I asked the Minister if the 
Government of Saskatchewan was going to come out with a definite program on some cuts of its own. 
Could you indicate whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan or the Treasury Board has now 
come to a conclusion as to what particular programs or items, or what steps the Government of 
Saskatchewan is going to use to reduce expenditures to cut unnecessary expenditures and to take some 
leadership? Have you come to any final decision? Is it your intention to announce some leadership and 
some cutbacks by the Government of Saskatchewan as well as the signing of an agreement with the 
Federal Government? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — The answer is, yes. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1478 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Romanow that Bill No. 1 - 
An Act respecting the Development of Potash Resources in Saskatchewan, be now read a second 
time, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lane. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is nice to be back in the 
Legislature again and it is nice to be resuming this great potash debate in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
One of the things that I am sure has disappointed Members on both sides or both parties on this side of 
the House is the failure of the Government after the Christmas recess to sit back and assess the impact of 
this potash legislation. They haven't apparently come in with any change of heart which is certainly very 
disappointing to me and certainly to industry right across Canada. I am certain they have also had an 
opportunity to go out in the Province of Saskatchewan and get an assessment of public reaction. I know 
that Members on this side of the House have certainly had an indication of public reaction and it is very, 
very critical of the Government's actions at this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — It is a disappointment. This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time I have 
had an opportunity to participate in the debate on Bill 1. It gives me a lot of scope for a wide range in 
opportunities to sit down and assess some things and today I should like to take the opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, if I might, to look at the principle of taxation. 
 
Now let's assess very carefully the arguments of the NDP as presented by the Attorney General. They 
are very simply put, I think they can be put into three areas. No. 1, might suggest that resource benefits 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan and, of course, I don't think there is any debate in this particular 
area whatsoever. The second one, expansion has not occurred and therefore they feel that the only way 
that they assure expansion of the potash industry in the Province of Saskatchewan is by expropriation, 
entering into the business and taking over the mines themselves. The third, of course, they have taken 
very strong exception to the legal entanglements and they suggest that this might jeopardize tax revenue 
or the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say and I want to say very clearly, I don't believe that this is the heart of the 
matter. This is only an excuse. The real argument goes much deeper and the real argument goes to the 
whole question of fair taxation. Let me put it this way, what is the right of the NDP or any government 
in the Dominion of Canada, to tax any individual or any company? The second point, what level of tax 
is just and fair? In other words, how far can a government go in taxing an individual, a company or a 
corporation. The third, what recourse has an individual or a company when the tax is unjust? This is the 
real heart of this issue, Mr. Speaker, and of course let's look at the potash industry. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1479 
 

I think when anybody starts to talk about taxation there are two very, very basic principles that must be 
adhered to. The first one, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are very fond of standing up and talking about taxation 
must be based on ability to pay. And how often have we heard the Premier and Members of the Treasury 
Bench stand up in this Assembly and start to talk about any tax should be based on the ability pay. And I 
recall the arguments with great clarity the last time they raised the income tax. Then, of course, we have 
many examples in the Province of Saskatchewan where the NDP attempted to follow that principle. I 
mentioned the income tax, I think of succession duties, where they abhor the principle of somebody who 
has saved for all of his life, worked to put funds and savings aside, paid taxes on them and then would 
pass them on to his beneficiaries. But they say, oh, no, we should tax the rich because they have the 
ability to pay. I think of the gift tax, I could go on and on. But in this particular legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and in the quarrel with the potash industry they have completely ignored in the reserve tax the whole 
principle of the ability to pay of an individual or a corporation. And I intend to get into that in detail 
later. 
 
The second principle of good taxation, Mr. Speaker, is that all individuals or companies should be taxed 
and treated as equally as possible. When we talk about equality and taxation and the principle of taxation 
of course I think all of us are aware that it is sometimes very difficult to tax different industries as 
equitably as possible. I think of the retail industry and so forth. But the Dominion of Canada, all 
governments at both federal and provincial levels have made very, very sincere attempts, first of all to 
treat everybody individually, equally. 
 
Let's take the individual income tax. You and I know that it's on a progressive scale. People who have a 
taxable income of a certain level are treated exactly equal, and as their taxable income increases the tax 
level goes up but it goes up equally with all the individuals right across the Dominion of Canada. I think 
of the gasoline tax, or the consumption taxes, I think of corporate taxes (another good illustration). A 
corporate tax is based on the principle of equality of payment. That each individual industry should pay 
according to their profits. Mr. Speaker, I think I can go on and point out two other consumption taxes 
such as sales tax and so forth. 
 
But let's look at the potash tax and particularly the prorationing tax and the reserve tax. One of the most 
difficult things in Saskatchewan is that very few people understand what the reserve tax is. Let me start 
off with the prorationing tax, Mr. Speaker. First of all the NDP have gone into great lengths and great 
arguments to indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that in 1971 when they became the Government 
that the potash companies were all in favour of prorationing, because they were in difficulties and that 
they needed to space out their production capacity, divide up the markets in order to protect all the 
industries. They said that, they made no bones about it. That the move of Ross Thatcher and the 
leadership that he provided across Canada in the international field had saved the potash industry from 
depression and some of the mines from outright closure. Then they go on and say, but later on in 1972 
and 1973, they change their mind. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell them it was not the potash companies that 
changed their minds. It was the 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1480 
 

NDP who changed their mind because they immediately attempted to change a conservation measure 
into a taxation measure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The potash prorationing scheme had one purpose in mind and that was to 
conserve and prevent dumping on the international market. It was an attempt to spread out the market 
equally among all the potash corporations or companies in Saskatchewan. It was not intended to be a tax 
and yet all of a sudden the NDP, when the tide began to turn, and the potash industries began to see 
some daylight, they immediately took this conservation measure and decided that this should become a 
taxation measure and the result of course followed. There was only one result, it meant that the NDP 
Government was going to have permanent control over the production and the marketing of the potash 
industry in Saskatchewan. And it is no wonder that the companies objected. And of course that tax was 
also not based on ability to pay. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let's go to the reserve tax. And this is really what the whole fight in this particular 
Legislature with the NDP Government and with of course the potash industry is all about. I don't know, 
Mr. Speaker, of a more insidious tax on any industry in the Dominion of Canada than the reserve tax. I 
don't think there is anybody in the Province of Saskatchewan who really understands the reserve tax 
because it is a very complicated formula. I want to very simply if I can try to, point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan and for the record some of those very complex factors that are taken into consideration. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Speaker, it's a very complicated formula. It starts off with the factor called the rated 
annual productive capacity. And of course, Mr. Speaker, each mine has a designated capacity by the 
Department of Mineral Resources, by the Minister, and this capacity cannot decrease, but it can increase 
if productive capacity goes up and does not take into consideration failing markets or anything else. 
 
The second thing it takes into consideration is the average selling price. This also is determined by the 
Minister and based on the total average price of potash sold in the previous 12 months, and of course it 
doesn't take into consideration any long term contracts that perhaps give a good price when things are 
tough in the potash industry and perhaps gives a reduced price when things start to go up. You and I 
know that there are one or two potash mines in serious trouble because of long term contracts. 
 
The third thing is they have a scale factor determined by the Minister and it varies with a 50 cent 
increment along with the rate of capacity. 
 
The next thing they have, they have an ore grade factor. And of course the grade of mine ore based on a 
12 month production, on the previous 12 months. Of course I don't think there is anything wrong with 
that because I think what they really do is they take the productive capacity of that individual mine and 
they assess the grade of ore that has been sold over the previous 12 months and they give it that ore 
grade factor. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1481 
 

The next thing they come to is the capital investment factor, Mr. Speaker. Now this is calculated by 
dividing the gross investment in mines for the product 100 times the rated capacity and I'm not going to 
try to explain that. It's pretty complicated. 
 
And they have a mill rate. A quarterly rate set by the Department. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — . . . (unintelligible) 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Is that the Whip at it goodness. Please don't — be quiet, polite, courteous 
because I'm going to be here a long time today and you might as well listen very, very carefully. Not 
only that, you might learn something from all this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The sixth factor of course is the quarterly rate set by the Department of Mineral 
Resources which will vary at a 50 cent increment with the rate of potash. 
 
What it comes to, Mr. Speaker, is this: The annual capacity is multiplied by the scaled factor for $40 per 
ton price. One grade times the grade factor times the fixed price of $40 times 20, which of course is the 
mill rate, divided by the capital investment. Now that's a very complicated formula and nobody in the 
Province of Saskatchewan really understands it, least of all the Members opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it has one specific result. It is the tax in Canada on an industry that is completely 
unbearable; it is backbreaking; it has the potential to destroy it. First of all, Mr. Speaker, it has no 
relation to profit. The price of potash or the cost of operation of a potash mine could go up and the 
profits go down and the reserve tax stays the same, Mr. Speaker, or relatively the same. It's not related to 
product, it's not related to the ability to pay, and this is the biggest objection of the potash companies and 
the potash corporations. And you know, this is the Government across there, that said that an individual, 
particularly if he is rich, should pay heavy taxes according to his ability to pay. But on the potash 
industry they completely ignore it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second thing, the higher the price of potash, the worse the tax discriminates against the company. 
Now if you can believe this, the higher the price of potash, the worse it is on the company. Doesn't that 
seem ridiculous for a tax, that if the amount of the product or the value of the product goes up that it 
should be worse on the industry? In other words, instead of encouraging them to sell, encouraging them 
to expand, encouraging them to enlarge, what it really does, as the price of potash goes up, its value, it 
completely discourages the mine. 
 
The next thing it does, it discriminates against the large producer. And this is another thing. It actually, 
Mr. Speaker, on the small production here (and I am going to read you an essay which clearly points out 
some calculations) that a small producer pays about 76 per cent according to an example given. When 
you get into the large producer he pays 87 or 90 per cent on the reserve tax. It discriminates against the 
larger one, yet 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1482 
 

at the same time this, the Government says, the reason we are taking them over is because they refuse to 
expand. 
 
Also, another thing it does, the formula penalizes a mine constructed in the low per ton capacity cost. In 
other words, because the formula is divided by the capital investment factor, any company which has a 
low per ton capacity cost and does a good job of construction of the mine, uses efficiency, gets its 
machinery (perhaps it has been built before the real inflationary period started) that particular company 
is penalized. 
 
The next thing, older mines are penalized of course, when the inflationary dollar was not as high as it 
now is. In other words, if the mine was built back in 1966 or 1967, as compared to one built in 1969 or 
1970, the older mine is actually penalized once again because of the division by the capital investment 
factor. 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, is the tax credit provisions. For decreases in production are inadequate and 
badly timed. Now when this particular tax was put in (and I don't know if the Minister has changed it) 
theoretically a mine could go out of production for a whole year and still have to pay the reserve tax. Mr. 
Speaker, that's how bad it is. 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, the tax overpayment being credited in the next quarter, or in the preceding 
tax period is without interest. In other words, if a corporation pays the reserve tax, if they pay too much, 
the government takes that money, puts it in the consolidated fund and then finds that that company has 
overpaid they don't pay them any interest and yet they have their money. 
 
The next thing is what the potash company objects to more than any other single thing, it is that the 
Government sets the tax rates by regulation and by Ministerial discretion. Mr. Speaker, here are five or 
six reasons why the potash industry objects very strenuously to the whole concept of taxation of the 
potash industry by the reserve tax. 
 
Let's examine this tax on the potash industry. First of all, Mr. Speaker, it is the highest tax on any 
industry in the Dominion of Canada. There is no industry, Mr. Speaker, not lumber, not oil, not uranium, 
not coal, not agriculture, not manufacturing, no industry in the Dominion of Canada is taxed at the level 
that the potash industry in Saskatchewan is taxed at. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Who says so? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I say so. And, Mr. Speaker, you try to find another industry taxed at 85 or 90 
per cent in the Dominion of Canada, and in my research I certainly can't find one and I should love the 
Attorney General, when he closes debate, to stand up and enumerate industries that are taxed at 85 per 
cent or 90 per cent of their profits. And if it's not the highest in the country, there may be one or two 
more, but I certainly don't know them, and I would certainly like to find if the Attorney General or the 
Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Whelan) can present an example of an industry that is taxed as high 
as the potash industry in the Dominion of Canada. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1483 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we had one other industry in Saskatchewan where we tried to turn around and 
find an example of where the NDP Government decided that they were going to put 100 per cent - over 
$3 a barrel - in Bill 42. Of course, we saw the disastrous impact of Bill 42. Figures have been quoted in 
this debate how the number of wells drilled in Saskatchewan in 1975 was something in the 
neighborhood of 1,000. In a time when energy is disappearing in our country and energy resources are in 
demand and are required and are needed, here we turn around and find that the Government, under Bill 
42, didn't learn a lesson. They are now busy amending Bill 42, trying to amend the regulations, trying to 
attract the industry back. Mr. Speaker, they saw what happened to an industry that was taxed beyond its 
capacity to pay and didn't take into consideration relocation costs, new oil discovery costs, didn't take 
into consideration any of the other factors. 
 
This tax, Mr. Speaker, makes absolutely no allowance for the years of loss or difficulty of the potash 
industry. When you consider that the potash industry in the Province of Saskatchewan has had five or 
six or seven or eight years of great difficulty, for years they were dumping it on the national market at 
something in the neighborhood of $12.50 per ton in order to try to keep the doors open, then they turned 
around and had a bare minimum price of $18 a ton which was its costs, and everyone knows, and the 
Minister of Mineral Resources has put out a pamphlet showing the difficulty that the potash industry had 
for years and yet the reserve tax makes no allowance whatsoever to recapture capital investment. It 
makes no provision for return, to retire the debt of the original investment, Mr. Speaker. When you take 
85 per cent of the revenue before taxes, and turn around and make it a tax, and then expect the remainder 
to pay off the capital debt, to make a return to the shareholder and then at the same time to attract 
expansion, that is being ridiculous. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the reserve tax because it's not based on the ability to pay, it doesn't have any 
relationship to profit whatsoever, will not build confidence in the shareholders which could determine 
whether or not, Mr. Speaker, they should go into expansion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the reserve tax was a deliberate attempt by the NDP to create a 
controversy with the potash industry to turn around and put forward their plan of expropriation and to 
get into the potash industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think there is any question about it. What about the NDP 
charge about refusing to expand? Let's examine that for a moment. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we attempted to demonstrate that the reserve tax is an unfair tax. That the 
reserve tax, Mr. Speaker, had no relation to profit, had no relation to the ability to pay, was excessive, 
almost to the point where it was confiscation. Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP say they will take over this 
industry because they refuse to expand. Mr. Speaker, let me ask any sensible man in this Assembly or 
any sensible man in Saskatchewan. Would you expand under these circumstances? 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1484 
 

Would you expand when there was no opportunity for a return on your investment? Would you expand 
when there was little opportunity to make a profit? Would you expand when a tax such as the reserve tax 
had all these detrimental effects on the industry? Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe the NDP expected 
the potash industry to expand. I think they hoped it would not expand. I think that this was really the 
scenario that the Attorney General and that the Premier and that the NDP Cabinet really intended with 
the institution of the reserve tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they saw what happened in British Columbia. The reserve tax was based and patterned 
after a tax on the copper industry or the mining industry in British Columbia. When they turned around 
and saw what happened in British Columbia where the copper mines were actually operating at a loss. 
They turned around and saw the disastrous impact on the mining industry in British Columbia where 
mine after mine closed its doors, where exploration and development almost came to a standstill and yet, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP expected the industry to expand under these circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could they expand when they hadn't even paid back the original capital investment 
and they could see no way in which they could do. 
 
Now, let's go to the third thing. What protection or what recourse has an individual or a company or a 
corporation when they are taxed unjustly or unfairly in the Province of Saskatchewan or any province or 
by the Federal Government? Mr. Speaker, how often have we heard the NDP going around the province 
making the claim that the potash industry had the audacity to challenge in the courts the reserve tax or 
the prorationing tax. Mr. Speaker, there is only one alternative, one recourse that any individual or any 
company or corporation has, if they are being taxed unjustly, unequally or without the ability to pay. 
That is the right to go to the courts. Here the NDP are standing up in this House, standing up going 
around the province of Saskatchewan attacking the potash corporations for going to the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we call justice. 
 
The NDP Government I suggest, Mr. Speaker, has 10,000 people under charges by the Crown today in 
the Province of Saskatchewan. When you take in traffic fines, criminal charges, charges against the 
Crown, litigation against company expropriation and so forth. They reserve the right, Mr. Speaker, to go 
to the courts any time they want, if they feel they are not being treated fairly and justly. But the only 
recourse that an individual has, the only recourse that anyone has when taxation is unfair, when taxation 
is discriminatory is to go to the courts and this is exactly what the potash companies have done. 
 
Surely I should like to suggest that the NDP should examine, very, very carefully what has occurred in 
the Province of British Columbia. First of all, Mr. Speaker, they watched the Premier of British 
Columbia go down to personal defeat and they watched the Government of the NDP in British Columbia 
go down to personal defeat with no loss in popular support. They almost maintained an identical ratio of 
the popular vote that occurred in British Columbia. I want to tell them what defeated the Government in 
British Columbia and anyone from British Columbia will tell them, was the resource policy of the 
British Columbia Government, 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1485 
 

their attitude toward mining, their attitude toward lumber and their attitude on oil, on the whole resource 
industry, its lack of exploration and development, the lack of opportunity in the Province of British 
Columbia. 
 
What really happened in British Columbia is that 60 per cent of the people decided that 40 per cent a 
minority were not going to dictate a change in the entire social and economic structure of their province. 
 
I think that the people of British Columbia have taught the people of Saskatchewan a lesson. Maybe I 
could give the Attorney General and the NDP over there a little lesson in political science. What's really 
happened in British Columbia is that free enterprisers decided that the minority will not determine the 
future of their lives and that if it is necessary to consolidate their vote as an alternative they would do so. 
People in Saskatchewan and Ontario are already talking about taking as a lesson from the Province of 
British Columbia and assessing an alternative from the Province of Saskatchewan and Manitoba and 
come up with a political party that has the best chance of defeating the NDP and consolidating their vote 
behind them. Nobody is going to suggest that the Socreds, all the people who voted Social Credit were 
supporters of Major Douglas of Social Credit fame in the '30s, no one. What they were, they were 
against government control, government ownership of industry, they were against state regimentation, 
they were against high taxation, they were against everything that the NDP stood for and that's why they 
voted Social Credit and that's what is going to happen in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and every 
province where the NDP are located. 
 
The people of British Columbia did teach us a lesson, Mr. Speaker, they taught us that free enterprise 
people who believe in the things that the NDP are against or don't stand for, they had better consolidate 
their vote. I suggest in the Province of Saskatchewan they are looking at the Liberal Party and this will 
be a very important process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here, for the edification of the Members a very important essay. Mr. Speaker, 
it is on mineral taxation . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . in the Cabinet! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, they are in the Cabinet. Not only that they will continue to espouse 
liberalism and the principles that they believe in. Not only that in the next election they are going to be 
re-elected and free enterprise is going to maintain its position. The NDP in the Province of British 
Columbia is dead, my friend. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — They are a forgotten thing. They are going to be dead and buried, in 1979 here, 
you will find exactly the same results. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — . . . until Christmas not April 1! 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1486 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — All right. Mr. Speaker, I want to read an essay presented to a mining 
conference in Toronto on the 12th November 1974, the speaker is H. Houston, C.A., Manager of 
Taxation, Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company, Limited, Toronto. It is on mineral taxation in 
Saskatchewan, 1974 developments. What this man does, who is a mining expert involved in the potash 
industry in Saskatchewan, clearly elucidates for all of us the steps in taxation taken by the NDP, points 
out the unfairness of them, gives specific examples of formulas and the application of the reserve tax 
and the prorationing tax and indicates exactly what is going to happen, Mr. Speaker. It is very, very 
pertinent to the subject. I want to take this opportunity to read it into the record. 
 

Saskatchewan producers of metallic minerals have so far escaped any provincial tax 
increases. 

 
This is one of the things that is very difficult to understand, though. Perhaps understandable as the 
industry is not a significant contributor to the economy of the province. In other words, gold, and other 
hard rock minerals have completely escaped any increase in taxes. 
 

The Province's Minister of Mineral Resources has indicated however, that changes will 
be made to conform more closely to the newly adopted potash taxation policy which this 
paper will principally deal with. However, let us first look briefly at taxes on minerals 
other than potash. 

 
I think this is important. We pointed this out at the start that no other industry, no other mining industry 
in Saskatchewan is treated as the potash industry, no other group of people in the Dominion of Canada 
are treated the way the potash industry is in Saskatchewan. Yet here we have two types of companies. 
All the difference is that they are mining a different element ingredient, a different product. One is 
treated one way in the Province of Saskatchewan and another treated another way. Is this equity in 
taxation? Is this the kind of taxation policy that is fair and just? Is it any reason that the potash industry 
is up in arms? 
 

Mining taxes on metallic minerals are presently levied under the Mineral Disposition 
Regulations of the Mineral Resources Act at a rate of 12 1/2 per cent on the net mining 
profit after deduction of processing allowance. 

 
Imagine 12 1/2 per cent! You compare that to the 85 per cent of the potash industry. We wonder why 
they are disturbed. 
 

The processing allowance is eight per cent on the capital investment and processing 
assets with a maximum of 65 per cent of the mining profits and a minimum of 20 per 
cent. A reduced rate is provided for new mines on a sliding scale basis with a maximum 
rate of nine per cent on taxable profits over $500,000. The big money is presently in 
potash (and this is what the NDP are trying to zero in on.) The province has the largest 
potash deposits in the world and the government has made it quite clear that they intend 
immediately to extract a bigger slice of flesh from the producers of this mineral. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1487 
 

By way of a little background, the productive capacity in Saskatchewan, following the 
period of initial development in the province exceeds world demand for the mineral 
which led to the Potash Conservation Regulation by the Saskatchewan Government in 
January 1970. 

 
Of course we are all aware of the history of the potash regulations, prorationing, where they were 
brought in by Premier Thatcher and the government of the day, and this very difficult period is being 
referred to here by Mr. Houston. 
 

The regulations established production and marketing quotas for each producer and set a 
minimum price for the product. 

 
It was nothing to do with taxation, Mr. Speaker, not a thing. 
 

The prorationing regulations as they are called are still in effect but the producing 
licenses for the fertilizer's year, July 1, 1974 to June 30, 1975 were recently issued to 
each plant authorizing production up to a full-rated capacity, the floor price was removed 
at the same time. 

 
With demand catching up and indeed exceeding supply, in 1974 prices have increased to 
the current level of approximately $60 per ton of K2O compared with $40 a year ago. 
This of course has not been ignored by the province. 

 
Of course this indicates once again going back into the history of the potash development the dramatic 
change in the world market conditions from 1971 to 1974 where all of a sudden the price of potash, the 
continuing demand for food in the world made it possible or the demands increased very dramatically. 
 
Continuing Mr. Houston's article: 
 

I should explain at this stage that a K2O ton is hypothetical unit of measurement in the 
industry which indicates the amount of actual potassium chloride KCL in a ton of refined 
ore. The K2O ton actually equals approximately .61 product tons. 

 
Regulations imposing an entirely new tax on the potash industry were released by the 
Government last month. 

 
This of course is following immediately the reserve tax announcement. 
 

This came right on the heels of discussions between the Saskatchewan Government and 
Finance Minister Turner who has not given any hint of the impending release of the new 
policy. 

 
Of course how many times we talk about consultation between Ottawa and Regina. 
Before I get into a discussion of the new tax, let me briefly review the present tax 
legislation as it applies to potash. (Here was the existing tax.) 

 
The Subsurface Mineral Regulations under The Mineral Resources Act levy a royalty on 
each ton of potash by a 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1488 
 

multi-faceted formula, taking into account such factors as the grade of ore, the mill 
efficiency factor, a percentage of the posted sale price of the mineral, and a percentage of 
Crown land located in the producer's utilized areas. The rates vary from 4.5 per cent on 
mines for the grade of ore less than 21 per cent potash to nine per cent for those 
producing ore richer than 45 per cent. 

 
The Potash Prorationing Fee Regulations under The Mineral Resources Act levy a tax of 
$1.20 per ton of product produced. Note that this tax is applied to product tons as 
opposed to K2O tons which form the basis for most other taxes. 

 
As I mentioned because of course that means that the product tons are more. 
 

As I mentioned previously a K2O ton is roughly equivalent to .61 product tons. The 
Proration Fee was initially levied as of June 1, 1972, at the rate of 60 cents per ton and 
was increased to the present level of $1.20 per ton October 1, 1973. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want you to note those two dates, 1972, 1973. They changed the whole philosophy of the 
prorationing agreement or the prorationing regulations. 
 

Now for the developments. 
 

Last April 29th, the Saskatchewan Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources, Mr. Jack 
Wotherspoon called the producers together at a private meeting to introduce a paper on 
the Government's proposed new potash mining policy. The Deputy Minister announced 
at the meeting that the Government wished to have the benefit of the industry's views 
before proceeding with any change in its potash policy. Within three days of the meeting 
however, Bill 129, An Act to Amend The Mineral Taxation Act was tabled in the 
Legislature. This provided enabling legislation for the Government to proceed simply by 
Orders in Council with all the sweeping changes contained in the proposed policy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the ingredients that I mentioned that the potash industry is so opposed to, is 
the power of the Government to set tax rates by regulation, by Order in Council and not by coming to 
the House. 
 

The major amendments were adopted as SS 25A and 28A of the Mineral Taxation Act. 
Section 25A empowers the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to prescribe regulations levy 
a tax computed on the value of potash ore reserved, a proposed formula for such a 
'reserves tax' was given to the producers at that time and draft regulations were released 
to the industry on October 23. They were implemented by Order in Council, 1956-74 
dated November 12, 1974. The tax adopted does not differ in principle from the one first 
proposed. 

 
Section 28A provides that the Lieutenant-Governor may by order require all or any 
portion of any tax payable under The Mineral Taxation Act to be paid in kind. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1489 
 

This is another thing, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the things that the NDP objected to so strenuously, it 
was the fact that the potash industry wouldn't present them with the facts. I think the potash industry 
made a mistake in that. I think they should have presented them with the facts. But the reason they didn't 
is because the Provincial Government had the power in these regulations to demand payment of taxes in 
kind and put the Saskatchewan Government in the potash marketing business, it made them competitors 
around the world. And, of course, the potash industry treated them the same as any other competitor. I 
don't know if you know anything about the potash industry, but, boy, they are very highly competitive, 
they are highly secretive. One potash mine doesn't know very much about what the other potash mine is 
doing. They are very secretive even among themselves. 
 
Section 28A provides that the Lieutenant-Governor may be order require all or any portion of the tax 
payable in kind. The Section further directs that the potash in payment of the taxes due must be 
delivered at a time and place at the discretion of the Minister. In relation to this amendment the Deputy 
Minister announced at the meeting with the producers on April 29, that in the immediate future this 
Government intended to establish as quickly as possible a corporation or agency to market potash. As 
the Government presently does not have any productive facilities, the sales agency would market potash 
received by the Crown in lieu of cash payable by the producers for taxes and royalties levied on potash 
under The Mineral Taxation Act and The Mineral Resources Act, and it doesn't end there. He further 
indicated that: 
 

The regulations would provide that the payment in kind would be a ten per cent discount 
which he said would cover the selling expenses of the Government's new marketing 
agency. 

 
That's kind of an interesting approach too, the privately owned corporations could sell it to somebody 
else for a certain price, but they had to sell for ten per cent less to the Government of Saskatchewan, 
which was really an increase in tax of ten per cent. 
 

Thus the industry would be faced with the situation whereby by a government agency 
would be competing with them on their market, their own potash, which the Government 
obtains at a ten per cent discount. This is not any more palatable when you consider that 
under the prorationing regulations, the Government has been requiring producers to 
submit detailed marketing information right down to the name and address of even their 
smallest customer together with the quantities purchased and the applicable prices. 

 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan going into the potash industry, demanding that 
the potash producers give them a list of every single market that they have, from the smallest to the 
biggest, the price that they sell it on, etc. This, Mr. Speaker, of course, is very obnoxious also to the 
potash industry. 
 

Perhaps the significance of this can be placed in better perspective when you consider 
that if the Government decides to require payment in kind for all taxes and royalties that 
they are projecting will be paid by the 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1490 
 

potash companies in 1975, they would receive sufficient product to secure over a quarter 
of the entire market and would probably become the largest volume seller. Isn't that the 
way to get into business for yourself. 

 
I want you to examine that, Mr. Speaker. What they are saying is, that if the Government in 1975 had 
demanded all the taxes paid in kind at a ten per cent discount, they would then have become the largest 
marketing agency of potash in the world. That, at a time when the markets were still depressed, when 
they were still not producing at a 100 per cent of their capacity. And yet the Government could go out 
and become the largest seller of potash with a limited market, with the potash companies themselves 
struggling to get back and up to 100 per cent production. And yet the Government of Saskatchewan 
could undercut them or could cut off their markets to sell the product at ten per cent less, at a discount or 
turn around and invade their own traditional markets. 
 
To quote further: 
 

We have mercifully been given a reprieve from this however. The Minister advised the 
producers on October 23, 1974 that the Government will drop for the foreseeable future, 
plans to take product in kind and become marketers of potash. Section 28A of The 
Mineral Taxation Act, however, will not be repealed and can be brought in at any time. 
Once again the Government of Saskatchewan can demand that potash be taken into 
consideration, or potash taxes to be paid in kind. This policy could thus be implemented 
at any time by a simple Order in Council. Incidentally the surface mineral regulations 
under which royalties are imposed presently empower the Minister to require a payment 
in kind at a discount of ten per cent, less than the current selling price if the products are 
used by the Crown, and full list price if the Crown desires to use potash products in any 
commercial enterprise in competition with producers. If the Minister's proposal is ever 
adopted these and all other regulations would change to provide for the ten per cent 
discount in all circumstances. 

 
Now let's have a look at the new reserve tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the reason I am reading this and explaining it is because this is really the whole core of the 
fight in the Province of Saskatchewan. Is the potash tax, reserve tax, a fair tax? Is it just? Is there not 
justification for the potash industry to go to the courts and test its constitutionality? Is the Government 
being right when it tells the people of Saskatchewan that they cannot stand or that they cannot tolerate 
any company or individual in the Province of Saskatchewan challenging them in the courts? Is there no 
reason or legitimate reason why this can be done? I quote again: 
 

Let's look at this reserve tax. It is essentially a lump sum tax to be levied and paid on a 
quarterly basis on the 20th day of the third month in each quarter. 

 
A lump sum tax. It's not related to profits and this is the importance, it's a lump sum tax, Mr. Speaker. In 
other words it's so much money that will be paid every quarter to the Government of Saskatchewan 
regardless of the price of potash, 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1491 
 

regardless of the profits, pardon me, of the industry, whether they make money, whether they lose 
money or whatever it may be, it's a lump sum tax to be paid every quarter. Quote: 
 

The Minister is predicting that the tax will produce at 87 million in additional revenue for 
the province in '75. 

 
Of course, since that time 87 million taken with the other royalty taxes, the other prorationing taxes and 
so forth, it comes to approximately 130 million, estimated, at least we calculate for the year 1976. 
Another quote: 
 

When this is added to the 22.5 million predicted revenue from other taxes on potash the 
total represents over 25 per cent of the expected gross revenue from the industry. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let's just examine that, 25 per cent of the gross revenue, it's not the net, before expenses, 
before marketing costs, before anything else, 25 per cent of the gross revenue. 
 

The reserve tax to be calculated by a complicated formula will become effective as of 
July 1, 1974. The components of the tax are: 

 
First of all it has what is called a rated annual capacity, and I tried to simplify it for you in my brief 
introductory remarks. 
 

This will initially be a fixed amount equal to the designated capacity used for the 
prorationing regulations. 

 
In other words when they turned around and asked each mining company to present their facts on how 
much their production was in order to establish prorationing and what rate of production would be 
included in the 40 or 45 or 50 per cent and they turn around and each potash mine said they had a 
designated capacity of so many tons. Of course, this then became what is called the rated annual 
capacity, productive capacity. 
 

This figure will never decrease, but it can increase if production in any 12 consecutive 
months within the immediately preceding two calendar years exceed the initial 
designated capacity. The increased capacity figure would then become the new "rated 
annual productive capacity". Which would then stay fixed at that amount unless revision 
again is required by production increases. This rated annual productive capacity figure 
will be the first factor in the reserve tax formula. There is a caveat here however. If the 
producer has overstated his capacity for prorationing and quota purposes he could be 
stuck with a lower figure; that is if the rate of capacity is greater than the average 
monthly production for the best three months of the preceeding 12 months of operation, 
multiplied by 11, then this smaller calculated figure must be used until in fact it does 
exceed the rated annual productive capacity. Once reached the "rated annual productive 
capacity" figure becomes from the time forward the amount to be used in the reserve tax 
formula. 

 
The second thing that is in the formula is an average selling price. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1492 
 

This will be determined by the Minister every quarter, based on the total industry actual 
average selling price in arm's length sales for the previous quarter. 

 
Third factor, would be a scale factor. 
 

This will be determined by the Department of Mineral Resources. It will vary with price 
and 50 cent increments with the rated annual productive capacity or the calculated annual 
capacity whichever is the first factor in the formula. 

 
This is all very complicated, Mr. Speaker, but I'd like to read it into the record. 
 
  Ore grade factor. 
 

This again will be determined in accordance with the table to be released by the 
Department of Mineral Resources. The grade of mine ore will be weighted in the average 
grade of potash ore mines from the producing track during the latest 12 month period of 
operation. 

 
Five, capital investment factor. This is the bad one, Mr. Speaker. 
 

This will be a figure calculated by dividing the gross investment in the mine and refining 
plant as approved by the Minister of Mineral Resources by the product of a hundred 
times the rated annual productive capacity. The Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources 
has indicated that the gross fixed assets will be defined "as in the Income Tax Act." 
However, the Income Tax Act does not contain any definition of fixed assets so that it is 
not possible at this stage to determine precisely the allowable components of the 
investment base. 

 
  Mill rate. 
 

This will be a quarterly rate set by the Department of Mineral Resources, will vary at 50 
cent increments for the price of potash. Having determined all the foregoing factors, the 
value of the ore reserve, the mining refining plant is calculated in the following manner: 

 
Annual Capacity times Scale Factor for a $40 Ton Price times Ore Grade Factor times 
Fixed Price of $40 times 20 divided by the Capital Investment Factor. (The constant of 20 
used in the factor is predicated on a 20 year life for the investment.) 

 
The $40 fixed price and the corresponding scale factor are used in the formula to arrive at 
a fixed value for the ore reserve mine in the refining plant. The initial quarterly tax is 
determined by applying the appropriate mill rate to this value. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is very complicated, but when we get down to see the impact, what Mr. Houston says 
the impact of this tax is, everyone will understand that it is the insidious tax that I refer to. It's unfair, 
basically dishonest of the Government, particularly when no one in the Province of Saskatchewan 
understands it. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1493 
 

As the scale factors decrease proportionately with increase in the average price, the use of 
$40 fixed price with the corresponding scale factor produces a tax figure greater than 
actually intended. Accordingly a credit is calculated to be carried forward in determining 
the tax due for the succeeding quarter. The correct tax is calculated by substituting in the 
formula the scale factor for the average price and the credit allowed is the difference 
between the initial calculation and the revised one. 

 
It's a tax jungle is right, Mr. Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron). 
 

Table 1 illustrates the reserve tax calculation for a small, medium and large producer in 
graph A plus the reserve tax for selling price for the same hypothetical producers. 

 
The graph (I'm coming to the graph) and this is the one that's startling. Is it any wonder the potash 
industry has very serious objections? I quote: 
 

The graph indicates very clearly that the largest producers with their economies of scale 
suffer much more steeply rising taxes as prices increase. 

 
Notice this, I repeat: 
 

The graph indicates very clearly that the largest producers with their economies of scale 
suffer much more steeply rising taxes as prices increase. It is difficult to understand the 
Government's reasoning in structuring the scale factor to accomplish this result. 

 
The more you sell the less you get, and the Government of Saskatchewan is asking the potash industry 
to expand. I continue: 
 

It can readily be seen that the reserve tax formula is quite sensitive to capital investment. 
For example, a large producer, (producer C) would realize approximately a 20 cent 
reduction in the reserve tax for every dollar of additional capital expenditure. 

 
Thus it penalizes the mine that was built a few years ago or that had some efficiency. 
 

What overall effect does the reserve tax have on the producer? The Canadian Potash 
Producers Association commissioned an independent firm of chartered accountants to 
gather and consolidate financial projections for the calendar year, 1975. Table II 
illustrates the net after tax earnings for the small, medium and large producer using this 
data. The calculations assume no earned depletion as I think it is fair to say that no 
significant amounts of earned depletion are available because most of the capital 
investment for all existing producers occurred prior to November 8, 1969, qualification 
date for depletion earning expenditures. 

 
The table indicates that the small producer faces a heavy tax load of 76 per cent. The 
medium producer a back breaking 85.7 per cent. The large producer is unbelievable 98.7 
per cent. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1494 
 

Isn't it a tragedy that the people of Saskatchewan and the ordinary little businessman, the farmer, does 
not understand the complications and the results of the potash reserve tax and then they would wonder 
why the potash companies are going to court in a hope to get some kind of fair and just treatment? 
 
I will repeat the above quote. 
 

The table indicates that the small producer faces a heavy tax load of 76 per cent. The 
medium producer a back breaking 85.7 per cent. The large producer an unbelievable 98.7 
per cent. 

 
This according to Mr. Houston was the exact impact of a hypothetical situation of the potash producers 
when this potash tax was put in in 1974. Quote: 
 

Admittedly, the costs used are industry averages which would not reflect the full 
economies of scale undoubtedly realized by the large producers. Nevertheless the tax 
levies indicated are crippling, even for the small producer where they are probably 
understated again because of the use of average cost data. 

 
In other words, what he is saying, Mr. Speaker, is that it may not be 98 per cent of the reserve tax on 
profits for the large producers because as the production increases they would have economies of scale. 
In other words the machinery, the equipment, the power, etc. etc. would reduce the overall costs in a 
very short period. Again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If the total tax rates don't shock, perhaps the incremental rates will. Graph B illustrates 
the incremental tax rates for the three hypothetical producers and further highlights the 
discriminatory nature of the tax levied on the large producer. 

 
You remember, Mr. Speaker, when I started off I said one of the bad things about the potash reserve tax 
was that it discriminated against the large producer. Mr. Houston points this out very, very emphatically 
and very clearly and yet this is the Government that says they are taking them over because they refuse 
to expand. 
 

Producer A, the small producer, does not exceed an incremental rate of slightly over 90 
per cent. Producer B however has an incremental rate exceeding 100 per cent at roughly 
around $72 per ton price level, while the large Producer C exceeds the 100 per cent rate 
at a price level of about $47 per ton. At present price levels Producer C will lose over 15 
cents per ton every time the price increases by a dollar. 

 
You can believe it. A tax system that whenever the price goes up the taxes go up and he loses more 
money. Mr. Speaker, how is it possible for the NDP to impose such a tax and to expect the potash 
industry to remain quiet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The supply and demand situation is presently exerting 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1495 
 

pressure for a price increase which must have the large producers losing some sleep. 
 
Of course, this was written and presented in 1974. Very early, a month after the potash reserve tax was 
put in and, of course, didn't take into consideration the latest dramatic rise in price in the past year. I 
continue: 
 

The Minister's original proposal provided no reduction in the reserve tax in the event of a 
planned shut-down. The new regulations however contain some relief from this 
eventuality. 

 
Now if you can imagine. The original proposal said that they were still going to tax them on a lump sum 
basis even if the plants shut down. Now they have some additional new regulations which contain some 
relief and I suppose since that time Mr. Houston, and I hope the Government has had some wisdom in 
trying to at least change, amend some of the regulations that were so ridiculous in 1974. Again: 
 

Before August 20 in each year the Minister is to determine that actual production in K2O 
tons for the immediate preceeding year. If the actual production is less than ten-elevenths 
of the annual capacity figure used in the formula the Minister shall recalculate the tax, 
substituting the actual production for the year plus one-eleventh of the annual capacity 
figure which was in fact used in the formula. If the amount of tax paid in the fertilizer 
year exceeds this recalculated tax, then the difference is applied as a credit to the tax 
payable during the current year. No provisions are made to refund the tax if the mine was 
shut down and never re-opened. 

 
You talk about a tax jungle, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some upward or downward adjustment in the tax, but strictly in the discretion of the 
Minister may be anticipated by the wording of S8 of the Regulations. This section allows 
the Minister to adjust the average selling price to take into account, annual changes in 
costs indices related to the potash mining industry prior to setting the mill rate and 
determining the tax base. 

 
What are the major objections to the tax? 

 
Mr. Speaker, let me go over this again very briefly. It's a lump sum tax, it's got a very complicated 
formula, it discriminates against the large producer, it discriminates against the low per ton investment, 
in other words the efficiency of the construction. It discriminates against the older potash mines, those 
who had a lower capital investment. If you can imagine, these are some of the generalities of this tax. 
Now what are the effects or the objections of the industry and what are the effects? 
 

Apart from subjecting the industry to an oppressive tax load there are major conceptual 
flaws in the reserve tax, 

 
according to Mr. Houston. Apart from subjecting the industry to an oppressive tax load here are some of 
the objections: 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1496 
 

   1.  Any major tax not geared to profits is inequitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't have to repeat what I said about the NDP saying that it should be based, all taxes 
should be based on ability to pay. There is only one principle of equity and that is ability to pay on the 
amount of profit and this has no relationship to profit whatsoever. 
 
  2.  The tax clearly discriminates against the larger producer. 
 
I've explained why. First of all, Mr. Speaker, because of the scale factor and because of the overall 
investment. 
 
  3.  The formula would penalize a mine constructed at a low per ton capital cost relative to a more  
    costly mine of the same capacity. 
 
In other words it gives no allowance for efficiency. Typical socialism, typical bureaucracy, it's typical 
without any question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: 
 
  4.  Older mines constructed with less inflated dollars will find themselves in a poorer position  
    compared to mines built at a later date with higher cost dollars. Equitably, some indexing figures  
    should be introduced to arrive at comparable present values. 
 
  5.  Tax credit provisions for decreases in production are inadequate and badly timed. 
 
Listen to what he says: 

Theoretically, a plant could be virtually shut down for a complete year but still have to pay the 
reserve tax based on a rated capacity. Credit — and partial credit at that — would not become 
effective until the following year. 

 
I believe if I remember the regulations correctly this has been changed. 

  6.  The tax overpayment provided by the formula with credit being allowed in the following quarter  
    without interest is clearly inequitable. 
 
  7.  This legislation follows the distasteful pattern of virtually all mining tax laws in Saskatchewan in 
    that it is riddled with ministerial discretion, even to the point of setting tax rates by regulations. I  
    don't think it is any understatement to say that the future of the private sector in the   
    Saskatchewan potash industry is extremely cloudy. 
 
And I want to tell you that that was written over one year ago, a year ago last November. Mr. Speaker, 
how very, very clear and how wise and how informed Mr. Houston was when he talks about it as being 
cloudy. Continuing: 
 

The Government has indicated that it intends to extend its involvement in the industry, 
developing productive 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1497 
 

capacity owned by the people of Saskatchewan. The ominous portent of payment in kind 
adds further uncertainty. At this point we can only hope that some sanity will emerge 
before we all become civil servants. 

 
You know one of the most interesting things, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder if the Minister or the Attorney 
General and the Government are going to produce the feasibility studies of Bredenbury, because they 
were going to get into production there. They had studies taken of what the costs would be. I wonder if 
they are going to lay on the table for the public of Saskatchewan and the Members of this Assembly just 
exactly what the costs as estimated by experts and engineers what the assessment will be in comparison 
to the purchase of an existing potash mine. Of course, this is what he means when he says it is extremely 
cloudy. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if the NDP had been able to build a mine at Bredenbury — there is 
no question about the potash there, there is no question about the grade of ore, there is no question about 
the fact that they had the leases. In fact I was in Bredenbury and saw the stakes where the mine was to 
be built. There is no question about it that they could build the mine but I think what happened, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they took a look at the report and at the cost of estimates of the construction of a new 
potash mine and they found it came to four to five hundred million dollars. Immediately they became 
discouraged and sat down and drafted this particular law, saying it would be based on earned profits, if 
you can believe it, after taxes, which means, of course, that they are going to attempt to steal the present 
mines. With the cost of building one mine they could turn around and steal four or five from the potash 
industry and this is the reason we have Bill 1 and Bill 2 before us today. 
 
I want to read to you table 1, "Saskatchewan Reserve Tax Calculations - Small, Medium and Large 
Producers." And this is astounding, this is Mr. Houston, a mining taxation expert. What I should have 
really done, is I should have xeroxed a copy of this so I could lay it on the table and send it over to the 
Attorney General. It starts off with basic data and it's got, "Producer A - Small, Producer B - Medium 
and Producer C - Large." and he starts off with a small producer at 300,000 tons. The medium producer 
at 750,000 and Producer C at 2 million. There are several mines at 750,000 capacity in Saskatchewan. 
There is one producer that comes close to the 2 million productive capacity in Saskatchewan. They give 
a total of six capital investment, $36 million for the small producer and I think we can go back to Potash 
Company of America in that neighborhood. Seventy-five million dollars of capital investment for the 
medium sized producer and I think we go to some of them like Sylvite and some of the others and, that 
is a fairly accurate figure. One hundred and sixty million dollars for Producer C of the large one, which I 
think is also fairly accurate. The inflated cost I think would raise the cost of those very dramatically in 
today's market but I think that was the original capital invested approximately. Your ore grade is 25 per 
cent, which is approximately the quality of the ore potash that is mined in Saskatchewan. The scale 
factor, 1.0 plus, 1.14 plus, 1.2 plus. Ore grade factor is 1.000 for all of them. The capital investment 
factor $36 million, $75 million, $160 million and, of course, then they turn around and they do it and 
they do the calculation and, of course, it comes out to a mill rate of $60 a ton, quarterly rate times four 
and it comes to 12 for the small producer. It comes to $12.6392 for the medium producer; 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1498 
 

$12.6302 for the mill rate for them all. They calculate the reserve tax and it comes for the small 
producer to $2 million, $8 million for medium and $31 million for the large producer. 
 
Now Graph A, for the small, the medium and the large Saskatchewan potash producer, shows the 
reserve tax versus the selling price. This is kind of interesting. And, of course, I can't show you, Mr. 
Speaker, but the chart indicates that when you come to the large producer and it comes to the selling 
price, as against reserve tax and its impact on the large producer, it is very, very dramatic. And I hope 
that the Attorney General when he winds up the debate will tell this House and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how it is possible that he expects the potash industry to expand when the reserve tax 
discriminates so heavily against the large producer? 
 
I should like to go on to Table 2. And this is again, of course, the small, medium and large 
Saskatchewan potash producer calculation of after tax profits, based on the Canadian Potash Producers' 
Association, 1975, estimated average financial data at $60 a ton of K2O selling price which is 
approximately accurate. Gross sales at $60 per ton broken down to show the final net profit. They show 
the following; cost of sales, marketing and head office expenses, $27; net profit before taxes, $32.16; 
provincial and federal income tax, $11.90 out of that $60; prorationing fees, $4.13; reserve taxes, $8.42; 
total tax $24.45. Net after tax, $7.71 or 24 per cent approximately. That is for the small producer. 
 
Now for the medium producer. Once again they start off with the gross sales at $60 a ton. The net profit 
before taxation is approximately $32 and this is all based on an industry average. And, of course, the 
$11.90 is again stable for the federal-provincial income tax, 37 per cent, based on November 8, 1974 
Federal Budget. The prorationing fee is $4.13 out of that ton, the same. But if you will notice the reserve 
tax for the medium producer jumps from $8.42 to $11.54, in other words the total tax instead of being 
$24.45 out of a $60 ton, it is $27.57 out of a $60 ton. The net after taxes instead of being $7.71 is $4.59 
and a percentage of 14.3. 
 
Now you get up into the large producer and once again we start off with a gross sale of $60. The net 
profit before tax, $32, the same as the others. The federal-provincial income tax exactly the same, 
$11.90. Prorationing fees, exactly the same, $4.13. But the reserve tax jumps from $8 for the small 
producers, $11 for the medium producer to $15 for the large producer. Instead of $24 for the small 
producer, $27 for the medium, it is $31 for the large producer. And, of course, what does he have net 
after taxes for a ton of potash, 39 cents, 1.3 per cent and I want to point out again as Mr. Houston did, 
that does not take into consideration the economies of scale, which means of course, a potash mine 
because of its size and its productive capacity for the same equipment can produce more and can mine 
more potash and so forth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I have tried to do here is to outline very briefly for you what the reserve tax has 
done in the Province of Saskatchewan and to try and point out that the whole argument of the NDP in 
this particular debate, that the potash industry has refused to pay the tax, the potash industry has 
challenged in the courts the reserve tax and that they only way we can be assured of a fair return to the 
taxpayers' of Saskatchewan is by expropriation and ownership. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1499 
 

I have tried to point out based on an analysis by a mining and a tax expert, - and I would like all of you, 
I would like everybody in this House to pick up this Conference Report, 1974 by all the tax experts in 
the Dominion of Canada and I've shown that, number one, you are getting all the blood you can get out 
of the potash industry right now on the reserve tax. You are getting all the blood, you can't get any more 
blood from a stone. You are getting all the blood you can get, it's paid in a lump sun, it's not related to 
profits. It's a terrible situation. The potash industry has no recourse but to refuse to expand until such 
time as it can get some kind of a return on its investment so it can pay off its capital debt and it can in 
turn make an investment for the future. You've got to change the reserve tax so that it doesn't 
discriminate against the larger producer in order that you can encourage a mine operator or a mining 
company to invest more money to expand its production. But don't penalize them because you are doing 
that and that is exactly what the reserve tax does. It penalizes the large producer and it is not related to 
profits. What is really required, if you gentlemen would sit down and say, look, here is the level of 
taxation that the Province of Saskatchewan can expect and that the people of Saskatchewan deserve. We 
will relate it to your profits so that if the price of potash falls as it has in the last three months, it has 
dropped something like $5 a ton, we will relate too, to that decline. 
 
When the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) asked that question about a deal with Russia, he wasn't 
kidding. You remember the Leader of the Opposition indicated that the deal was in the works with 
Russia, over one million tons of potash and that deal will come to fruition in 1978. You've heard that the 
potash industry is now exploring just south of our border and I heard the Premier say they have to go 
7,000 and 8,000 feet. Don't be ridiculous if they are not making anything in Saskatchewan no matter 
what the cost of operation is, they could turn around and accept increased costs of operation by 25 per 
cent and still make far more profit and get a much greater return on the investment to the people down 
below the border. I suggest to you, sit down with the potash industry, do away with the reserve tax, 
come up with a new tax, a tax that is related to profits, a tax that doesn't discriminate against the large 
producer, a tax that is fair, a tax that will not have the same disastrous results as the same kind of tax had 
in British Columbia which drove the mining industry right out of the province of British Columbia. 
 
I am going to explain to you just exactly what has happened in British Columbia, because I believe that 
the reserve tax was actually copied off the formula of Dave Barrett. Dave Barrett, of course, put it in 
immediately following his election victory in 1971 and, of course, you know what happened to him. Mr. 
Barrett has now gone to his just reward. And I sincerely think that the NDP in British Columbia like all 
governments did some good things. I think that Dave Barrett and his government were pretty sincere in 
some of the social legislation they tried to implement but what really put the noose around Mr. Barrett's 
neck, what really strangled Mr. Barrett was his resource taxation policy. 
 
Now, I am going to use that illustration with the hope that you can turn around and take an assessment 
of what did happen in British Columbia so that you will know what happened to Dave Barrett. And it is 
based on the same kind of a tax system. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1500 
 

The Minister of Health is a tax expert, he was the Minister of Finance, he knows that the reserve tax is 
the most insidious tax in Canada on an industry. He knows that it is unfair, he knows that it is unjust, he 
knows that it is not equitable with any industry. He knows that it is far more severe than any other 
industry in the Dominion of Canada, any other industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. He knows it is 
not related to the ability to pay. Surely he can sit down with the now Minister of Finance, the Premier 
and the Attorney General and the Government and explain, and get George Taylor down too, because 
George is shy. He is a lawyer and I think he may be partly responsible for the terrible complications of 
potash reserve tax. But really gentlemen, what we are really urging you to do, is you sit down with the 
potash industry and come up with a new taxation formula, based on ability to pay, based on equity, give 
a little incentive to expand, I think you know that the potash industry would grow and expand and 
become an important segment to the Province of Saskatchewan, and I think it is important. 
 
Now I am just going to show you that what happens in the mining industry in one province and what is 
happening across Canada. You know this has been a debate on potash taxation and I like to hear the 
NDP say, well, we don't know what is going to happen with the Federal Government. They want to talk 
about the Federal Government and what they have done. I'm going to tell you when you talk to the 
potash industry they make one statement. The Federal Government is not getting one cent more than 
before, or very little. Industry's complaint is not with the Federal Government. They don't like the 
changes and the quarrel between the Federal and Provincial Governments because they know there is 
some danger and what happened in the oil industry might then well happen in the potash industry. That 
is they may say, look we want our pound of flesh the Federal Government too and we are going to make 
some more changes. But I suggest what happens in the federal level has a dramatic impact in 
Saskatchewan. What happens on a provincial level right across Canada has an impact on the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I would like to give you an example of some of the things that happened in the province 
of British Columbia and what happened as a result there. 
 
Now this was written by H.F. Gougeon, C.A., I think it is Gougeon, if that is how you pronounce it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Yes, that's probably right, Cy. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Assistant Treasurer, Placer Development Limited, Vancouver. He begins. 
 

My part in this panel is to provide an overview of recent taxation changes affecting the 
B.C. mining industry. 

 
And this is very important because what happened after the NDP took over in B.C. is that it just 
completely brought all mining exploration to a halt. Mining stocks plummeted, in the Province of British 
Columbia because the same type of tax was not related to profits as you are going to hear when this 
gentleman explains it and you'll hear exactly what happened in the Province of British Columbia with 
disastrous results. You can't laugh, Mr. Minister of Health, you can't laugh because that did happen 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1501 
 

in Saskatchewan and it has nothing to do with bringing a return to the Province of Saskatchewan or a 
return to the province of British Columbia. What happened in the Province of British Columbia was that 
they were getting no return because mining development and exploration and everything else almost 
came to a complete standstill. 
 

I would like to preface my remarks by saying that as an employee of mining company 
which operates three mines in the Province of British Columbia and as the chairman of 
the British Columbia Mining Association Taxation Committee, I have been thrust into a 
hectic position over the past two years because of the ever changing B.C. tax scene. I 
trust this will become apparent once I explain some of the content and the effects of The 
Mineral Land Tax Act and the Mineral Royalties Act because where were certain 
provisions contained in the May 6th, 1974 budget. 

 
When did it all start? As you are aware the attitude towards resource industry has 
changed dramatically in the last few years. 

 
I think that is important and I think you people recognize that. 1971 you know, I love to hear the Premier 
get up and say why, we are taking more in three months out of the potash industry than the Liberals took 
out in four or five years. Of course that is true because at that time potash companies were operating at a 
loss, or almost a loss, at a break even point. The taxes had to be very moderate. But as resource values in 
this country changed, everybody began to recognize that resource industries had to pay a bigger and 
bigger share of the tax burden of providing services to the province from which that resource was 
derived. Therefore they expected and everyone expected in the Dominion of Canada, the NDP and all 
governments, including Lougheed's with the oil industry, that they would change the whole taxation 
principle and that they would turn around and reassess the existing formulae, the existing taxes and 
come up with more formulae so that the people of those individual provinces got a better return on the 
resources they owned. Everybody expected that and that's why if you people came up with a real 
formula that was not based on discrimination, that was not based on almost confiscation, that left little or 
no return to the shareholders, or no return in investment, no opportunity to retire debt, no opportunity to 
make profit to put away to reinvest in expansion, I think you people would have done a real service to 
the Dominion of Canada and I think this would have happened and there would have been a lot of 
people follow you. 
 
Now remember this fellow works for three mining companies, he is the president of the British 
Columbia Mining Association, he is the chairman of the committee on taxation and here is what he says: 
 

When did it all start? Previously mining was considered a high risk activity requiring a 
favorable tax climate in which to grow. Now however the mining area is sometimes 
viewed as earning excess profits. 

 
I think that is a fair assumption to say in Saskatchewan. 
 

As a result governments of all political stripes across Canada reacted by altering or 
considering altering the tax structure not only by removing incentives previously granted 
but also imposing additional taxes on the industry. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1502 
 

And I don't object to that kind of a principle. Removing any incentive for the potash industry and also 
imposing new taxes on the potash industry, I don't think anybody on this side of the House opposes that. 
That's when all of a sudden potash went from $18 a ton to $40 a ton, we are talking about a production 
ton here and we certainly anticipated that they should pay a much greater share in taxes. 
 

It is not possible to ascertain the exact point in time when the present attitude was 
developed. Since the release of the 1967 Carter Report on taxation, it became evident that 
the mining industry would lose many of its federal taxation incentives. However, it now 
appears that the vast majority believe that mining companies should pay a greater share to 
the government in periods of high profits due to high level prices. Certainly there has 
been a good deal of debate about how much should be raised and how it should be raised. 
In any event B.C. was the first province in recent years to radically alter the taxation 
system applied to mining companies. Part of the present provincial government's '72 
election platform included remarks such as, "In 1970 mining companies shipped $128 
million worth of B.C. copper concentrate out of the country without having to pay one 
cent in royalties for that resource." Accordingly once elected the government seemed 
committed to two things, obtaining an increased share of mining profits and obtaining 
them in the form of a royalty. The annoying feature about comments that mining 
companies do not pay a royalty is that they do pay a mining tax on profits at a rate of 15 
per cent which is in addition to normal federal and provincial corporation income tax. 
Ironically the present provincial mining tax was originally a two per cent royalty which 
was changed to a mining tax on profits in 1948. 

 
So this is the kind of thing that I think the NDP should have done. They should have put a mining tax on 
profits. There is no question about it. They could have done that, it is legal. The Province of British 
Columbia did it. They could have said 75 per cent, 70 per cent, 60 per cent and sat down and negotiated 
it and come out with a tax on profits and I think it would have been acceptable to the corporation, 
acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan and it would have been based on ability to pay. Continuing: 
 

Probably the most important factor which has prompted the Province of British Columbia 
and other provinces to require mining companies to pay their fair share was the very high 
price of metals in '73 and the first half of 1974, especially when compared to the 
abnormally depressed metal prices in '71 and '72. For example, the international price for 
a pound of copper in the London Metal Exchange averaged 49 cents in '71 and '72 as 
opposed to 81 cents per pound in '73 and peaked to $1.50 in early 1974. Presently the 
price is in the 60 - 65 cent range. 

 
I think that this is kind of comparable to our potash when we started off at $20 a ton and it went up very 
dramatically. He says, "Presently the price is in the 60 and 65 cent range" which, of course, is very, very 
dramatically down from $1.50 and it just shows how much the value of the product of the metallic 
mining product can change very, very quickly. Just as the price of potash has dropped $5 in the last three 
months, certainly it can 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1503 
 

change very dramatically if any new major discovery is found or any new markets are developed by the 
Russians or the Russians become interested in new markets or if the great deposit in Brazil and Thailand 
becomes developed by the other countries. 
 

Another factor is that the Province of British Columbia has taken the position that as 
minerals represent a non-renewable resource it should be subject to a royalty regardless 
of whether or not the mining companies operate at a profit. 

 
This is the crux and this is where I think the NDP of Saskatchewan copied the whole concept of reserve 
tax. It came directly from that principle. The Province of British Columbia or the NDP in that province 
took the position that as minerals represent a non-renewable resource they should be subject to a royalty 
regardless of whether or not the mining company operates at a profit. This was a brand new philosophy 
of taxation and it was adopted in the reserve tax in the Province of Saskatchewan and certainly this is 
one of the reasons we are in trouble. 
 

A supporting argument used is that no copper smelter operates in British Columbia and 
therefore all copper concentrate as well as in most other concentrate is exported so that it 
can be further processed by secondary industry in foreign countries with the result the 
province does not get the benefit of employment from a processing industry. 

 
I think this is a legitimate concern. I think we in Saskatchewan should have some concern about the fact 
that we don't process any of the potash here. It is true we don't use any or very little of the commodity. 
We don't have the other ingredients that are required to produce the kind of fertilizer that potash is used 
in but I think maybe we could be using an exchange, we should be encouraging this kind of thing and I 
think that was a legitimate concern of the B.C. government. 
 

The first thing they did was put in The Mineral Land Tax Act. The first tangible sign that 
the provincial government would levy a royalty on B.C. mines became apparent in 1973 
when The Mineral Land Tax Act was introduced. This Act applies royalties to minerals 
extracted from all lands except Crown lands (thus it covers minerals extracted from 
Crown granted mineral claims, i.e. freehold land which has not been granted by the 
government since 1957). 

 
The Mineral Land Tax Act essentially imposes an annual tax commencing January 1st, 
1974 on every owner of a designated mineral land situated within a production area of 
production tract. The tax is $2 per acre plus an amount 'not exceeding 25 mills on each 
dollar of assessment of his designated mineral land within the production area'. The Act 
states that the terms, designated mineral lands, production area and production tract as 
well as the mill rate up to the statutory maximum and the basis of assessment are to be 
established by Order in Council. 

 
As you might imagine B.C. mining industry officials and many tax practitioners were 
very critical of The Mineral Land Tax Act because on reading the Act there is no way of 
determining the base on which the tax is levied. Not only 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1504 
 

are the taxpayers affected unable to quantify their tax burden but the tax rate and the tax 
base are set up by an administrator that is a civil servant, with the result that control is in 
the Cabinet and not in the Legislature. 

 
Very similar to Saskatchewan. 
 

The Act does not provide for any appeal against the designation of mineral land, the 
production area or production tracts. 

 
Shortly after the introduction of this Act members of the mining association of B.C. met 
with the government officials in Victoria. They were advised that the numerous 
discretionary powers were in the Act to enable the government to impose royalties on 
Crown granted mineral leases, (presumably this is why the Act is drawn up to form a 
royalty in the form of the property tax) and that the assessed value for the mining 
company would be determined on the basis of the previous year's production value. The 
members were also advised that a royalty based on net smelter returns of 2 1/2 per cent in 
1975 and five per cent in subsequent years is going to imposed on designated minerals of 
all producing mines in British Columbia and that the assessed value would be set to 
accommodate such a levy for mines located on Crown granted mineral claims. 

 
About a year after introducing this Act, the government issued these regulations. These 
designated certain production areas together with minerals containing therein to provide 
the means of determining assessments. Assessments are determined by the use of a 
complicated formulae which are designated to equate the royalty rates employed in The 
Mineral Land Tax Act to those employed in The Mineral Royalties Act. 

 
In February 1974 The Mineral Royalties Act, commonly referred to as Bill 31 was 
introduced and immediately became the subject of heated debate within and without the 
House. The mining industry conducted an aggressive advertising campaign in its attempt 
to arouse public pressure to make the government either abandon or substantially amend 
the legislation. Complemented by heavy criticism by the press and the investment 
community, some significant changes were made to the Bill which was proclaimed as of 
October 1st, 1974. 

 
Did you notice this, when the B.C. government brought in their Mineral Royalties Act, they did listen to 
the industry and they did listen to Members of the Opposition and the press and they did make some 
amendments and I would hope that the NDP Government in Saskatchewan would be equally as wise and 
make some changes as well. 
 

The Mineral Royalties Act applies to minerals produced in B.C. from Crown land, i.e. 
land held under lease by the miner. It imposes two separate royalties which are effective 
as of January 1st, 1974. 

 
(1) A smelter return royalty commonly referred to as the 'basic royalty' of 2 1/2 per cent 
for 1974 and five per cent for subsequent years applied to sales proceeds of 'designated 
minerals' produced in B.C. Sales proceeds 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1505 
 

are determined as the international metal price less smelting, refining and transportation 
costs. This royalty may be reduced in two ways. First there is a reduction in the royalty 
rate of one percentage point if the minerals are smeltered or refined in British Columbia. 
Secondly there is a reduction in the royalty of up to one percentage point in years when 
proceeds received are sufficiently less than basic value amounts. Therefore the minimum 
royalty for 1975 and subsequent years can be three per cent of both those conditions. 

 
An additional royalty commonly referred to as the 'super royalty' . . . 

 
This is kind of like the reserve tax. 
 

. . . of 50 per cent of the amount by which the international price as reduced by smelting 
and refining costs exceeds 120 per cent of the 'basic value' of the mineral. No deduction 
is allowed for transportation costs. Initially the 'basic values' are arbitrarily set up by 
Order in Council. To date, four minerals have been designated, have been assigned basic 
values for 1974. They are copper at 58 cents per pound; molybdenum, $1.76 per pound; 
gold $82.50 per ounce; silver $3.00 per ounce. 

 
I'll have to get my mineral affairs critic here to give me that. 
 

The super royalty is computed by each company using its individually rated average 
values for sales made during each year. 

 
A recent regulation of the Act provides new mines some relief from the super royalty 
during the first three years from commencement of commercial production. In a 
September 25, 1974 press release the Minister of Mines and Petroleum Resources stated: 
"In the case of new mines the incremental royalty takes effect only if net smelter returns 
exceed 135 per cent of the basic value of the first year, 130 per cent in the second year 
and 125 per cent in the third year of production." The following example shows how the 
basic and super royalties are calculated after 1974, both for a mine which commenced 
operating prior to January 1st, 1972 and for a mine operating in its first year assuming the 
copper price of $1 a pound. 

 
This is kind of interesting because it looks very much like the reserve tax in the kind of return it brings 
to the government. In a national copper price (and they are taking it at an estimated $1) smelting and 
refining costs are 16 cents, gross value then is 84 cents, transportation costs four cents, net value 80 
cents, basic royalty four cents, super royalty seven cents, total royalty 11 cents and the new mine, of 
course would be six cents as compared to 11 cents. 
 

The super royalty for a new mine is calculated as 115 per cent of 120 per cent, which is in 
accordance with the wording of the regulation. Accordingly the rate is 139 per cent, not 
135 per cent. May 6, 1974 Budget Proposals. 

 
Now this is kind of interesting too because, of course, everybody takes great exception to what the 
Federal Government does 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1506 
 

to the mining and the oil industry, particularly the provincial governments in B.C. and Saskatchewan 
and here is what it had upon existing tax structures. I continue quoting: 
 

After the B.C. mining industry had just finished making royalty submissions to the 
provincial government, a crushing but not unexpected blow was struck by the Federal 
Finance Minister when he introduced proposals to disallow the deduction of mining taxes 
and royalties. Immediately it became evident that the industry was caught in the middle 
of the federal and provincial confrontation. The Federal Government had taken the stance 
that it was not going to let the provincial government reduce the taxable income base of 
the resource industry by significant royalty and tax payments to the provincial 
governments. 

 
The awkward position in which the resource industry found itself is well explained by the 
following extract from the comments on the budget's resolutions for May, 1974 submitted 
by the joint committee on taxation to the Canadian Bar Association and the Canadian 
Institute of Chartered Accountants. 'One area of particular concern to this committee 
which does not relate to technicalities is the question of the taxation of the mining and oil 
and gas industries. We appreciate the problems involved and the difficulties in devising 
an appropriate formula for the division of revenues from these industries at this time, we 
do not believe that it is fair or right to allow the industry themselves to be caught in the 
middle of what is essentially a federal-provincial problem. There are indications that in 
some cases the combination of federal and provincial levies on the oil industry may result 
in a total tax which exceeds the profits earned and that in the area of mining, projects may 
be shelved because of the sudden increase in taxation which may render the investment 
uneconomic. We commented in our last brief in respect of federal taxation of provincial 
incentives, that taxpayers should not be made pawns of the federal-provincial dispute 
over the tax base; since then the situation has deteriorated rapidly in respect to an 
industry which is more than ever important to Canada. Problems of this sort must be 
resolved by consultation between governments, they cannot be resolved unilaterally 
through the tax system.' 

 
One of the things which I think some of the gentlemen opposite might have been very interested in was 
the Report of the Economic Council of Canada. One of the things the Economic Council of Canada 
reported was that Canada in the next few years is going to need something between 800 billion and 900 
billion of foreign investment if we are to continue to grow and develop and to have a country to 
maintain the standard of living that we are. I am not talking about foreign control, we are talking about 
in addition to Canadian capital. If this is the circumstance do you gentlemen not think that taxation 
measures such as the reserve tax, the taxation proposals, expropriation procedures over existing 
industries are going to help our development. Whenever an industry begins to make a profit instead of 
treating them fairly and dividing up the pot and seeing that the people get their fair share and leaving 
industry enough to expand and reinvest, the tool of expropriation and fear tactics that you are now 
putting into Saskatchewan will drive this foreign investment right out of our country. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1507 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Maybe what you are doing is that you are going to have the future generation 
of Canadians suffer and suffer and suffer as a result of the taxation policies and the expropriation in Bills 
1 and 2 that you are doing in Saskatchewan. And not only that it is not just hating Saskatchewan. Did 
you notice that the Economic Council said that this was going to be very difficult to get this 800 billion 
or 900 billion dollars worth of foreign investment because of the attitude of some Canadians, some 
political parties. That is, was very bad and that we didn't want foreign investment. And all I suggest is 
that the taxation system used fairly, so that investment is reinvested in our country and if we need eight 
to nine hundred billion more in investment in this country in the years ahead then surely this government 
and all governments, provincial and federal, should be having an eye to whatever policy they implement 
and whatever programs they implement that they are not going to jeopardize that foreign investment. 
Already we are beginning to see, and I don't have to tell the Provincial Government, we lost $500 
million, between $400 million and $500 million of expansion and development of new mines already 
because of your attitude in the reserve tax and the prorationing tax. There is no question about it. It has 
been in every paper and, of course, the Premier in his Speech from the Throne got up and talked about 
our little capital investment of one mine and talks about the overall policy across Canada of that 
particular company. What he didn't say was that in the rest of Canada there was a depressed state but in 
Saskatchewan in potash it was on the move, the demand was up and the price was rising. This was the 
one area we should expand in and already in this province we must have lost I say $400 million to $500 
million in expansion, capital investment and in the development of new mines because of the attitude of 
the NDP of this province. When you take the attitude of the NDP in British Columbia, the fear of you 
people across this country and if you can do it in one province you can do it in two provinces. What 
might happen in Manitoba and the other provinces in Canada, you have jeopardized hundreds of 
millions of dollars of investment in this country, in this nation which may well depend on the standard 
of living of your children and my children and future Canadians for years to come. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Even in Newfoundland, Cy? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That's right even in Newfoundland. And all I am suggesting to you that that is 
the reason. You are getting your pound of flesh out of the potash. There is no question about it. All you 
need to do, you don't need to expropriate them, you don't need to buy them out or force them to sell, nor 
blackmail them into selling, blackmail them with a club over their heads. 
 
Can you imagine the potash industry, what are they going to do? Are they going to stay in 
Saskatchewan? Or are they going to sell out to the NDP Government and go to Brazil or to Mexico or 
Montana or North Dakota and develop a new mine or New Brunswick, or maybe Thailand? Whose 
money are they going to be using to develop competition? Whose money? They are going to be using 
the Saskatchewan taxpayer's money. They are going to be taking that $500 million or whatever you are 
going to pay them it depends on how cheap you can steal it. When we 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1508 
 

get into clause by clause study this Act is designed on earned profits after taxation. You determine the 
level of taxation, you tell them what the profits are going to be, then you are going to pay for the mine 
on those earned profits. 
 
It is a shame, it is an attempt at theft to say that it is going to be a fair market value. All I am going to 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, is that what the NDP is doing is they are giving a $100 million of the taxpayers' 
money, giving it to a potash company saying here, get out, sell out, get out of Saskatchewan, you can't 
make any money, you won't get any return on our investment. We have no incentive to expand, no 
encouragement to stay in the province. Some of these companies are in the potash business, that is what 
they know best that is where their expertise is. They are going to go then to either North Dakota, 
Montana, New Brunswick, Thailand, Brazil, New Mexico, wherever it may be and turn around and 
develop new potash resources which will be in direct competition with the ones here in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I suggest to you the impact of future foreign investment of the reserve tax in Bill No. 1 and Bill No. 2 
can have a terrible impact upon Canada, upon Canadians and upon future generations in this country. 
 
It is rather interesting a few years ago Canada was very high up in relation to the standard of living of 
Canadians in relation to other countries in the world. Today we are dropping year by year. More and 
more countries in the world are improving over us in the standard of living. If we cannot turn around and 
attract foreign investment according to the economic survey and this is not the Liberal opposition saying 
this, this is not the Conservative opposition, this isn't the potash companies, this is the Economic 
Council of Canada, saying that if we can't turn around and encourage $800 billion to $900 billion dollars 
worth of foreign investment, other than Canadian investment that this country is in serious jeopardy and 
in serious danger and yet you people completely ignore it, completely go your happy route. You know 
the funny part of it is, I think in your own hearts all of you know that you are doing this. You are 
looking at what you think are the short term political benefits for your party, short term monetary gains 
for Saskatchewan and yet in your hearts you recognize the dangers of Canada and the dangers for the 
rest of this country. Oblivious to reason, you say, "Let's go on." 
 

Because provincial royalties are not levied on mining profits it is very difficult to arrive 
at an effective tax royalty as a percentage of mining income for British Columbia mining 
companies. 

 
We can say the exact same thing for the reserve tax. That is why I say I think the NDP Government in 
Saskatchewan copied their idea and the philosophy from the British Columbia mineral royalties tax in 
the Province of British Columbia. They are oblivious of what happened to Dave Barrett. It is not based 
on income, it is not based on profit and you might call it Barrett's boomerang, you might say that this is 
Blakeney's boomerang in 1979. 
 
People don't forget. You take what happened when the British labour government nationalized the steel. 
They didn't forget that. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1509 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — After two more elections they might forget. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, no, no. You know what you are doing, speaking of health, I like to talk 
health. You know what the former Minister of Health did. You know what he did for political reasons, 
he turned around and cancelled the premiums, did away with utilization fees or deterrent fees, did away 
with the $70 tax, and since then has destroyed the quality of medical care in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If you want to talk about it go ahead, go and ask any doctor, any hospital. You 
don't even have the courage and the guts to open the base hospital. You know why, because the costs are 
so high and you can't find the money. You are rasping medical care right down the Province of 
Saskatchewan, you are destroying the quality and the quantity. And that is because you did a cheap 
political thing and removed utilization fees and premiums. 
 
Don't think, Mr. Attorney General, four years from now you are the ones who are not going to pay the 
price in medical care. You are the ones that are going to pay the price. You destroyed it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — In 1976 we will win again on it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You are the ones that are going to pay the price. Go in '76, we will take you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Let's go in '76. Let's go, when are you going? As a matter of fact, Mr. Attorney 
General, Mr. Premier, maybe that is not a bad idea. The Conservative Leader is calling for it, the Leader 
of the Liberals has called for it, the potash companies have called for it. A lot of people are calling for it, 
particularly after British Columbia and I mentioned that a little while ago. People of British Columbia 
taught Canadians a lesson. They are not going to let a 40 per cent minority dictate the entire social and 
economic traffic of this country. If you call an election you are going to pay by the results the same as in 
British Columbia. You know you didn't have a mandate. Call an election that would be the honest thing 
to do. I tell you, Mr. Attorney General, you might be shocked and surprised and amazed. 
 
I want to pay $70 a year medical premiums so that I can get my kids in the hospital when they need it, I 
will pay $70 a year. You can quote that, it will be in Hansard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — It is about time that you people turned around. There are thousands of people 
trying to get into hospitals. The 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1510 
 

nurses who are quitting and refuse to go to work in the Province of Saskatchewan because of the cheap 
wages that you are paying. You took $17 million or whatever it is in medical premiums, I'll pay my $70 
and be glad. I believe that people who can afford it should pay it. That is on Hansard and you can quote 
that anywhere you like. 
 
Mr. Attorney General I should like to carry this on as a straight political discussion about a variety of 
subjects, but I don't want the Speaker to call me to order. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If the Speaker will eliminate any danger of me being called to order, and you 
would like to sit down and have a wide range — I have got a long evening. I would just love to have a 
wide ranging political discussion on any subject that you can come up with. Pick a subject, I will answer 
any questions. I would love to do it. Election '76, you name it . . . that is in Hansard. Would you like me 
to say that the Attorney General has indicated in the House in the Legislature that he'd like an election in 
1976? 
 
Let's get back to this very important thing, this tax in British Columbia from which the NDP copied this 
insidious reserve tax for the Province of Saskatchewan, consider what it did. One that is based, not on 
profit, no relation to income. The following table attempts to show the combined effect of royalty 
mining tax and income tax load of an actual copper mining company operating in British Columbia in 
1975 assuming the provisions of the Federal Budget in The Mineral Resources Act remain unchanged. 
 

Possible effective royalty and tax rates for '75 on a British Columbia copper mining 
company. 

 
This more than anything else brought about the defeat of the NDP in British Columbia. 
 

International copper price per pound at 75 cents; revenue $750, less smelting and refining 
costs $122, gross value, $628. Transportation $37; net value $591; operating costs $406; 
income before royalties and taxes $185; B.C. royalties, basic royalties five percent, $30; 
super royalty another $30; provincial mining tax 15 per cent of mining profits, $24; 
income tax, federal, 25 per cent of income, $46; provincial, 12 per cent of income, $22; 
total taxes and royalties $122, net income after royalties, $63; overall effective tax 
royalty rate 66 per cent. (Then it goes on) for $1 per pound, it's 78 per cent; at $1.25, it's 
87 per cent. 

 
This is another thing that is interesting. The British Columbia tax is the same thing as the reserve tax. As 
the price of the product goes up, the percentage of the tax goes up. As the amount of the profits goes up, 
or the amount of the sales goes up, the amount of the revenue goes up, up goes the percentage of the 
taxes. The exact same principle as the Province of Saskatchewan. The thing that completely discourages 
expansion, growth or development in the Province of Saskatchewan or in any and certainly resulted in 
the complete refusal of the people in the mining industry in the Province of British Columbia from 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1511 
 

investing in any kind of a mining enterprise there if they could possibly help it other than what they 
were required to do through investment that they had already made. 
 
It is the same thing in Saskatchewan. How could you turn around and ask anybody to invest in 
Saskatchewan and expand when as the returns on the product went up the percentage of your taxes went 
up? This is the craziest thing about it. Sometime I want the Premier to explain that to me. Because I sure 
can't figure it out. How are you ever going to encourage anyone to go out and sell potash, to get a better 
price, when the minute you do the percentage of your taxes goes up? I wish the Minister of Finance 
would explain that one to me. Because I can't understand it. 
 

Assumptions. 
 

(1) No earned depletion is available. Maximum earned depletion would reduce  
 effective rates to 9.25 per cent. 
(2) Minimum processing allowance is available for mining tax purposes giving an 
 effective rate of 12.7 per cent. 
(3) Royalties are not deductible for mining purposes. On May 30, 1974, a letter from 
 the Mines Minister to the managing director of the B.C. Mining Association 
 indicates that changes will be made to allow royalties to be deducted in 
 computing mining taxes. If appropriate amendment is made the rates are 64 per 
 cent, 75 per cent and 83 per cent, instead of 66 per cent, 78 per cent and 87 per 
 cent. 

 
It can be readily seen that the higher price level the overall effective tax royalty rates 
becomes confiscatory. 

 
Isn't that a fact. The higher the price, it almost becomes confiscation. If that is a fact, is that why the 
Minister of Finance will not enter this debate? Is that why the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
potash does not enter this debate? To explain the reserve tax and all its implications, the same as this 
British Columbia tax, it is frightening. 
 

Furthermore, once the super royalty is imposed, the mining company earns less net 
income after taxes and royalties when the selling price increases. Because the incremental 
effective royalty and tax rate becomes 104.7 per cent assuming constant smelting 
charges. It is of interest to note that at all price levels the Federal Government only wants 
25 per cent of income from mining. At the high price level moreover the federal share 
will be significantly reduced if the super royalty is allowed as a deduction in arriving at 
federal taxable income. 

 
I would like to finish this paper by highlighting what I consider to be the bright and dark 
sides of the British Columbia mining industry arising from the events that have occurred 
during 1973 and 1974. 

 
1. Less severe legislation. Certain amendments to The Mineral Royalties Act have 
been made since it was first introduced which have reduced the tax burden which was 
first expected by the industry. Originally it appeared 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1512 
 

that the government did not intend to allow a deduction for smelting and refining charges 
with the resultant effect that the super royalty would be much greater. These charges are 
now allowed as a deduction which means that the international metal price must now be 
about 84 cents a pound for copper before the super royalties applied. Copper is by far the 
largest mineral produced in British Columbia — about 700 million pounds of copper 
being mined in British Columbia annually. If smelting and refining charges were not 
deductible the super royalty alone would cost copper producers an additional $50 million 
at 84 cents a pound for copper. 

 
Furthermore, the recent issued regulations provide partial relief from the super royalty 
during the first three years of operation. In addition the regulations provide an automatic 
and clearly defined annual adjustment to the basic values that are used in the super 
royalty calculation. Basic values will not be adjusted by half of the annual movement in 
the Canadian wholesale price index. 

 
2. Provincial Administration. This year members of the taxation committee of the 
British Columbia Mining Association are being able to meet with the government 
officials to discuss many items requiring clarification under both royalty acts and to 
review and make suggested improvements to the royalty forms which will be required to 
be filed under the provisions of The Mineral Royalties Act. Government officials advised 
that there will be no royalties on December 31, 1973, 1973 inventories sold in 1974 and 
that the acts will essentially apply royalties on sales when the cash is received. These 
discussions are and will continue to be very important because the provincial government 
does not publish guidelines regarding the administrative practice which will evolve under 
the royalty legislation similar to the interpretation bulletins and information circulars 
published for the Income Tax Act. 

 
I would like to point out that isn't it too bad that the NDP in Saskatchewan won't take the same attitude, 
recognize some of the weaknesses of the reserve tax, some of the difficulties of the industry and come in 
and bring about some legitimate changes. 
 
Now the dark signs. They had said those were the bright signs, the fact that the Government was willing 
to listen, the fact that they had made some changes in regulations. They had given a three year 
concession to new industry. Now here are the dark signs. 
 

1. Federal-Provincial Confrontation. It is of paramount importance that the two 
levels of government resolve their difference over the taxation of the resources sector. It 
is evident that the mining industry will not be able to grow and many mining companies 
will not be able to survive for long unless some agreement, satisfactory to all parties is 
reached. 

 
Of course, I am referring to the same situation in oil as we are in the mining industry. And particularly in 
oil in Saskatchewan. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1513 
 

2. Effect on mining. Royalties and taxes are additional costs which must be applied 
to an ore body in determining whether or not it is economic. 

 
This is the real crux in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Royalties and taxes are additional costs which must be applied to an ore body in 
determining whether or not it is economic. Increased taxation will require either a high 
metal price or higher grade ore bodies with higher cutoff grades to be developed in future 
years. This is particularly important in British Columbia where new and potential mines 
comprise low grade deposits which would be uneconomic except for their large volume 
throughout. As a result statistics indicate a sharp reduction in exploration and 
development expenditures in British Columbia — expenditures necessary to find new 
mines. Claim staking has dropped from an average of about 60,000 a year to an estimated 
15,000 this year. 

 
This is what has happened in British Columbia, from 60,000 a year claim stakes to 15,000. That's almost 
the same thing that has happened in the oil industry in the Province of Saskatchewan. It's disastrous. 
 

Exploration expenditures have declined from an average of 38 million a year to about 15 
million (less than 50 per cent). Further, no new major mines have been placed in 
production in British Columbia since 1972. 

 
This again comes right back to almost the identical situation in Saskatchewan, no new potash mines at a 
period and a time when potash was really in world demand, food production and food demands are 
going up, big countries are no longer going to be permitted to let their families starve, or their people 
starve or go hungry and, of course, the need and the demand for potash has gone up and up and up and 
yet we haven't got one new mine coming into production, one new mine under construction. We haven't 
got one new mine that really has done any expansion in the last couple of years. I continue: 
 

3. Ministerial Discretion — The Mineral Land Tax Act and The Mineral Royalties 
Act, are both riddled with ministerial discretion, with the result that the industry is left 
with 'trust me' legislation. 

 
How true that is in Saskatchewan eh! The Cabinet can get together and change so many things, so many 
regulations, so many rates, so many royalties and do all those kind of things and, of course, now the 
industry has to depend also on the 'trust me' attitude. Who would trust the NDP? Particularly the 
industry, after what they did to the oil industry and the forest industry and now the uranium industry is 
next under the gun. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — You read that page once already. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Did I? Oh, no, no, no. This is very interesting. 
 
Many of these provisions contained in the former Act have already been discussed. Similar 
provisions exist in The Mineral Royalties Act which allow the Cabinet to determine 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1514 
 

basic value, net value, designated minerals, whether to grant or default deferment of royalties 
as well as what constitutes milling, smelting or refining. These are the important provisions of 
the Act and they provide the Government with enough power to regulate the province of the 
British Columbia mining companies. 

 
4. Compliance — Section 6 of The Mineral Royalties Act requires producers to file 
royalty forms and make royalty payments on the 15th day of each month. These forms 
are eight pages and require details of each sale made in the preceding month, adjustment 
relating to prior month's sales, etc. The filing deadline is extremely tight considering the 
detail required. Also the forms are designated for copper sale, where a producer only 
makes about 15 sales a year, which is in sharp contrast to our experience with other 
metals, (such as that one word that I cannot pronounce. What is it again Gary?) 

 
MR. LANE: — Molybdenum! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Molybdenum — ah! That's it. 
 

where there are about 500 sales annually. The royalty form filing requirements have not 
yet been prescribed for mining companies who were taxed under The Mineral Lands Tax 
Act. The royalty payments need only to be made by July 2 of the following year, which is 
certainly advantageous in light of currently high interest rates. It is of interest that S5 of 
The Mineral Royalties Act contains the disclosure requirements and that every producer 
must file with the administrator a certified copy of every subsisting agreement with 
respect to producing, selling, milling, smelting, transporting or marketing of the 
designated mineral. 

 
This is the real important one. 
 

Conclusions — 1974 has been a very busy year for those who have tried to keep up with 
the mining legislation introduced provincially and proposed federally. The central 
problem today has to be to resolve the conflict between the federal and provincial 
government so that the British Columbia mining industry will not be burdened with 
extremely high effective tax rates in the future and so that it can continue to grow and 
contribute to the economic welfare of the country. It appears that the most the mining 
industry can hope for is that the combined tax load of both governments is similar to that 
of most other public companies and does not exceed 50 per cent of income. 

 
Well I think in some cases it can go beyond that, as long as it is based on profit. The profit can fluctuate, 
but I don't think there is anything wrong with establishing a higher rate and I think the Minister of 
Mineral Resources, and the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation could sit down and determine 
what they consider to be a fair return. Base it on profit, base it on income, and I think it would be 
acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan and acceptable to the mining industry and would not require 
the risk and the overall capital requirements to get into the potash industry and purchase them or 
expropriate. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1515 
 

Now that's the first point. The second: 
 

The royalty legislation has been clarified so that its effect on British Columbia mining 
companies is not as onerous as indicated in Bill 31, before it was amended. Since 
royalties will not be applied to December 31, 1973 inventories, since the basic royalty for 
1974 is 2 1/2 per cent as opposed to five per cent for subsequent years, the financial 
burden on the industry will not be too severe in 1974, but certainly dramatic in 1975. 
However, the super royalty will make it much more difficult for mines to have good years 
to make up for bad years when it is important to mining as world metal prices are so 
fluctuating. Even if the Federal Government allows the deduction of royalties when the 
basic and super royalties are applied gross revenues will be taxed at 55 per cent, the 
remaining 45 per cent after expenses will be subject to income and mining expenses. 

 
Once again, this goes right back to the concept and the fact of the reserve tax being a lump-sum 
payment, not based on profits. It makes no consideration for bad years. We have seen them in the potash 
industry, we may see them again. There is no way which the potash companies can put aside a reserve 
from which they can look after future development and growth. 
 

There is sufficient ministerial discretion present in both royalty Acts to give both the 
Cabinet the power to regulate, through profits, the British Columbia's second largest 
industry. It is no wonder that mining exploration and development necessary to find new 
mines has declined dramatically. It is unfortunate that the provincial government did not 
just increase the British Columbia mining tax to obtain an equivalent amount of revenue 
from British Columbia mining companies. Not only would it have overcome future 
compliance problems, but it would have been a more equitable method of taxation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's what has happened in British Columbia and you and I are now aware of what 
has just occurred in British Columbia. A few weeks ago the NDP were defeated. There are a lot of 
political observers very astute people who have had a great deal of experience in the Province of British 
Columbia, who are convinced that more than any other single factor the NDP attitude in the province of 
British Columbia towards the resource industry and the complete almost dissipation of the idea of 
British Columbia being the land of opportunity in Canada. The slow down brought about in its growth, 
development and expansion was responsible for the NDP defeat in the Province of British Columbia. I 
would hope, Mr. Premier and Members of the Government, Members in the back benches, would look 
carefully at what happened in British Columbia. I have to go out to British Columbia in two or three 
weeks, whenever we manage to get this Bill passed in the House and I'm looking forward very, very 
much to talking to some of my British Columbia friends. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What party? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well I'll tell you what party — the free enterprise party. That's what party, 
we're not Social Crediters, don't ever kid yourself. They didn't vote for them because of their 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1516 
 

philosophical slant, as I said before, Mr. Premier, you were out, they didn't vote for Major Douglas' 
Social Credit theories, what they voted for was against state regimentation and state control and state 
ownership and unfair taxation. That's what they voted against. That's why when I go out there I'll be 
talking to my free enterprise friends. I'll probably be talking to some of all political faiths and they'd be 
telling me — go back and tell the people of Saskatchewan, all those free enterprisers, get behind the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. You are the alternative. Get behind you. You will defeat the NDP and I 
believe that the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada will have learned that lesson. I think 
that's the message that I'm going to get when I go out there to the Province of British Columbia from my 
friends and they are going to make it very, very clear without any question. 
 
I have another thing that I wanted to talk about, originally. When I started off I spent a few minute today 
talking about equality and taxation, talking about ability to pay, talking about fairness, talking about 
responsibility in taxation. I want to take some time this evening and point out some of those clauses of 
The British North America Act, and some of the confrontation that's developing over provincial and 
federal decisions on resource taxation. But I want to talk about some of the basic principles of good 
taxation policy, principles which normally are followed by all governments in Canada and around the 
world, and not only that, I am going to tell you something. One of the greatest ways to judge a 
government is by the principle by which it taxes its citizens. No question about it. It is one of the ways 
by which people will judge a government, by the way it taxes its citizens. And I'm not talking about 
private citizens only. I'm talking about corporation citizens, private and corporate citizens, and I think 
because of the way in which you are taxing the corporations, I think that that's what is going to happen 
in the province. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (unintelligible) . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . and I think that's what is gong to happen in the province. Do you want me 
to get into this, shall we talk about health again? It may well be that we can turn around and do . . . the 
Minister of Health is back, you might even be able to do it and he might be able to help you out a little 
bit and tell you how many people are waiting in line and when the Minister of Health is back he might 
be able to help you out a little bit. He might tell you how many people are waiting to get into elective 
surgery and why the sick and the lame and the poor and the blind can't get into the base hospital because 
you haven't got enough money to open it. Why you can't hire nurses because you haven't got enough 
money to pay them. Maybe if you will sit down and move over one seat, the Minister of Health will tell 
you those things. He will tell you for example why you have only got about 130 to 150 beds in a hospital 
that's been sitting there wide-open ready to be open for something like three or four years, because you 
don't have any money, because you turned around and for political purposes to try and win and election, 
you cancelled the premiums. Go sit down beside the Minister of Health and he will tell you all about 
those things. 
 
But anyway, I want to repeat that one of the things that governments are judged on is the way in which 
they tax their citizens. There are two real basic principles in taxation which 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1517 
 

everybody recognizes. One is equality and that equality, of course, is based primarily on the principle of 
taxing according to the ability to pay. The NDP says it espouses this principle. I have heard the Premier 
and every Member of the Government stand up in this House time and time again, and you have 
completely repudiated that principle. You have completely destroyed the whole concept of good taxation 
policy that you espouse, because it is not related to profit at all, the reserve tax, and, of course, you turn 
around then and chastise the industry because they take the only recourse they have left and that, of 
course, is the courts. 
 
But I want to talk about equity and taxation and I want to read to you the pattern of taxation in Canada, 
because if there is a quarrel between the NDP and the potash industry it is because of the taxation policy 
of the NDP. And, therefore, it's vital that the people of Saskatchewan and all of us have a clear 
understanding of just what is the taxation policy of the NDP. I want to talk to you a little bit about 
equity. 
 

In its Eighth Annual Review (and once again this doesn't come from the Liberals or from 
a chartered accountant, or the potash industry, this comes from the Economic Council of 
Canada) the Economic Council of Canada emphasized the importance of equity 
consideration in planning and evaluating the economic programs of governments. 

 
Do you treat the potash industry the same as you treat the forest industry? Do you treat the potash 
industry the same as uranium? Do you treat the potash industry the same as the hard rock mining 
industry? No! There's no equity in your resource policy at all. 
 

Determining who pays for, and who benefits from, a particular government program is 
recognized to be equally important as considering the effect on economic stabilization 
and resource allocation. For this reason the income distributional consequences of 
government actions have become a matter of concern in intelligent policy formation. For 
example, when the broad goals of equity, stabilization and allocation conflict, as they 
very often do, a policy maker must be aware of how much of one objective he is trading 
off to attain more of another. 

 
By examining taxes levied by all three levels of government in Canada, this study 
addresses one side of the equity question. Who pays for the various government 
activities? In the competitive market is it possible to assert that buyers of commodities 
bear the costs of producing them? The equity problem inherent in government actions is 
that only a very small portion of the goods and services provided by government is 
allocated to consumers through markets. By far the greatest part is distributed to the 
population in general, e.g. public goods, or to the persons according to criteria that are 
not simultaneously established as part of the market transaction e.g. age, sex, race, 
geographical location, wealth, etc. Consequently, the question arises as to which 
individual and group pays the costs of the goods and services distributed outside the 
market mechanisms. To answer this question at least approximately it is necessary to first 
examine the incidence of taxes in Canada. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1518 
 

Determining the incidence of a tax could loosely be defined as deciding who in the final 
analysis actually paid, or bears the burden of the tax. Virtually all taxes have the potential 
to affect the relative economic position of an individual (family) in two ways — by 
affecting the income received (income source side) or by altering the relative prices of the 
goods bought (the income-use side). The net effect of these two adjustments is to change 
the real income position of the individual as compared to his pretax position and relative 
to other members of the community. Analyzing the relative change is the essence of the 
study of tax incidence. It is important to note at this point that consistent with the above 
definition of incidence, the objective here is to examine actual taxes borne by each 
income class, which may be quite different from the taxes initially levied on the group. 
Indeed it is precisely this difference that is the heart of tax shifting and tax shifting is in 
turn the heart of tax incidence. Furthermore, shifting may be of two types — backward 
shifting occurs when a tax is passed on to other factors of production and forward shifting 
occurs when a tax is passed on to consumers via relatively higher prices. Depending on 
the extent of relative price change shifting may range anywhere from zero per cent to 
over 100 per cent. 

 
Of course, we don't have this shift in potash because we don't use potash. 
 

A substantial amount of theoretical work on tax incidence has already been done using 
both partial and general equilibrium approaches and it is not the intent of this study to add 
to that body of theory. Rather, the intent is to employ some of the results of theoretical 
investigations to estimate the actual pattern of tax incidence in Canada, the tax revenues 
of all three levels of government are included in the analysis. 

 
To be more specific, this study analyzes the incidence of taxes in Canada by provinces 
and within provinces by income groups. It thus goes a step further than earlier studies of 
tax incidence in Canada, which concentrated on the overall pattern and did not deal with 
interprovincial variations. Included will be an examination of: 

 
(i) the level and progressiveness of individual taxes and total taxes paid by the  
 residents of each province; 
(ii) the overall levels and progressiveness of tax systems across provinces; and 
(iii) the tax situations of families in comparable economic positions across the 
 country. 

 
In a quantitative study such as this two basic approaches can be followed. The first deals 
with families on an individual basis using very detailed data; the effect of taxes on the 
relative economic position of each family are determined. And assuming that these 
families are represented by the general population in various ways, conclusions about the 
general pattern of tax incidence are drawn. This approach, while it promises a great deal 
of detail and accuracy has only recently become feasible with the development of the 
techniques of microsimulation 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1519 
 

and the extensive data basis upon which it depends. 
 

The second approach has been more extensively explored and is one used in this study. 
The population is grouped into meaningful socioeconomic classes and a picture of tax 
incidence is drawn using information from each of the separate classes (e.g. mean 
income). 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Got it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Have you got it? I don't need to explain. 
 

The criterion employed to classify the population is annual income. This seems the 
logical choice, given that the purpose is to provide information useful in the evaluation of 
the equity aspects of government revenue policy. The results of this approach, while they 
may not describe the economic position of any actual family are reliable when interpreted 
as 'class averages'. 

 
It is important to note that this study examines only one side of government fiscal activity 
— tax revenues or cost to the taxpayers. In order to draw a complete picture of the 
relative positions of individuals or groups as affected by government policies it is 
necessary to use data about the incidence of the benefits of government expenditures as 
well. 

 
A further caveat is in order here. This study is empirical but not in the econometric sense 
of the word. It is instead a quantification of theoretical assumptions and conclusions 
about tax incidence. 

 
Now I give you a good English lesson here anyway. 
 

Consequently it is not possible to apply a statistical test of significance to the results or to 
employ conventional statistical measures of confidence in their interpretation. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Repeat that. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I should repeat that? 
 

Consequently it is not possible to apply a statistical test of significance to the results or to 
employ conventional statistical measures of confidence in their interpretation. 

 
Got that? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . didn't get . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, you didn't get that. 
 
In what follows chapter 2 will construct the income classes in each province, and that, of course, 
is not important. I want to get down to the 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1520 
 

basis . . . when it comes to what it is, the provincial allocation of taxes. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The last page has the funnies, read those. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — All right. Would you be able to understand those? If I got to the funnies could 
you understand that? I don't think you could, you know that. You know something, but if you can 
understand those funnies, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll bring those in after supper because it will be the 
first thing you have understood since you came here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, I really will. I will bring in the funnies and I'll bring them in and I'll read 
them and not only that I'll send you any additions. I'll try and get some. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (unintelligible) . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If you have trouble, I'll really . . . 
 
Now I want to turn around here, the next most important part of this is, of course, when we get into the 
provincial allocation of taxes and I want to talk about this because this talks about the provincial 
allocation of taxes and I think this is important. Particularly for Ted. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Bowerman. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, no, I wouldn't say that about you. 
 
  Chapter 4 — The Provincial Allocation of Taxes; 
 

The objective of this study is to determine who pays taxes rather than which jurisdiction 
levies or receives them. 

 
This is important when we talk about the potash industry. 
 

The next step towards this objective is to determine the share of each particular revenue 
source formed by the residents of each province. (This once again is equity.) Thus the 
provincial distribution of taxes is determined by the incidence of taxes and not by the 
provincial collection of revenues. For example, part of the corporate profits tax levied by 
Ontario may be shifted to consumers in British Columbia and would be allocated to 
British Columbia in the provincial distribution. 

 
Approximately $24 billion of federal-provincial and municipal tax revenues have been 
allocated for the year 1969. This sum accounts for over 95 per cent of the total revenues 
that are classified here as taxation revenues. The other five per cent would be mainly 
taxes that are assumed to be paid by foreigners and excluded from these totals and a few 
minor taxes that were not allocated. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1521 
 

I want to talk to you and then I want to read to you about what it says about estates and succession 
duties. 
 

Though federal-provincial arrangements varied considerably, each province receives 75 
per cent of the revenue from estates within its jurisdiction. Available data are compiled 
according to the province in which the estate or part of it is located. Ideally, however, one 
would like data on the province of residence of the beneficiary and the donor. This raises 
problems because there is no way to make adjustments for an individual living in one 
province whose estate includes assets in another. Because of this limitation which is not 
likely to appreciably affect the overall provincial distribution, the distribution of federal 
estate taxes, table 4 (1) is by province of assessment as taken from the Department of 
National Revenue data. 

 
The federal collections $100.4 million are then split between federal share and the 
provincial shares. 

 
And I want to bring this up to show you how once again the Federal Government did away with these 
terrible onerous taxes, estate taxes and here the Province of Saskatchewan turned around and put them 
on. 
 
Now I want to talk about natural resources taxes which is really the part of this particular reading I 
wanted you all to hear. 

 
Natural resource charges are mainly of two kinds. Rents on mineral producing properties, 
and, of course, that's lease charges and so forth, and royalties. Federal revenues can for 
the most part be classified as royalties. 

 
As discussed above, these are assumed to be ultimately borne by consumers and 
consequently are distributed provincially by the series on retail trade. From the financial 
management data for FY1968 (and you should mark that down) it was determined that 
approximately 61 per cent of provincial revenues could be classified as royalties, and 39 
per cent as rents. Revenues from royalty payments are distributed to the provinces 
according to the consumption shares i.e. by using the retail sales series. 

 
Note that, consistent with the objective of this study this distribution attempts to estimate 
the province from which the payment ultimately comes; the revenues are not distributed 
according to which province collects them. Royalty payments amount to 369.8 million to 
the total provincial resource revenues of 522.3. 

 
The remainder 152 million is accounted for by rent payments, which as discussed are 
assumed to be borne by the owners of the resource companies. Again assuming 35 per 
cent foreign ownership — this may be an under-estimate given the relatively heavier 
foreign investment in Canadian resource industries — the foreign share of these charges 
is subtracted in arriving at the above total. This amount deemed to be paid by Canadian 
owners 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1522 
 

is provincially distributed according to the distribution dividends. 
 

The provincial allocations in table 4 (1) are the sums of the royalties and rents allocated 
to each province. 

 
I just wanted to read you that to give you an idea of what the tax situation was in Canada prior to the 
imposition of the B.C. taxation story and what happened, of course, when they not only put it in in B.C., 
but they also then in the Province of Saskatchewan in the potash industry and in the oil industry. 
 
Now I've got one other thing here that I think is important because it relates, it is another comparison 
which I think I would like to see read into the record, it's the difference in the attitude of another NDP 
government. This NDP government exists in the Province of Manitoba. Of course, we are talking about 
Premier Ed Schreyer's NDP government in that province. Once again like the Province of Saskatchewan 
and the Province of British Columbia, particularly in northern Manitoba there are a lot of resources. We 
can think of Flin Flon and Lynn Lake and many of the mining properties in northern Manitoba which 
provide a very, very large portion of the resource industry in the Province of Manitoba and, of course, it 
will be interesting to see the attitude of that government compared to the attitude of the British 
Columbia government, compared to the attitude of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, this is one of the reasons why I think it would be wise to accept, if the Government would 
accept the amendment as proposed by my colleagues, in which they said we should set up a public 
hearing, tour around the Province of Saskatchewan and find people who would be willing to come in as 
witnesses. We could then call in, for example, the Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources in the Province 
of British Columbia and get from him first hand what the tax situation and the tax business in the 
Province of British Columbia did to the mining industry, what it did to overall revenues and so forth. We 
could turn around and call in the mining experts from the Province of Manitoba, where they could make 
a comparison of their tax policies in the Province of Manitoba with the Province of Saskatchewan. We 
are neighbors, we have many of the same opportunities. We are both members, or we both have large 
portions of the Pre-Cambrian Shield in our province. Much of the potential of the Province of 
Saskatchewan is similar to the potential in northern Manitoba because of the Pre-Cambrian Shield and 
yet for some strange reason Manitoba doesn't seem to have had the same impact of the NDP as we have 
had here in Saskatchewan and therefore, I do think it would be important to hear the taxation policy on 
resources for the Province of Manitoba and then we would have a real analysis. We would hear what 
happened in British Columbia with those two taxes, The Mineral Lands Act tax, the mineral royalties 
tax, which based it not on income, not on relation to profits. We saw what happened to the price of 
copper and to the copper industry. 
 
You know, one of the most interesting ads I saw in the whole British Columbia election was a big ad by 
the mining industry, saying that they represented 6,000 people who were no longer working. That they 
used to be in the mining business, but because of the mining taxation principles of the B.C. government 
they now were out of a job. It said every one of those 6,000 people and their families were voting free 
enterprise. I think 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1523 
 

this is the kind of a comparison we need. Therefore this particular essay and this one is written by 
another very, very influential and very talented and capable person. It's B.I. Watson, another chartered 
accountant, Treasurer, Sherrit Gordon Mines Ltd., Toronto, another one of the majority mining 
corporations in Canada. He's another chartered accountant, a man who has a great deal of knowledge 
and experience particularly in the taxation field of the mining industry. That is why I want to read it to 
you if I can. I hope to finish it because at 7:00 o'clock I want to get into a little variety here and I thought 
I would talk about kind of the meat of it. I thought I'd give you a little dissertation on the attempts of 
your Government to brainwash the citizens of Saskatchewan and what I have found as I've been touring 
the province in the last two weeks, about brainwashing. But I didn't want to get into that until after 
supper, because I thought you might want to digest your meal. But that was quite an exercise and the 
funny part of it is, everybody in Saskatchewan was able to identify it exactly for what it was, an attempt 
to brainwash. 
 
Every time they have heard that over the radio and they have heard that IMC ad, they laughed and then 
every time they heard that one about the head office and about Sask Minerals and all the rest of it. They 
thought it was . . . every time they opened the newspaper, they recognized it for exactly what it is. 
 
But I better save that for after supper because I want to do a comparison. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What do they say about the potash ads? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — They expected there should be two sides of the story. But there is a basic 
difference, Roy. You see what happens with the potash ads, they pay for that themselves. That's the 
difference. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . comes out . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh you mean it comes out of that reserve tax because it's over a 100 per cent. 
Is that what you are saying? But what happens with your brainwashing, you see what happens, when the 
potash ad puts on an ad that's their privilege. It's the same if I want to put on an ad, pay for it myself, 
that's my privilege. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What did they say about the Conservative ad? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You know what I think the Conservative ad was. I'll tell you what happened 
with the Tory ad. You know it's really funny. Every Tory I talked to was giving Dick so much of the 
dickens and he got so much H E L L from the Conservatives around the Province of Saskatchewan that 
everywhere he moved and everywhere he went he got so much trouble from his own party that he 
decided that he would try to convince the people of Saskatchewan that really they did oppose the potash 
legislation. So he turned around . . . 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1524 
 

MR. COWLEY: — Who paid for that ad? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I think that he did. Not the people of Saskatchewan. I don't care whether it got 
paid for as long as the taxpayers don't pay for it, unlike what you do. You know, you fellows shouldn't 
use the taxpayers' money. He's using his own money. You know, it's really quite interesting anyway. 
That's why I think the Conservatives put the ad on, because everyone began to give them so much 'hail 
Columbia'. They said what are you doing, you are sitting there, you are doing nothing. The most 
important issue that's ever been in Saskatchewan for years and years, free enterprise at stake and here 
you remain silent and say, oh we want it on the books and make them accountable. So all of a sudden 
Dick had to turn around and say, we are opposed and he had to announce the reversal. That's what I 
think. But you see I don't mind that ad. I think that's the right and the privilege of any political party or 
any individual to show their stance or position. But I don't think it's the right of the NDP to use the 
taxpayers' money to put their political posture to the province. 
 
But I'm going to talk about that after supper because it will give a little variety. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (unintelligible) . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well that's what you hope. You don't mind squandering thousands and 
thousands of dollars of the taxpayers' money. That's what I told the Leader of the Conservatives a couple 
of weeks ago. "You let this Bill through, you think they will remember. They will spend hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars of the taxpayers' money in the next four years to tell you 
what a great job they do." 
 
Taxation of mining in Manitoba, recent developments. This is kind of interesting because Ed Schreyer's 
just not quite as dumb as the NDP in Saskatchewan. He's not as dumb as the NDP in British Columbia 
and that's why he's going to be the third NDP government to get kicked out, not the second, as you are 
going to be. 
 

Changes in the basis of taxation of the mining industry in Manitoba and Canada have 
been . . . 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . what . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You know something, it's nice to hear the Minister in charge . . . you know that 
we did hear a rumor of and I'm not sure if the Press has heard this or not, but we heard a rumor that the 
Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation was actually going to get into the debate, that the NDP said 
we can't take any more of this static. They said that they had a little hurried cabinet meeting and the 
Premier decided that he was going to get into the debate and who else? I heard three of them. I think it 
was the Minister of Finance. So we can anticipate the Minister of Finance . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . maybe . . . 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1525 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, he wouldn't get into it. The Premier and the Minister in charge of the 
Potash Corporation are actually going to get in. Now that's the rumor circulating, that they are getting 
tired, they feel they are getting too much static. If that's true, Mr. Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Potash Corporation, I welcome it. Because the only debates you have done since you came here in the 
last two months is from the seat of your trousers and that's not the way you do it here. That's the rumor 
that's circulating. I heard that from a very reliable source. Right out of the Premier's office as a matter of 
fact. I wouldn't like to tell you where but I heard it from a very reliable source. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — When is that going to be? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, as soon as they get in, in fact they were going to put one up this afternoon, 
at least one NDP speaker. I was hoping it might have been one of them, the Premier or the Minister of 
Finance or somebody. We'll let him go tomorrow. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Wednesday. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — On Wednesday. I want to read this in. Now the Attorney General has just made 
a promise to the House, to the people of Saskatchewan that he is going to call Bill 2 on Wednesday and 
on Bill 2 we are finally going to hear from the NDP Cabinet Ministers who have attempted to ram this 
Bill down the throats of the people without providing any information, anything else. The 31st day of 
the debate we are going to hear from the Premier, the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Potash 
Corporation and I think we should all give them a hand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Not only that, if you call Bill 2 we will all sit quiet here and give you full 
opportunity to go. We want to hear what the Premier has to say. This may change the course of the 
debate on Bill 2, because if he comes out and tells us, it would be kind of interesting to see if he is going 
to tell us how much he's going to pay, what interest rates he's going to have to pay, where he's going to 
get the money, how many mines is he going to buy, what's the time schedule that he's going by. I tell 
you something, all of Saskatchewan will be waiting with great anticipation for Wednesday, to have the 
opportunity for the Premier to stand up here and tell the people of Saskatchewan on January 7, just how 
important this is. 
 
I want to read this to the Minister. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, no, you gave us a commitment now. 
 

Some substantial changes have already been made and additional changes with very 
serious implications for the mining industry have been announced. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1526 
 

I am saving my political speech from 9:00 to 9:30. Don't go to sleep yet, because I am saving my 
political speech for the last half hour. 
 

The proposed legislation by both Canada and Manitoba have not yet been implemented 
and will in all probability be revised before becoming law. 

 
Before dealing with the most recent proposals affecting the Manitoba mining industry, let 
me briefly review the history of taxation as it affects companies in the industry. Ten years 
ago the industry was subject to Federal and Manitoba corporate taxes and to a Manitoba 
mining royalty tax which in total gave the companies a preferential position in 
comparison to manufacturing and other corporations as an encouragement to the 
development of Canada's natural resources. The Royal Commission on Taxation under 
the chairmanship of the late Mr. Kenneth Carter had been studying the taxation system in 
Canada since 1962. Its report published early in 1967 recommended that the preferential 
position of the mining industry be eliminated and the mining companies be treated in the 
same manner as all other corporate taxpayers. Following long and heated discussions of 
the Carter Commission proposals the Federal Government published its Proposals for 
Tax Reform in November 1969. The Government concluded that some special rules were 
still needed for the mineral industry and that provisions should be made so that really 
profitable operations would bear a fair share of taxes. 

 
The Government proposed that: 

 
(1) The three year tax exemption of profits from new mines be eliminated after 
December 31, 1973. 

 
(2) That a separate asset class be set up for new mining machinery and buildings 
which would permit the taxpayer to write off the cost for tax purposes as far as income 
from the new mine would absorb it. 

 
(3) The depletion allowance as a percentage of profit be eliminated after 1975, and 

 
(4) So-called earned depletion allowance be introduced effective after 1975 which 
had no relation to depletion in its historical sense as an allowance for using up of a 
wasting asset, but merely permitted the deduction from income of an additional one-third 
of exploration and new mining expenditures. 

 
I think this is a good thing, this earned depletion and the doing away with the depletion allowances. 
Some of you may be aware of the depletion allowance and its principle. It explains it here for those of 
you who have never had an opportunity to really study those taxes. It explains the depletion allowance 
and the new earned depletion principle which the Federal Government is getting into. 
 

Long and heated discussions of the government proposals took place. In 1974 
amendments were made to the Income Tax Act which enacted the proposals in essentially 
the same form as they had been introduced but with one delay in 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1527 
 

the implementation of the depletion changes until after 1976. An additional change made 
in legislation was elimination of the deductibility of provincial mining and royalty taxes 
after 1976 and a provision for the abatement of 15 percentage points of federal income 
tax on mining profits. 

 
While changes were being discussed and implemented in the federal field which resulted 
in substantially higher taxes of the mining industry, the winds of change were increasing 
in the provincial field as well. In June '69, the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Manitoba was defeated and replaced by an NDP Government under Premier Schreyer. 
The new government was of the opinion that the mining industry did not pay to the 
province a proper share of the profits derived from the exportation of the mineral 
resources which had originally belonged to the people. Changes were made to the 
Manitoba Mining and Royalty Tax Act which, (1) eliminated after December 31, 1971, 
reduction of half rates on the income from new mines in the first three years of 
production, and (2) increased the rate of tax from a graduated rate of six per cent to 11 
per cent to a rate of 15 per cent on all income effective January 1, 1971. 

 
Notice that. One thing that the Manitoba Government did that was entirely different, when they brought 
about changes to the mineral resource taxation, they brought it in in relation to income, raised it 
substantially which is acceptable I am sure by most people. 
 

The latter rate change had the effect of increasing tax by 150 per cent on the first one 
million of income; by 67 per cent on the next four million; and by 36 per cent on all 
income over five million. The Government changed the departmental administration 
responsible for enforcing the Act and new and narrow interpretations have resulted in 
much higher assessments most of which are presently under appeal. The changes 
instituted have only been of an interim nature to cover the situation until a new policy can 
be devised and instituted which would cover the taxation of the mining industry in its 
relations with the government. In 1972 Professor Eric Kierans was invited to submit his 
views to the Government of Manitoba on the resource policies of the province then in 
effect and in terms of reference needed 'to assist in the development of a technically 
sound policy respecting the natural resources of Manitoba.' 

 
You know that Eric used to be a Liberal, one of the very few we ever lose, who strays down the path of 
the NDP. 
 

His Report on Natural Resources Policy in Manitoba was released in February 1973 in 
which he stated, that he would recommend to the Government of Manitoba a new 
resource policy that would place the responsibility for all future development of 
Manitoba's resources firmly in the hands of the public sector as being the only effective 
manner in which the people of Manitoba can be sure that the value of the depleted 
resources remains in Manitoba. A fundamental aim of such policy shall be the 
repatriation by the Crown of all existing resources leased to the private sector and that a 
period not exceeding ten years 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1528 
 

is sufficient to accomplish the transfer in an orderly fashion. 
 
Imagine. Thank God that Ed Schreyer had more brains than to listen to Eric Kierans. 
 

For the long term the policy was to be implemented by the Crown exploration company 
pursuing an active and aggressive exploration program and by the government taking 
over the mineral rights from the private sector by eliminating the practice of assigning 
mineral rights to the private sector, by forbidding the transfer of existing rights and by 
reversion to the Crown of such rights upon termination. In the transition period he 
recommended a property tax on reserves held under existing leases at a rate that would 
force the pace of repatriation to the Crown, i.e. by expropriation through taxation. His 
other major recommendation was to abolish the 15 per cent mining royalty tax on net 
income and replace it with a 15 per cent tax on the value of annual output. The 
Government of Manitoba chose not to act on the radical recommendations of Mr. Kierans 
but in turn set up an internal government committee to study the Kieran report, to make 
policy recommendations to the government. A year ago when the Canadian Tax 
Foundation held its annual conference this committee had not yet presented its findings. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think everybody has had a very interesting afternoon and I should like to call it 5:30. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o'clock p.m. until 7:00 o'clock p.m. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, in starting off this evening I thought I might divert a little bit and 
talk about what I consider, apart from all the frivolity, a very serious subject. The subject is the abuse of 
taxpayers' funds in relation to the potash takeover. I am going to speak particularly to the new Members 
on the other side of the House. I am not sure what their political consciences would say about what has 
happened in relation to Service Printers, and The Commonwealth, at this new attempt to brainwash the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
I should like to mention to them that I have been a Member of this House now since 1964 and I don't 
think I have ever seen a more flagrant, more deliberate, more thought out abuse of public funds, than the 
potash advertising program, which was a deliberate attempt of the NDP to brainwash the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A deliberate attempt. Mr. Speaker, I am going to talk about that for a moment 
but I think we have to look back in history a little bit. We realize that this is not the first time that the 
NDP have used public taxpayers' funds for their own political purposes and their own political party. 
That is exactly what has happened. They have been doing it by abusing public funds and politically 
being morally wrong and against every ethics of the political structure of this country for so 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1529 
 

long that now they have come to take it for granted. I suggest to you that if the Federal Liberal 
Government or the Federal Conservative Government took taxpayers' money and created in the Federal 
Liberal or Federal Conservative office, whichever was government, a printing press, and then directed, 
without tender, public money for printing for the Federal Government of Canada, that the national press 
would run them right out of office. They wouldn't dare to do it. Yet in the Province of Saskatchewan for 
years the NDP has taken and has created its own printing company, entirely owned by the NDP political 
party and have channelled for example, the 'Blues', year after year are printed by Service Printing 
without tender. They say there is a schedule of events, a schedule of costs. I would suggest to you that 
they are using their printing press at slack time, I have no idea what kind of profits they are making. But 
a government using public money, directing it to their own printing press, using the profits for their own 
political use, and for the promotion of their own political party as no other government in the Dominion 
of Canada has dared to attempt. 
 
Year after year it is brought to the public's attention and now after 20 years, 25 years whatever it is of 
NDP reign in the Province of Saskatchewan, the NDP has convinced the public of Saskatchewan to 
ignore this blatant, immoral practice. 
 
For example, I should like to cite an example of what did happen in Service Printing last year . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have been patient with the Member earlier today. I fail to follow the connection 
between what you are speaking about and Bill No. 1 which is before us. At this point I don't grasp the 
significance of what you are talking about in relation to Bill 1. I wonder if the Member plans to relate 
that to Bill 1. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I would agree. I will try and relate it very directly. What I am 
talking about is the Government's misuse of public funds to advertise the takeover of the potash industry 
and the practices that they have followed in Service Printing by publishing these kinds of things. I will 
relate it very directly, Mr. Speaker,. I won't spend much time on Service Printing. This is an old hat 
game. 
 
For example in 1973-74, they allocated $51,915 or almost $52,000 to Service Printing. Which I 
presume, Mr. Speaker, might make $25,000 or $20,000 profit. Then in turn they pass an Election 
Expenses Act which prohibits the Conservative Party . . . I don't know how that ad of the Conservative 
Party in the newspaper is paid for. I have read that Election Expenses Act and I am not so sure that isn't 
going to come off his election expenses in '79. I hope it isn't because it is about a specific issue. But that 
is the kind of control they placed on the Opposition. And yet they take $51,000 and apply it to Service 
Printing. They bring in an advertising firm like Dunsky — straight political advertising established in 
office, $399,545, then they took another good old NDP from Saskatchewan, Struthers — $626,611. That 
is just one misuse of public funds that I want to remind the new Members, the backbenchers about. This 
is just astronomical and beyond the imagination. To me it is immoral. I don't think you could get away 
with that in any province in Canada. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1530 
 

If the Federal Government attempted to do that they would be run right out of office, and rightly so. 
Don't ever kid yourself that the national press would let them get away with that. But because they have 
been doing it here for 25 years and it's still immoral. 
 
The second thing, they come to potash advertising. They have a newspaper they call The 
Commonwealth. They call it political, economic and religious freedom. Real freedom, religious, I don't 
know how they get religion in here. They use this and how do they pay for this paper? They put 
government ads, questions or problems regarding provincial government services. Provincial inquiry, 
free of charge. I wonder if the Commonwealth is given this free of charge. Not according to my figures. 
They are charging very dramatically . . . 
 
MR. SNYDER: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I am sure that your patience and the patience of 
this House has been strained to the utmost. I think without question the subject matter that the Member 
wishes to debate is a fit subject for debate at some other time and some other place. But surely, Mr. 
Speaker, the rules of the House do not provide for the Member to be dragging extraneous material by the 
tail at his whim without any reference to the material that should be discussed at this particular point in 
time. I think, Mr. Speaker, this needs some adjudication by yourself. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it is quite clear that Bill No. 1 deals with the acquisition of part or all of the 
potash industry. The Member in speaking to the Bill should deal with the principle of acquiring the 
potash industry or not acquiring it as he sees fit. The Member puts me in the awkward position of 
allowing other people to speak back to the comments that he raises when they are not pertinent to the 
issue. I would be the first one to admit and I think he would be too, that some of his comments earlier 
today dealing with health in the Province of Saskatchewan have nothing to do whatsoever with the Bill. 
I still have not grasped the significance of the comments the Member is making in relation to the Bill. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to relate it directly now and go to the potash 
advertising program which was intended to brainwash the people of Saskatchewan as to the potash 
takeover and I want to talk about public information programs. There is a better choice, I could go, Mr. 
Speaker, on the potash bill, I have ad after ad after ad. This is directly related to potash and what I was 
using is two other examples to indicate how that political party will use public funds and abuse them for 
their own political interests. 
 
When we come to the potash advertising program, I should like to point out and I hope this is related, 
Mr. Speaker, because I don't wish to digress from the subject. I'm talking about potash advertising. The 
principle of public advertising by the Government of Saskatchewan or by any government in Canada is 
based on the premise that the citizens or the voters or the constituents have the right to public 
information. You and I know the kind of public information that we are talking about. Your medical 
care premiums are due on such and such a date. Safety advertising by the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1531 
 

Anti-inflation by the Federal Government . . . absolutely. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Now, come on, Cy. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Absolutely. Now we have here, well, when you talk but anti-inflation that's a 
government program. That's a government program but when you talk about the potash . . . 
 
MR. COWLEY: — It's a government program. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Is it? The Bill isn't even passed. Here we have been trying to justify again the 
misuse of public funds where they take thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars of the 
taxpayers' money to deliberately attempt to brainwash and the funny thing, the people of Saskatchewan, 
as I indicated before supper, recognize it for what it is, recognize it without any question. They 
recognized it as an attempt to brainwash and it had a backlash. I know that program was originally 
scheduled for December 15th. They didn't take it off because of anything else but because the Christmas 
spirit it is a very bad time for public advertising. I would be most interested in finding out when they 
intend to resume it. I heard the Attorney General talk about the Conservative Party advertising. All the 
more power to them if an individual or person who wants, or a political party or company who wants to 
use their own money to advertise that is their privilege. But the NDP took something that is not passed 
in this Legislature, is not a government program, is only a policy or an indication or a direction and they 
turn around and use this money to try and deliberately brainwash the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, it is a terrible abuse of public funds and is an indication of why the bureaucracy or 
government should never establish or get into the business of running something that can be better run 
by private industry. But if the Government becomes involved in it, it becomes a political thing. Then to 
justify their own existence they have to worry about the political votes, they have to worry about 
political indoctrination and I would like to suggest to all of you, to some of you backbenchers, I don't 
know what you think about the moral part of the Commonwealth, the Service Printing, or this 
government advertising, but I am going to tell you a lot of people in the Province of Saskatchewan are 
concerned. And it has nothing to do with government programs, it was a complete violation of the 
principle of providing information about existing programs in the Government and yet they sit there and 
not one of them, none of them with these great high motives that they suggest the NDP have are 
supporting it. I think it is about time that somebody brought this to the attention of the public and to the 
House and to the backbenchers and I will be looking forward with a great deal of interest in the coming 
weeks and months as to whether or not the Government is once again going to try and justify their 
takeover. 
 
And this is why this debate is important. Because the only opportunity to respond to that kind of money 
being spent, the only opportunity to counteract the abuse of public funds is for Members of the 
Opposition to try and bring this to the attention of the public through the Legislature. And you know, for 
example, I heard tonight that a couple of my Conservative friends are intending to join in the debate and 
I thank God that they have come to their senses. Really, I thank God they have come to 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1532 
 

their senses. We welcome their participation and their joint effort in this particular regard and I hope 
they do a good job and I am convinced they will. But it is about time after six weeks or two months of 
sitting and permitting free enterprise and the whole economic system that built this great country 
possibly to go down the drain because of an example set by the Province of Saskatchewan and I am very 
pleased now that they are going to participate in this debate and I welcome the opportunity of listening 
to them and I am going to tell them that I am going to be the first to give them a hand and thump my 
desk when they stand on their feet. Because it isn't good enough for an MLA to be an observer in this 
House he has got to actively participate. I know that our good friends the Conservatives after their 
Christmas break have had some kind of an indication of the reaction of the public of Saskatchewan in 
hostility to this Bill and I want to tell them I welcome them. But I do ask once again that you Members 
and the backbenchers of the Government side consider very carefully the moral implications for your 
political party as to what is going on in the Commonwealth, Service Printing and in the public 
advertising program deliberately designed to do one thing, promote the NDP, deliberately designed for 
NDP propaganda and nothing more. 
 
Now, somebody asked me when I came in tonight how long I was going to speak tonight. I picked up a 
little clipping and it said: Longest Sermon on Record" and I thought I might read it to you because I am 
nor sure if I can equal this or not: 
 

Rev. Robert Marshall is the most talked of minister on record. Marshall, 55, completed a 
60 hour, 31 minute sermon at 12:33 p.m. Saturday, topping the record for the longest 
sermon in the Guinness Book of World Records. The previous record set almost 20 years 
ago by Clinton Losee of West Richland, Washington, was 48 hours, 18 minutes.'I can tell 
you that after 50 hours it got a lot tougher,' the minister said Sunday. Marshall spoke to a 
standing-room only crowd of more than 300 during the last hours of his sermon, 
Saturday, at the Birmingham Unitarian Church in the suburb north of Detroit. The 
congregation gave him a standing ovation when he finished. 

 
I expect the people of Saskatchewan will flood in here and pound and pound when I finish because they 
know that I am on the right track and it is about time that somebody did something about you people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I hope they're here before long. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — And it is kind of interesting when you start talking about this that the minister 
speaking for 60 hours and yet in this debate their Ministers have been completely silent. How can you 
explain that particular contradiction. I would hope, I wouldn't expect them to stand up and talk for 60 
hours or even 60 minutes but I would even be glad if one of them would talk for 60 seconds. If they do 
and the Attorney General has promised that on Bill 2, Wednesday, that the Premier, and the Minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation are going to get up and respond to this debate and provide us with 
some concrete information, provide the people of Saskatchewan fulfil his responsibilities, carry out his 
duties as Premier, carry out his duties 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1533 
 

as Minister in regard to the potash takeover and the potash expropriation and stand up and give us some 
information about this particular Bill, about the cost and so forth. And I know that all Members and all 
citizens of Saskatchewan are looking forward to this with a great deal of anticipation. 
 
Now before supper I was on a very important subject and I should like to return to it. During the 
afternoon as you will recall we pointed out that the reserve tax and the NDP attitude toward taxation of 
the resource industry in Saskatchewan was really behind what is going on in the potash expropriation in 
Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Telephone call for you, Cy. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Will you take it and tell him I will call him in about ten minutes. I was trying 
to point out that the reserve tax in particular was very onerous, was without question the worst form of 
taxation, it had generated complete hostility within the industry and prevented any hope of expansion. It 
discouraged private industry, it was not related to profit or anything else. At the same time I had made 
an effort to compare mineral resource taxation in the province of British Columbia where, as you know, 
the NDP generated this conflict of tax that was not based on income, not based on profit, which could 
destroy an industry but was based on greed. That's right, one of my colleagues said it was based on 
greed and there is no question that it is based on greed. And what it really is, fellows, and let's not kid 
ourselves, what this whole business is about is that the Wafflers came in 1970 and 1971 and demanded 
to take over the potash industry, take over the resource industries and the left wing element of your party 
is a very dominant and a very strong element. Up until 1971 with Bill 42 you had hoped to satisfy them 
and then along of course, the election of 1971 was over, and all of a sudden the left wing element of 
your party got very very vociferous again, very voluble, very articulate and now the NDP realize that if 
they are going to do anything to justify that left wing support and to try and retain it for the next election 
that they are going to do something dramatic. They also realize that if they are going to do it 
dramatically they had to do it in 1975, as far away from a provincial election as possible, so they turned 
around and introduced Bill 1 and Bill 2. Really what it is is a stereotype doctrinaire political philosophy 
which believes that the government can manage industry better and manage the affairs of yours and my 
life better than we can. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Socialist harakiri. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Socialist harakiri, the Member for Regina South says and that's a good way of 
describing it. The funny part about a doctrinaire person is that a doctrinaire individual never learns. He 
never learns by experience, he never learns by education and in all probability he never learns because 
he won't listen. But we have had some very, very real examples and illustrations of doctrinaire socialism 
and the impact on the economy of the world. I think of England, I don't think there is a country today 
that is in more serious trouble and they are now talking about finding oil and gas out in the North Sea 
and it may be the salvation of that great country with that great tradition, but I am going to tell you 
something that they 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1534 
 

are in real trouble. And why? Because when the bureaucracy takes over and all of a sudden the voter 
starts running the corporation, determines the productivity of the individual corporation or industry 
because of the political impact. When the labor unions have such strong control over the political 
movement, then of course, the productivity goes down and other things become much more important 
and of course we see the destruction of the company, we see the destruction of the industry, it no longer 
becomes competitive, it's priced out of the world market. 
 
I should like some of you to go back just prior to World War II. It was sure that Britain was seeking the 
demise of the British Empire because of a change in its philosophy of colonialism and imperialism but it 
was still a strong economic community. And all of sudden today the British people have lost all interest 
in work, all incentive to produce, all competitiveness as far as the rest of the world is concerned and we 
find that that country has gone from bad to worse and they are in really, really grave trouble. 
 
We could go on and point to illustration after illustration, country after country, nation after nation and 
find exactly the same thing that has occurred. We have had a lot of good examples in Saskatchewan. The 
Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) is going to get up and talk about the great Crown corporation debate 
between the former Premier Thatcher and the former Premier Douglas that occurred in Mossbank. We 
so clearly pointed out the folly of government becoming involved in industry, in the management when 
they don't have the expertise, they don't have the knowledge, they don't have the world markets, they 
don't have the organization to set it up and structure it, and all of a sudden we find that here now this 
Government is going ahead with the great risk and the great undertaking but without any realization of 
what it might do to the future. I mentioned this afternoon about the difficulty of foreign investments and 
the requirement and the need in the next ten or 15 years in Canada and yet here we find that this also is 
being ignored by this Government. So this afternoon I did try to point out some of the problems that are 
related to the reserve tax, the prorationing tax and I did a comparison and an analogy between 
Saskatchewan and British Columbia and now I want to talk about what is happening in the Province of 
Manitoba. 
 
All of a sudden in the Province of Manitoba they have got an Eric Kierans. He used to be a Liberal and 
all I can say is thank God he left our ranks, because not even the NDP Government in Manitoba would 
accept his recommendations. They said he was a coo-coo. They said the poor guy he doesn't know 
where he is going and rejected him completely. And do you know what he said? Do you know what Eric 
Kierans said, he recommended to the Government of Manitoba and they rejected it, exactly what the 
NDP is doing in Saskatchewan. That's the funny part of it. He recommended that the public sector 
should manage all resources. He also recommended that the public sector should buy existing resources. 
This is something that nobody has talked about in this potash debate. 
 
You know when we start talking about $1 billion investment by the public sector and not the creation of 
one new job, gentlemen, we have only got some 900,000 people in the Province of Saskatchewan. Do 
you realize that you will invest $1 billion, put this province in debt for 20 years and you won't create one 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1535 
 

single new job in this province. It's like Intercontinental, you turn around and you squander $10 million 
of the taxpayers' money and there are less people working for Intercontinental today than when you 
purchased it. If the private sector had that company and Mr. Mendel was still managing it, it would 
continue to grow and expand and there would be more people working for it than there were when you 
took it over. The Government has a very strong representation on the board with veto powers, I know 
what the agreement is, Mr. Minister of Health as well as you do. But all I am trying to tell you is that 
you are going to take out $1 billion of the potash industry, invest it in, or whatever it is, maybe its $1500 
million, maybe it is only $800 million, I don't know what it is, but you are not going to create one new 
job. You are taking a province that requires people, in a world that is bursting with population and we 
have an opportunity here. Just think of what you could do with a $1 billion investment in the creation of 
new jobs and new employment and new investment. What kind of a climate you could create. Instead of 
that you are investing $1 billion in an industry that will never create a new job and the crazy part of it is, 
you are investing it in an industry where you are getting all the money anyway. So how you can justify 
it, how you can rationalize it, is completely beyond me and I hope that some of you, some of you look at 
the whole concept of job creation. We are pretty fortunate in Saskatchewan. We have got an agricultural 
economy that is bursting, thanks to a fellow in Ottawa by the name of Otto Lang who is able to get out 
and around the world and sell wheat and do all those jobs that were needed for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — We have got an agricultural economy that is bursting. It is being transferred, 
for example, to the service station operator, the garage man, the grocery store, the clothing merchant, the 
hardware merchant, the furniture salesman, everybody is benefiting from the farmers' prosperity. And all 
of a sudden Saskatchewan doesn't have a job problem, not really, compared to the rest of Canada. Go to 
Quebec or New Brunswick and Ontario and some of the other parts of Canada where there is a real need 
for investment, a real need to create jobs and maybe if you properly used this billion dollars you would 
stop the exodus of every young person between 20 and 25 years of age who is now being forced to go to 
Calgary or Vancouver or wherever it may be, to Ontario to find a job. 
 
This is one of the great tragedies of potash takeover because you people since you have been the 
Government. First of all you bought a great number of shares in IPSCO and right now IPSCO is laying 
off people. Second, you bought Intercon. Intercon is laying off people. You know it is very unfortunate, 
Mr. Speaker, that you can't maintain order over there because, particularly that Member for Moose Jaw 
North. I wish he would go back to his seat and ask a couple of questions. But it is a tragedy that every 
investment that the Government of Saskatchewan has made since the NDP has taken over in '71 has not 
created any jobs. Now they have bought oil companies, for example, and what did they buy? They didn't 
buy something that would turn in new production and new jobs. What they did, they bought existing 
wells and existing production. For example, in Intercon as I say, this fall Intercon did lay off 50 or 60 
people. Since they originally bought the company I would suggest 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1536 
 

that there are probably 200 people less working for Intercon in the Province of Saskatchewan than there 
were before they bought it. Not only is there Intercon, but there is IPSCO which all of a sudden has laid 
off a number of people this fall. I am not concerned about IPSCO because it is a very dynamic company, 
it has great management, they are very aggressive. I think they will come back. But it does point out the 
foolishness of government investing in private industry which is non-job creating, does nothing to 
generate new jobs, new productivity, new enterprise, new secondary industries. What you are really 
saying in taking over the potash industry is boys we have a philosophy, doctrinaire socialism and we 
want to own those industries and we don't care what happens as a result. 
 
So now I should get back to my comparison between Manitoba and Saskatchewan and British Columbia. 
I was talking about Eric Kierans who recommended, as you know, the takeover and Premier Schreyer 
rejected it. He is a socialist, he is an NDPer, he even thought it was kooky. 
 

The Government of Manitoba chose not to act on the radical (notice what he says) the 
radical recommendations of Mr. Kierans. (When they talk about radical, all they are 
doing is exactly the same thing as the NDP in Saskatchewan) . . . instead set up an 
internal government committee to study the Kierans report and make policy 
recommendation to the government. 

 
Of course as you know that report came in and nothing has ever been done. 
 

A year ago when the Canadian tax foundation held its annual conference this committee 
had not yet presented its findings. 

 
So one year ago the situation reached the stage where the Government of Manitoba was 
studying a recommendation to gradually take over the mining industry in the province 
through high taxation and through reversion of mineral rights to the Crown by removal of 
transfer extension rights or by taxation. 

 
Most metals were in short supply with the result that prices had risen to record heights. 
Now most mining companies were enjoying record profits. Provincial governments, 
including Manitoba, had felt for some time that they were not receiving adequate mining 
taxes or royalties on their mineral production and with the increasing profits of the 
industry they felt the urgent necessity to make changes in their taxation statutes in order 
to capture a larger share of the increased metal values. At this time too the Arab oil 
producers had discovered how easy it was to increase their return on oil production with 
doubling and re-doubling of prices. The provinces did not have the same ability to set 
metal prices but they were encouraged to enact legislation that would extract a far larger 
share of the expanded production value. 

 
You know, it is kind of interesting, because we might take that philosophy of the NDP in Manitoba that 
they would take control of the industry by high taxation, by regulation and contrast it with the 
expropriation proceedings in Bill 1 in this 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1537 
 

Act. It is interesting to make an analogy. I wonder how many of you have made a comparison of the oil 
policy of Premier Lougheed and that of Premier Blakeney? Of course, Premier Lougheed said exactly 
the same thing, you could read his speeches and they would be identical to the NDP speeches, identical, 
that the resources belong to the province, the oil belongs to Alberta, the people of Alberta deserve a 
higher share of the benefits of this resource. You could almost paraphrase the words of Premier 
Lougheed and Premier Blakeney, or Premier Davis, or Premier Reagan. Then you turn around and do an 
assessment of the policies by which they tried to accomplish this. 
 
In Alberta for example, in oil they said, yes, the province deserves its share and a very large share. They 
are getting something in the neighborhood, what is it, $1 billion or $1.5 billion a year? They are talking 
about putting it aside, investing it wisely, it is a non-renewable resource return, but at the same time they 
ensured that the oil industry was given enough to expand, to invest and to develop. It has been very 
rarely, only in the last few years, that the oil industry actually took out of the Province of Alberta more 
than they put in. All of a sudden now, we find that this is the situation in Alberta, we find the same 
situation with Premier Reagan and the off-shore drilling of oil in Nova Scotia. Here is how they handle 
their resource. 
 
With the whole concept that the people deserve the benefits, but not that they are going to turn around 
and expropriate and take it over, because that wasn't necessary. 
 
The Province of Manitoba has a balance between the two and they are reaching danger. I want you to 
listen to what they have to say. 
 

This was the situation prior to 1974. This year has seen many developments which could 
have serious consequences for the viability of a strong mining industry in Manitoba and 
in other provinces as well. Early in the year the internal governmental committee 
studying a mineral resource policy for Manitoba recommended to the Government that it 
commit itself to a long-run mineral exploitation plan. That it require full disclosure of all 
information; that any new or revised mineral undertaking require a production licence on 
government approval; that a flexible volumetric tax be instituted to replace the existing 
tax system, but in the interim the existing royalty rate be increased to realize $30 million 
in revenue based on 1970-72 industry profits; and that the government establish a 
mechanism for future development of Manitoba's mineral resources by a policy of close 
regulation of operations of existing mining operations by a government agency which 
would also be responsible for all new mineral exploration, development and production 
either alone or in partnership with the private sector. On March 21, 1974, the Hon. 
Sidney Green, Minister of Mines, Resources and Environmental Management presented 
to the Manitoba Legislature, the government's long awaited statement re mineral policy. 

 
I don't know if any of you know Sidney Green. Sidney Green is the left winger of all left wingers in 
Manitoba. In fact he would be considered a left winger of all left wingers in Canada. Here is what he 
said. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1538 
 

1. The people of Manitoba must receive revenue from existing mineral development 
consistent with a fair return as the owners of the resource (mother love). 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I offered . . . at the beginning. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You know Roy, there is one thing I want to tell you, you were sort of 
considered the left wing member of the party. Now in the last couple of months, people in Saskatchewan 
are beginning to ask if you are the radical. You are the real radical left winger in this party. I say, yes. 
This is the man who brought in Bill 42. This is the man that brought in potash expropriation and 
government control. All of a sudden your stature is going badly. In fact, you are out of it. Now, for 
example, it is the backbenchers who will have a chance when Premier Blakeney goes to his happy 
hunting ground, you're out of it Roy. Because all of a sudden you have become the radical left wing 
member of the party. It is understandable how the people of Saskatchewan would judge you in that way. 
Because all of a sudden you take the resources of the province and you personally, not even the 
Minister, you bring in the Bills, put them through, handle the debate, justify their existence, justify the 
takeover and everything else. People are asking a lot of strange questions about the Attorney General. 
The grey eminence, the man behind the plot. That's what they are saying about you, Mr. Attorney 
General. If I were you, I would be a little careful. Roy the Waffler. 
 
Some of them had the audacity to suggest that now that Richards was no longer representing the 
Wafflers from Saskatoon, two people have asked me if you are now becoming the Waffle representative 
from that city. I said I really don't know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I really don't know. But certainly with what he is doing in the House and in the 
province and what he is doing to private investment, and private industry, that is a pretty fair assumption 
I told them. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I don't discuss things with friends like that . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I would never have suggested that, they brought that to my attention. 
 
Actions speak louder than words, Roy. They just judge you on the deeds, they don't judge you on what 
you say, they judge you on what you do. You are the man who is doing these things. This is the reason, 
you are in real trouble Roy, I want to tell you among the constituencies. 
 
The second thing that this report recommended. 
 

2. The existing private sector operators must be able and permitted to receive a fair 
return on their invested capital commensurate with the nature of their undertaking. 

 
This is the difference between the NDP in Saskatchewan and the 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1539 
 

NDP in Manitoba. Very simply. If you people had treated the potash industry in this province in the way 
that Sidney Green and Ed Schreyer recommended to do it in Manitoba, we wouldn't be sitting here now 
debating Bill 1 and 2 taking over the potash industry. You would have a potash industry that was 
growing, expanding, providing more jobs, more revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

3. The people of Manitoba are entitled to receive a fair share of any added value or 
economic rent occurring to their mineral resources because of scarcity or the increased 
value of the minerals which are unrelated to the immediate costs of production. 

 
I think that is a very sound principle. I think it is one that is probably taken by every government, even if 
they oppose the NDP in the Dominion of Canada, because that is good resource policy. 

4. In the future the people of Manitoba will take a more active role in the 
exploration, development and secondary processing of their mineral wealth in order to 
capture their fair share of the wealth which accrues from the development of such 
resources. 

 
They just have to get that socialist justification in there so that the people of their own party will be able 
to have something to stand up and shout about. It is unfortunate that they take that attitude that they do. 
 

5. The people of Manitoba must jealously guard their resources which have not to 
date been turned over to private corporations and individuals and take advantage of their 
ownership to obtain real opportunity to participate in their development. 

 
Another unfortunate thing. I don't know when we'll ever learn that a bureaucrat who comes from nine to 
five has no incentive, no commission basis of payment or where that, workers can't participate in the 
ownership through shared profits or shared return, there is just no way that a bureaucratic management 
can ever compete. 
 
I should like to suggest to some of you Members just to make a comparison and to see if that statement 
that I made is true or not. I would like to ask you to go and ask the Minister of Health or Northern 
Saskatchewan, what is the ratio of secretaries per man in his department in central office. I would like 
you to ask him what is the relationship per senior executive to support staff. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — What has that got to do with the department? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Very much! What is it going to cost you to operate it? How much money you 
are going to lose, that is what it has to do, Mr. Minister of Natural Resources. 
 
Then you go to somebody in the private industry, go to an insurance company, or stock broker, a 
printing company, find how many people are with support staff or senior management in that particular 
corporation, then turn around and make a 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1540 
 

comparison with government cost of the operation. Is it any wonder, that nobody in Regina can get a 
foot of space to rent? Somebody told me the Conservatives wanted to open an office here, they have 
been looking for three months and can't find even one square foot. That's how bad it is. They only need 
three! I am being serious, it is fine to be facetious, but I am not being facetious when I talk about that. 
 
I urge some of you backbenchers to read the Department of Public Works Annual Report. I am serious 
read it, and see what has happened to the footage of government space that has been rented, the cost of 
government space that is rented, what they have done to the private sector. Then you turn and suggest to 
me that the public sector can run a private business, or run a mining operation as well as can the private 
sector. That is very unfortunate. 
 
The last one in this particular long awaited statement on mineral policy that was presented to the 
Manitoba Legislature was this. 
 

6. The private sector now engaged in the mineral industry must conduct its activities 
more consistent with overall social and economic objectives of the Province of Manitoba 
and disclosure of information relative to support of such objectives must be made readily 
available to government. 

 
I am not sure what he means by that. What it would appear to be that they are very, very conscious of 
disclosure and this Government is doing the same thing. One of the reasons that the NDP have said they 
are expropriating and the reason that they have introduced this potash Bill is because the potash mines 
refused to give them their financial statements. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that we have been here two months and we haven't received one iota of 
financial information about the establishment of the potash corporation. Not one! Do you realize for 
example, we asked for a feasibility study that would take two minutes to put on that desk and here this 
Government is spending taxpayers' money, involving the taxpayers' of Saskatchewan in a fantastic risk 
and yet they are completely silent, refuse to provide one single item of information by which the people 
of Saskatchewan can evaluate whether it is a good deal or a bad deal. Yet they say the reason they are 
taking over the potash industry is because the potash industries refuse to disclose some information. Can 
you tell me how that is justified? It is going to be rather interesting because I know when we come to 
third reading of this Bill if it ever gets there, if those feasibility and cost evaluations are not there for the 
Bredenbury mine, it is going to be a long, long time before that clause is passed in this House. If you can 
suggest that a private corporation owned by private individuals with no public investment has the 
responsibility to provide to the public full disclosure of information concerning their private business, 
but yet a public company and a government which is financed completely on public money with public 
investment has no responsibility to provide public information or public disclosure, that I can't justify 
and that is one of the great mysteries that I can't understand. 
 
I can remember when the Prince Albert Pulp Mill was being debated in this House. Premier Blakeney, 
who was then the Leader of the Opposition said I have got reams of information several feet in height. 
There were about 30 agreements, 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1541 
 

everything was disclosed in relation to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. Here we have ten times the 
investment, maybe 20 times the investment and this Government completely remains silent. Yet they 
expect the private sector to disclose all their information. 
 
It is inconsistent, it is unfair, it is irrational and it is not carrying out the responsibility of government as 
far as the taxpayers' of this province are concerned. 
 
Now I want to carry on, Mr. Speaker. Those six points that I read was the statement of mineral policy 
for the Province of Manitoba. They key one, of course, being that the private sector was to receive a fair 
return for the dollar invested. 
 
To implement the policy, Mr. Green proposed: 
 

Exploration and Development; that the province be committed to maintaining mineral 
development activity at a level equal to or greater than its present level. Any further 
intended exploration and development of mineral resources in the private sector would be 
reviewed by a public agency which would have an option to participate up to a maximum 
of 50 per cent on such a program. If the private sector reduces its exploration and 
development activity in the province, the public agency would make up the reduction. 

 
That's not bad, not good! 
 

Resource Management; new regulations would be enacted requiring full disclosure of 
mineral ore reserves, diamond drilling results, production objectives and such other 
information as may be deemed advisable in order to expediate effective planning by the 
Government. 

 
Greater In-province Processing; in-province processing would be a major factor in the 
province's long range resource development plan. Wherever practical processing 
operations would be established in Manitoba through negotiations with the Federal 
Government and mining corporations. 

 
This one thing I should like to suggest. Why doesn't the NDP go to the potash industry as Premier 
Lougheed has to the petro-chemical industry? Sit down and say, look we've got millions and millions of 
dollars, we're willing to invest it. But let us invest it in the processing of potash, let's negotiate exchange 
for the resources that are needed for the fertilizer other than potash with the United States on an 
exchange basis. Most of it comes from Florida. Bring it up here, exchange it, get into the processing 
business, sit down and negotiate with the potash mines, let them make a contribution on a shared basis 
and you might turn around and find something realistic. And this, of course, is the direction that the 
NDP should be going in the potash industry if they want to invest money. It would be investment in new 
jobs, new industries, growth and expansion and development for Saskatchewan. Finally: 
 

Taxation; (i) The existing levels of royalties and taxes would remain relatively unchanged 
as they are reasonably competitive with those in existence in other parts of Canada. The 
government would provide itself with the right to honor rates similar to the practice with 
regard 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1542 
 

to oil royalties so that it could realize additional revenues if there is any delay in 
implementing new forms of taxation. 

 
(ii) A new tax would be imposed which would be related to price increases in the 
basic products of the mining resource industry. The new tax would be designed to do the 
following: (a) obtain a percentage of any price increase beyond basic levels for the people 
of Manitoba, taking into account rising costs of production in calculating the basic levels: 
(b) protect a reasonable return on an original capital investment for the mining industry in 
establishing the basic levels. 

 
I wonder why the NDP of Saskatchewan can't follow the example of their counterparts in the Province 
of Manitoba? Demand full share for the people of Saskatchewan and the taxation, and yet understand 
and accept the principle of a fair return on the investment and a fair return in order to expand. 
 

(c) modify or eliminate the tax so as not to apply to the mining of lower grade ores 
which might not be economically mined if such a tax remained. 

 
Mr. Green stated that the policy of the government 'attempts to preserve the reasonable 
expectations of those private sector industries who are carrying on business in the 
Province of Manitoba' and ' this new thrust will result in both equity and opportunity for 
the people as a whole to realize a greater legitimate return for their natural resources.' 

 
I (Mr. Watson) cannot speak for the mining industry in Manitoba, but in general terms 
the overall policy is not unreasonable dependent, of course, on a fair level of taxes being 
established. 

 
Now this is the private sector. I'm talking about Manitoba. Saying it's not unreasonable, not 
unreasonable. 
 

One can hardly object to a heavy government involvement in exploration and 
development in new ventures if the government enters at a grassroots level and pays its 
share throughout. However, the mechanics of giving information or the government an 
option to enter certainly presents difficulties. Full disclosure of information for resource 
management will provide little additional information which is not already available to 
the government unless 'full' is so widely interpreted that it will swamp the government 
with detail. The possibilities of the government setting up a parallel bureaucracy to 
monitor the operations of the mining companies is hardly in the interest of either the 
companies or the people of Manitoba. In-province processing has always been carried out 
when the economics of such operations favor it. If the new taxes were based on prices 
rather than income it would be frightening. 

 
Now listen to this: 
 

If the new taxes were based on prices rather than income it would be frightening. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1543 
 

And yet this is exactly what has happened in the Province of Saskatchewan. Well, no taxpayer is ever 
happy to be required to pay more, the taxation policy outlined could be reasonable because it would 
appear to be related to the ability to pay. And this is why I wanted to read this about Manitoba. Their tax 
structure is related to income — not to price. It's related to ability to pay — not to reserves in the 
ground. It, therefore, guarantees for the private sector the ability to carry on their operation, give the 
shareholders a reasonable return and have enough to expand and grow and yet provide the kind of 
taxation the Province of Manitoba wants. Continuing: 
 

What has been done to legislate the taxation policy put forth by the government? At the 
time the policy was presented by Mr. Green, the Minister of Finance, the Hon. Mr. Saul 
Cherniak in his budget speech stated that legislation would be introduced to permit the 
implementation of a variable system of volumetric taxation related to basic price and 
price fluctuations with Cabinet authority to set rates. Amendments would be made to the 
Mining Royalty and Tax Act to provide similar rate setting authority for the Cabinet. 

 
Since no one knew what was meant by 'volumetric taxation' one could hardly wait to see 
and, of course, taxation by Order in Council rates would produce a horrifying state of 
uncertainty. 

 
That's one thing I want to comment on. I think the mining industry has got to get used to Order in 
Council, even though I don't agree with it. Because what has happened to the oil industry is a good 
example, or at least we are going to have to call the Legislature more often. 
 

On May 27, 1974 the Minister of Finance tabled Bill 77 — The Statute Law Amendment 
(Taxation) Act, 1974, to amend the various taxing statutes of the province, including the 
Mining Royalty Tax Act, with which we are concerned here. Apart from a number of 
technical changes the significant changes in the latter Act with the increase in the annual 
royalty rate from 15 per cent to 23 per cent of income derived from the operation of the 
mine . . . 

 
. . . notice "of income". 
 

. . . and the provision that the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may fix a smaller 
percentage. The 23 per cent rate was effective from April 1, 1974 with income in the 
company's fiscal year to be prorated. Bill 77 was passed by the Legislature in June and 
came into effect July 1, with a higher rate of tax effective retroactive to April 1. Although 
the government had indicated that existing levels of royalties would remain relatively 
unchanged, it enacted the higher rate in the Royalties Act in order to provide it with 
additional revenues which it expected to obtain from the new tax, which was not likely to 
be legislated without significant delays because of its complexity. 

 
Bill 82 — The Principal Minerals Royalty Act, was tabled in the Legislature, Thursday, 
May 30, and received first reading. On Friday, May 31, the Minister moved second 
reading of the Bill. On that same day the industry which 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1544 
 

had previously indicated little opposition of the government mineral policy reacted 
promptly and vociferously against the Bill; and on Monday, June 3, Mr. Green met with 
members of the Mining Association of Manitoba to hear their views and on Wednesday, 
June 5, he advised the Legislature that we would not proceed further with the Bill at that 
session. 

 
Now isn't that amazing! Here in the Province of Manitoba, Bill 82, The Principal Minerals Royalty Act 
was introduced and it had some violent reactions by the industry, it had a really bad effect on them and 
the industry turned around and met with the Minister five or six days later, explained their position, and 
the Minister came in the next day and withdrew the Bill in order to provide for the concerns of the 
industry to ensure that he would not jeopardize future investment in the Province of Manitoba. 
 
Wouldn't it be interesting if the Government only had enough common sense to come into this 
Legislature and say, "Yes." And you know something, you wouldn't be backing down. In fact, I think 
you would get some kudos from all the people of Saskatchewan. You would really get some kudos, 
because they would say here is a government that is reasonable. Here is a government that is interested 
in resource development, growth and expansion and new jobs. Here is a government that is interested in 
people and what the resource industry can do for people. Instead of that you put the earplugs in, you 
stare blindly ahead, you are completely negative to any recommendations and suggestions for anybody 
in the industry, and I think that's a tragedy. 
 

Bill 82 was a complex piece of legislation obviously, hurriedly drafted with the result that 
it was difficult, if not impossible, to interpret in parts, omitted a significant part of the 
proposed policy and in general did not correctly implement the other parts as was 
intended. It is to the credit of the government that it acted so promptly when the major 
deficiencies were pointed out. 

 
That's what I said. It would be to your credit, just as it was to the credit of the people of Manitoba, the 
Government of Manitoba, that they withdrew that Bill. 
 
I know, I can't understand why the Member, for example, for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), I guess he is the 
only one from the oil industry left, or the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) from the potash seat. I 
just would like to know, I would really like to have the Minister of Agriculture stand up and make a five 
minute speech on this particular Bill outlining what his thoughts are on this particular piece of 
legislation and indicate to us and to the members of his own constituency whether or not he agrees with 
the potash takeover, and particularly when the NDP are zeroing in on his home town. They are zeroing 
in on Esterhazy. What's that song, 'Now You Know Where you are Going'. Well they are going right out 
south of the border, and right off. The old NDP are driving them right out. I don't think I have ever heard 
a song that has come back to haunt anybody and I am sure that the president in New York, or wherever 
the IMC president is going to have that song, he is going to be playing it every night before he goes to 
bed and he is going to have one theme in this mind, never trust the NDP. Hallelujah! Never trust the 
NDP. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1545 
 

But I hope the Minister of Agriculture stands up and makes a speech in this House. Will you do that Mr. 
Minister of Agriculture, and tell us what you think and what your constituents think? Because I think it 
is pretty important. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . give him . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh no! I'm going to be, I'll give him lots of opportunity. I'll give him lots of 
opportunity. 
 
MR. MESSER: — He is busy with other federal concerns. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh well! But he has been here all day. I'll tell you what, we will make special 
allowance for the Minister of Agriculture to get ten minutes before he carries on with his negotiations 
with Ottawa, on Wednesday or Thursday or whatever he likes. We'll give him a schedule, we'll schedule 
him so he can tell us what his constituents in Esterhazy feel about this Bill and how dangerous they 
think it is. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Maybe in February. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — In February. Well, maybe March. At least if you are too busy now we might 
give him an opportunity in March. Or Good Friday, just the day before the House gets out for Easter. 
Fine. 
 

Since that time the Minister has set up a government study group which is working to 
produce a workable taxation system which will implement stated government policy and 
industry is being provided with the opportunity to comment critically on the proposed 
system. 

 
What a difference in attitude by the NDP in Manitoba. And that's why I say I don't know about this 
Premier Schreyer, but I tell you he has got a little common sense when it comes to resources. A little 
common sense which you people haven't got. 
 

Although Bill 82 has been withdrawn, every statement by the government indicates that 
its general scheme will continue in the new legislation. Accordingly a brief review of Bill 
82 is in order. 

 
I want to give you this brief review of what Bill 82 stated, what kind of an impact. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's nice! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Yes it is nice, so that you can make that kind of comparison. It's unfortunate 
that you people didn't have a chance to do this yourself. You should have done this before you made the 
tragic mistake that you are subjecting private investment in this country to. You would think that at least 
you could have studied the implications of other taxation policy on resource development, particularly in 
the NDP provinces. You looked at one little bill in B.C. and you completely ignored what happened in 
Manitoba. You know, the worst possible example. Here's what it is: 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1546 
 

1. Basic Royalty. This was roughly arrived at by applying a rate not in excess of 33 
1/3 per cent, to the average mining company for the year 1969 to 1973, but the royalty 
would not be more than that calculated under the Mining Royalty Tax Act applying a 15 
per cent rate to the current year's income as determined under that Act. 

 
2. Incremental Royalty. This was a royalty arrived at by applying a rate not in excess 
of 50 per cent to all income over the basic income. The intent of this royalty was to 
provide the government with a share of the economic rent earned as a result of high 
prices that were not offset by higher costs. Because of the tie-in under the basic royalty 
between Bill 82 and the Mining and Royalty Tax Act, the incremental income could 
effectively be taxed at 65 per cent, being 50 per cent under Bill 82 and 15 per cent under 
the Mining and Royalty Tax Act. 

 
3. Husbandry Surcharge. This was an additional tax ranging from 50 per cent to 100 
per cent, which was to be applied to all income arising from production in excess of 
authorized operating levels and was intended to prevent anybody from high-grading a 
mine. The government intended to allow a husbandry credit to encourage mining 
low-grade ores but this was omitted from the original draft bill. On the second reading the 
Minister again indicated that they intended to add this feature. 

 
4. Mining Royalty Tax Credit. The Mining Royalty Tax Act was to remain in effect 
and it was intended that the rate would revert back to 15 per cent when Bill 82 was 
enacted and the tax paid under the Mining Royalty Act would be allowed as a credit 
against Bill 82 tax. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — It's nice to have an appreciative audience of people who are willing to learn 
about the complexities of the taxation of mineral resources in the other provinces of Canada. I'm going 
to repeat that last statement so that I will make sure that all my friends on this side of the House clearly 
understand. Here's what it said: 
 

When Bill 82 was enacted and the tax paid under the Mining Royalty Act would be 
allowed as a credit against Bill 82 tax. 

 
5. Disclosure. There were quite detailed requirements for disclosure of information, most 
of which is already provided under the Mining Royalty Tax Act. Additional information 
to be provided under this Act included effectively all additional information on proven, 
probable and possible ore reserves and all contracts and arrangements for the sale or the 
disposition of all mine production. 

 
And I think this question of disclosure is going to become an interesting governmental process in the 
next few years. The NDP have attempted to tackle the potash industry and I think probably the potash 
mines made a mistake. They should have sat down and negotiated what information and made possible 
and made sure that the competitive status of the potash industry was not 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1547 
 

destroyed. But I think we are going to find more and more disclosure required, but I think it should be 
only basic material, enough to satisfy the government about conservation, about taxation principles, but 
it shouldn't delve into the private affairs of an industry or a corporation. 
 

6. Discretionary Powers. This Act provided wide discretionary powers to the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council; to fix the basic royalty rate, royalty surcharge rate, and 
husbandry surcharge rate at or below the maximum provided in the Act; to establish 
annual operating levels in the principle mining production range for each mine; to 
prescribe depreciation rates, the rates for the amortization of pre-production development 
costs not in excess of ten per cent per year; to set the base rate net value for mines not in 
production prior to 1974; and to appoint the tribunal for hearing appeals and then to the 
final body to accept or otherwise the findings of the tribunal. 

 
This discretionary power is one of the problems, of course, the potash industry in Saskatchewan has 
taken very strong exception to. 
 

7. Appeal Procedures. An operator could appeal an assessment to the Minister who 
could dismiss it if he considered it frivolous or vexatious. Where the Minister did not 
consider the appeal frivolous or vexatious and he did not amend the assessment he would 
refer the appeal to the Minerals Board. All appeals referred to the Board would be open 
to the public and the Board would make its recommendations to the Minister, who would 
report the recommendations to the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council, who would 
determine the final disposition of the matter with no further appeal. As you can see, such 
an appeal procedure leaves the final decision solely in the hands of the parties to the 
dispute. 

 
And I don't like that. That's one thing again about the NDP. Once again they feel that the government 
knows all. They have everything under their own particular thing and nobody else knows anything about 
it and as a result they are the good Lord himself, they make the decisions, and they have great reluctance 
to go to the courts. 
 

Let us leave Bill 82 for the moment and take a look at the current level of tax on mining 
income in Manitoba. The Manitoba Mining Royalty Tax has been established at 23 per 
cent effective April 1. Let's assume that the federal proposal of May, 1974 for the mining 
industry are reintroduced in the forthcoming federal budget, and made effective on 
January 1. The comparison of the tax applicable to $100 of mining income in Manitoba 
would be as follows: 

 
In 1974, Manitoba royalties $15, income tax $7.37, total $22.37 tax; federal income tax 
$21.53 for a total tax of $43.90, which is 44 per cent. Proposed 1975 total rates would be 
$51.50 or $61.50 with no earned depletion. 

 
I would suggest to you and compare that, of course, to the NDP reserve tax. 
 

You can see from the foregoing that the mining company 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1548 
 

with the full earned depletion would pay in 1975 slightly more than a general corporate 
taxpayer in Manitoba, but its tax rate would be 8.5 above the tax rate of a manufacturing 
company. With no earned depletion the mining company rate would be 11 per cent above 
the general corporate tax rate and 18 per cent above the rate for a manufacturer. The 
mining industry cannot afford to pay taxes higher than the general corporation level and 
the industry, the provinces and Canada will all suffer if such rates prevail. We expect to 
see substantial changes in Bill 82 when it is re-introduced in the Manitoba Legislature, 
probably early in 1975. If Manitoba's revised Bill 82 increases taxes which are already 
too high, then Manitoba and Canada will be taking a giant step backward. 
 

Now what we have done up until now, Mr. Speaker, we have done a kind of evaluation of three 
provinces. British Columbia, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. The interesting part of this dissertation is, of 
course, that these three provinces are all NDP provinces. They have a philosophy of government which 
is different than a free enterpriser, and yet there was kind of a basic difference between that of Manitoba 
and that of Saskatchewan, that Manitoba recognized two very basic principles that Saskatchewan does 
not nor did B.C. 
 
The two basic principles that Manitoba recognized is that any tax should be based on income and profit 
and that that tax level should recognize the right of the individual corporation to have a fair return. 
Those two principles are recognized by the Province of Manitoba, entirely different than the Province of 
Saskatchewan and the Province of British Columbia. That's unfortunate. 
 
Now I should like to turn to mineral taxation in one more province, I won't take very long. This is the 
Province of Ontario. But I think now when we talk about mining there are three or four other provinces 
besides Saskatchewan that have a lot of mining. We are talking about northern Quebec, Ontario 
particularly, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and a small amount if the NDP don't completely destroy it like 
MOTTCA up at Cluff Lake. It will be interesting when mineral resources estimates come along to find 
out what is happening to MOTTCA, Wollaston Lake, both established by the Liberal Government, and 
they should be coming on-stream pretty quickly, those two mines. 
 
But Ontario is the real mining giant of Canada and it should be interesting now to make a comparison 
between the three socialist provinces and what they have done in mineral taxation and that one which 
has a free enterprise government and see if that is worthwhile. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — This speaker is E.K. O'Brien, another chartered accountant, he is senior tax 
representative for the International Nickel Company of Canada Limited in Toronto, INCO another major 
giant. I want to point out that what these people are doing and representatives of the mining industry are 
being very critical of the direction of mining taxation in the Dominion of Canada, yet I think, as most of 
you will appreciate, very objectively. Not by asking favor of the company, looking at the overall 
Canadian 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1549 
 

scene, doing a fair and honest assessment of each individual province's tax arrangements. 
 
Let's see what they say about free enterprise Ontario, what is happening in the Province of Ontario 
because they too, as you recall, just as Premier Lougheed did in oil, even the free enterprise people in 
government are insisting that they too get a much larger return for resource industry particularly with 
escalating prices in the world market because of the shortage of minerals and the world demand that is 
increasing every day. Let's find out what Ontario says. 
 

Ontario Mining Companies Recent Tax Developments. 
 
I have been asked to deal with recent Ontario tax legislation related to mining and the effects on 
mining and processing in Ontario of the combined provincial measures and the provisions related 
to mining in the federal budget on May 6. It was hoped that by the time this conference had 
started there would be a revised federal budget more favorable, of course, and that regulations 
which the Ontario government is working on so hard would be available. Unfortunately I have 
no new exciting changes for you, just the old less exciting but fairly recent proposals of both 
Ontario and the Federal Government. 

 
The Ontario legislation reflecting the April 9 budgetary proposals was brought before the 
House for first reading on June 20, 1974. The passing of this legislation is expected later 
this fall. Before examining in detail some of those fairly radical changes in the taxation of 
mining companies in Ontario, it would be useful to highlight the tax treatment of mining 
companies in Ontario prior to that Ontario budget. Before April 9, provisions affecting 
mining companies could be broken down in two areas, namely, Ontario Mining Taxes 
and Ontario Corporate Taxes. 

 
Now he gets into a rather detailed explanation. 
 
MR. LANE: — Let's hear it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Sure. 
 

The Ontario Mining Tax. Prior to April 9, 1974 Ontario imposed a 15 per cent mining tax 
rate on taxable mining income. In computing the taxable mining income, the following 
expenditures were permitted as deductions. 

 
- Exploration and Development Expenditures in Ontario. 

 
I want you to notice that there are some things in these Ontario tax provisions which are much different 
than they are in either Saskatchewan, Manitoba or British Columbia. The basic difference is this. They 
are still trying to get a very fair return but they have provided some incentive to encourage expansion. I 
think the reserve tax is one of the great weaknesses in the Saskatchewan policy and that it gives no 
encouragement or little encouragement for re-investment and for the opportunity to encourage the 
growth and development of the potash industry. 
 

- Depreciation on mining and processing assets on a straight line basis at a rate of at least 
five per cent 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1550 
 

but not more than 15 per cent of the original cost of the asset. 
 

- Processing allowances which are the most generous in Canada are permitted as an 
annual deduction in determining the taxable mining income. Based on original asset cost, 
eight per cent is permitted in respect of concentrated assets, 16 per cent cumulative in 
respect of smelting and concentrating assets and 20 per cent cumulative in respect of 
refining, smelting and concentrating assets. 

 
This was the last government in Canada to recognize with the price of metals going up there needs to be 
some changes in the mining regulations and taxation policies in order to ensure that the Government and 
the people of Ontario would get a greater share. They had the right principles when they did it. 
 

In each of the above cases the beneficiating process must be conducted in Canada. A 
minimum 15 per cent processing allowance of mining income is permitted and processing 
allowances may be deducted to a maximum of 65 per cent of the mining and processing 
income completed after all deductions. Processing allowances are normally reduced if 
custom ore or out of province ores are processed in company owned facilities. The 
concept of permitting processing allowances to determine the pitsmouth value of the ore 
mined in order to arrive at a pure mining profit on which mining tax is applicable. To my 
knowledge there has been no recorded court case testing this method of arriving at 
pitsmouth value for provincial mining tax purposes. 

 
The following deductions were not permitted in computing taxable mining income; 
interest expense; losses carried forward or back; mining royalties paid, either to 
governments or third parties. 

 
Ontario Corporate Tax prior to April 9, 1974. 

 
Generally speaking, although Ontario imposes and collects its own corporate taxes, the 
Ontario provisions follow very closely to the federal corporate tax provisions. A 12 per 
cent corporate tax rate was imposed on approximately the same taxable income amount 
computed under federal rules. One small exception is that the foreign exploration 
provisions enacted by the Federal Government effective 1972 were not duplicated by 
Ontario. These provisions were described by John Turner in his May 8, 1972 budget as 
difficult to utilize. No federal changes however have been forthcoming. 

 
Ontario Budget Proposals of April 9, 1974 Mining Tax Changes. 

 
A 15 per cent flat rate on mining income was replaced with a graduated rate scale which 
is shown in the table. 

 
This is rather interesting because here they have a graduated rate scale. 
 

Mining profits after deduction of processing allowance. Up to $100,000, zero tax; up to 
$1 million, 15 per cent; up to $10 million, 20 percent; $10 million to $20 million, 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1551 
 

25 per cent; $20 million to $30 million, 30 per cent; $30 million to $40 million, 35 per 
cent and over $40 million, 40 per cent. 

 
The Government's intention was to double the yield for mining tax and to secure a larger 
share of windfall gains. It is obvious that this tax is a tax on bigness in Ontario and 
represents an unveiled attempt to severely tax large profits without regard to investment 
required to produce those profits. 

 
The budget specifically stated that provisions would be introduced to deal effectively 
with associated companies that existed for the purpose of taking advantage of the 
graduated scale. 

 
The Corporate Tax Changes. Three year exemption for new mine income was abolished. 
Mining taxes and mining royalties could no longer be deducted in computing corporate 
taxable income. In computing capital tax, mining companies were no longer permitted the 
mine and mill allowance that were previously available. 

 
Positive changes in the budget included the following: 

 
The depletion allowance would apply automatically to all operators and non-operators; 
the fast write-off provisions under the Federal Income Tax Act will be paralleled by 
Ontario for new mines, major expansion of existing mines and associated processing 
facilities. 

 
That is kind of interesting, the fact that Ontario adopted the fast write-off provisions of the federal 
income tax and its latest changes are one of the real methods of trying to encourage expansion and 
growth of existing mines. It would be rather interesting if Saskatchewan had some kind of an approach 
which would give some kind of incentive to the potash industry instead of crying about their lack of 
expansion and their refusal to do so. 
 

Non-principal business corporations will be permitted the full deduction of exploration 
and development expenditures incurred in Ontario. 

 
What was the industry's reaction? 
 

Following the introduction of the budget a state of shock and disbelief had beset mining 
companies who had thought up until this time that radicalism was the NDP domain. 

 
Now listen to this. 
 

Mining companies who had grown accustomed to hearing Kierans, the NDP Premiers, 
the Lewises, father and son, demanding much higher taxes be paid by mining companies 
did not really expect the reasonable and rational men of Ontario to be listening to them. 

 
Marginal rates in Ontario suddenly soared from 43 to 63 per cent in 1974 and 69 per cent 
in 1977 without any federal action. Mining taxes were projected by government to $88 
million, up from $45 million. Industry felt that instead of a $43 million increase Ontario's 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1552 
 

additional mining taxes would be closer to $100 million. The Federal Government by 
continuing to permit deductibility of mining taxes would be paying 25 per cent of the 
additional bill. Obviously some federal action had to be taken. 

 
This is kind of interesting, even Ontario as I indicated, the same as Lougheed, all provinces in Canada, 
recognized that windfall for the province in the increased value of the product, the increased prices in 
the world market, that all governments had the right to demand more sharing of the resources with the 
province. But Ontario and Alberta are doing it by taxation. They didn't have any sympathy for the 
industry, the industry was in a state of shock in Ontario, but it was based on a return, based on profit, 
based on income and is entirely different than the NDP philosophy in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 

The Federal Budget on May 6 followed the provincial lead of severely taxing the mining 
industry and administering the coup de grace to the industry by superimposing its own 
overreaction provisions on those already imposed by the province. Denying deductibility 
for mining taxes paid to the provincial governments was understandable, but unilaterally 
speeding up tax reforms from 1977 now back to May 6, 1974, denial of exploration and 
development expenditures as normal operating deductions and singling out resource 
industries by applying a special rate of tax, 50 per cent instead of 48 per cent back in 
1974 and 46 per cent in 1976 which are the rates applicable for other companies, all 
contributed to severely shake the world mining industry's confidence in Canada. If 
Ontario actions caused the industry to break stride federal action caused them halt. 
The federal goal as I see it is to make all oil companies pay tax and whatever ends they 
had to do to achieve that goal automatically applied to mining companies. Denial of 
exploration and development of ordinary operating expenditures and speeding tax reform 
are especially indicative of that irrational thinking. The mining industry and the oil 
industry had very few similarities. 

 
All of these changes came on the heels of tax reform which had just begun to take effect. 
The three year new mine income exemption had gone in December 31, 1973, automatic 
depletion would be gone in 1977. With these two major incentives eliminated there were 
virtually no tax advantages left for mining companies. 

 
I say they don't deserve any in this period, in this time of high prices, increasing world demand and the 
fact that there is a scarcity of resources and that Canada has a right and the Canadian people have a right 
to derive all tax revenue as long as it is based on profit, income, ability to pay and that business has a 
right to a reasonable return on their investment. Very reasonable. 
 

Briefly the federal proposals were as follows: 
 

- Exploration and development expenditures starting May 6, 1974 were to be placed in a 
special asset class, capitalized and written off at 30 per cent annually on a declining 
balance basis. The cost of unsuccessful 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1553 
 

drilling programs which are the norm, is considered for some obscure reason to be an 
asset. 

 
- Automatic depletion would no longer be permitted. The earned depletion provisions 
instead of being effective in 1977 would be in effect immediately and subject to 25 per 
cent limitation mining income instead of the contemplated 33 1/3 per cent. 

 
- Tax rates which were declining from 50 per cent to 46 per cent in 1976 would be 
immediately increased to 50 per cent, would not decline any further. 

 
- Mining taxes would no longer be deductible but an additional 15 per cent abatement of 
resource profits would be effective immediately. 

 
- As a result of these and the Ontario provisions, effective rates of tax applying to mining 
companies moved from approximately 40 per cent, the rate applying to manufacturing 
companies, to more than 50 per cent, which seems high, bearing in mind the large degree 
of risk inherent in the industry and the fact that it competes in a world-wide market place 
without the protection of tariff barriers enjoyed by the manufacturing industry. 

 
A comparison between the pre-Ontario Federal Budget and the post-Ontario Federal 
Budget is shown in Tables I and II. 

 
I would like to read them for you. 
 

Tables assume minimum processing allowances. It is noted that the effective rates jump 
from 42 to 62 per cent. The marginal rate jumps from 42 to 71 per cent. If, however, a 
company has used all available processing allowance i.e. between the 15 and 65 per cent 
minimum then the marginal rate is 73 per cent. This means that for every dollar saved 
through increasing the efficiency of operations 27 cents is retained. There is a danger that 
the Canadian Mining Companies which are among the most productive and efficient in 
the world are clearly being discouraged from maintaining that position. 

 
It is kind of interesting to hear the comments of the people in Ontario and other parts of Canada when 
they talk about the impact of some of the tax policies in those provinces and what it will do to the 
mining industry in their particular provinces and yet when compared to the Province of Saskatchewan 
they are a minute, very, very small percentage of the impact here. There is very little or no indication as 
to the kind of discouragement to the industry that is in existence in Saskatchewan, where they turn 
around and take as high as 85 per cent of the profit before taxes. 
 
Table I 
 
"Ontario Mining Companies Combined Mining and Corporate Tax Rates." Pre-Ontario and Federal 
1974 Budgets - The federal corporate tax is as follows, on $100 mining income. Federal corporate tax 
deduction 12.8 leaving 87.2; automatic depletion 29.1; taxable income 58.1, tax rate 38 per cent, tax 
payable 22. Effective tax rate 22 per cent. Now, the pre-Ontario 1974 Budget mining taxes, 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1554 
 

this is rather interesting. Ontario mining 100, 15 per cent after the budget, leaving 85 per cent, mining 
tax 15 per cent, 12.8, tax payable 13 and the effective tax rate combined 13 per cent and this is 
compared to 22 per cent in the federal tax. 
 
When presenting the Bill reflecting the budgetary changes on June 20, 1974, the following modifications 
were announced. The Government of Ontario at least had the common sense to make some 
modifications. 
 

- The new mine income would be disaggregated for the purpose of calculating mining 
tax. This was to encourage Ontario operators to develop new mines. Under the budgetary 
provisions non-Ontario operators could operate a new mine at a much lower tax cost than 
an Ontario operator who would have to add the new mine income to his original marginal 
rate. 

 
- Depreciation allowances in respect to new assets relating to mining increased from 15 
per cent to 30 per cent on a straight line basis would apply to those assets acquired after 
April 9, 1974. 

 
- The processing allowances were improved in respect to refining assets operated in 
northern Ontario which is defined as north of the latitude of the mouth of the French 
River. A further processing provision was added to existing processing allowances in 
order to encourage further manufacturing in northern Ontario. Table III shows a 
comparison between the pre-April 9 processing allowances and the new proposed 
processing allowance. 

 
Observations of the Proposed New Ontario System. 

 
Now here are some of the comments of this tax expert and he is looking at the changes in Ontario, their 
impact on the mining industry, what he thinks they will do and what impact they will have. Then I 
would ask the Members opposite to compare this impact in Ontario as suggested by this tax expert as 
compared to the far more drastic tax changes in Saskatchewan and what they have done. First of all this 
'disaggregation' of new mines, what is a new mine? 
 

For 37 years the Federal Government exempted from taxation income from new mines 
for a period of three years. Not once did they attempt to define a new mine and relied on 
governmental policy and legal jurisprudence in granting exempt new mines status to 
certain holes in the ground. Only recently when the Bethlehem Copper case was handed 
down were the industry and the Department of National Revenue able to give greater 
clarification as to what constitutes a new mine. Interestingly enough this clarification 
comes after the new mine provisions have expired. It is believed that the Province of 
Ontario wishes to be more generous than the Federal Government in granting new mine 
status when all additional mining income is being taxed at the marginal rate of 71 per 
cent or 73 per cent it is important not to discourage the expansion of existing mines by 
taxing income flowing from such an investment with these ridiculous rates. It is hoped 
that the Ontario Government will permit the disaggregation of this type of investment. 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1555 
 

Disaggregation of New Mines. 
 

An operator in Ontario with one or more mines when he is developing a new mine faces 
several questions. 

 
(1) Is he obliged to allocate the existing processing allowances related to existing 
facilities to the new mine income which is being subjected to the graduating rates of tax? 
If he is, the operator is merely transferring the deduction of the processing allowance to 
the top of existing operations from a much reduced rate on the new mining graduated rate 
structure. This is an undesirable transfer. It substantially modifies the new mine 
incentive. 

 
(2) How would depreciation allowances apply? In developing the new mine is he 
obligated to take a minimum depreciation allowance thereby creating reductions in 
income which otherwise would be subjected to the graduated rate structure. The result in 
losses could neither be carried forward or backward and additionally if processing 
allowances are added on top of these losses the incentive to develop a new mine is 
disappearing. 

 
MISS CLIFFORD: — No incentive. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That's right, they never even tried to give any incentive. In other words, as I 
said this afternoon, I think the whole concept of the reserve tax was to deliberately drive the potash 
industry out of Saskatchewan, to deliberately prevent them from expansion. I don't think there is any 
question about it. When you say there is no encouragement and incentive you are absolutely correct. Not 
only that, the Government knows it, the Premier knows it, the Minister of Labour knows it, you all know 
it. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Markets . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That's right, you are absolutely right, that's another question about markets. 
You are absolutely right, the Member for Wilkie. There is no question about it, there is no use taking 
potash out of the ground if you can't sell it. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — How long . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I think I'll make it Gordon. I should like to have you make a few more 
comments Gordon because it makes it more enjoyable for me, Mr. Minister of Labour. Of all the people 
in this House who has a very vital interest in the potash industry of Saskatchewan, its expansion, its 
growth, the opportunity to provide new jobs, surely to heavens the Minister of Labour should. 
Therefore, you should be very interested in my comments, particularly those about investing $1 billion 
and not creating one new job. That's the tragedy of what you are doing here, Mr. Minister and I would 
hope that you . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — A member of . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, I am not sure if I will ever get to be a member of 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1556 
 

the potash board. But that's some advice that we could perhaps give to the Premier at this time if you do 
succeed in passing this Bill. We would hope that when selecting the board, the Member for Saskatoon is 
very concerned about seeing that a mother is on there. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . travel agent. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, no, you don't need to put a travel agent on there but I think it is important 
to have a mother and have good representation and not to have them all political appointees, get some 
good commonsense businessmen. If I remember in '71 when you became the Government you took the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation and you removed practically every businessman who had any 
common sense from the board, and of course, three years later you got in real trouble, mismanaged the 
contract that cost the province some millions of dollars and ended up firing the general manager and 
other senior officials. So it is important to get a good board and I agree with the Member for Saskatoon 
that a lady on that board is very essential and as I say to the Minister of Labour I hope that in his 
deliberations he'll get a chance to sit on that board and talk to them so that if they do buy one mine that 
he can discourage them from buying any more. He could maybe get him involved in processing or 
something that would create new jobs and so that he won't just waste his time and waste the taxpayers' 
money in Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . Service Printing. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Should I go back to Service Printers? Roy doesn't want to hear that one again. I 
wonder, do you think that the new Saskatchewan Potash Corporation will provide equal opportunity for 
females in the management area? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not likely. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I wonder. For example, I hear that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is 
looking for a new manager and they are now advertising, I think they started at $50,000 and they are up 
to about $60,000. I suggest that you are going to have to pay around $75,000 before you get anybody 
after the way you treated the last one. I would hope that if you are getting into the management hiring 
business and you've got a consulting firm out looking for senior employees, and I understand that you 
have, you are not having too much success. I know some who have rejected you cold, that you consider 
some women and bring them into the management level. The Member for Saskatoon says that they may 
not have the training but you might at least give them some training so that they would have equal 
opportunity on this day when all women are created equal. What's that, Mr. Minister of Labour? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — It will take you to the end of January to correct that speech. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You know that is the first sensible thing you have said today. It will probably 
likely take me a long time. In fact, I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll send a few pages over to 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1557 
 

you, Mr. Minister of Labour and let you do it because you fellows haven't done anything else for the last 
couple months so you might as well take part in that. 
 
Now I want to go on here and talk about the disaggregation of new mines. Some of you might not 
understand that term and I want to make sure you do. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What does disaggregation mean? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Disaggregation of new mines? Well, I'll have to explain it to you. I don't really 
understand it myself. 
 

An operator in Ontario with one or more mines who is developing a new mine faces 
several questions. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You read that. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Oh, I read the first two and I'm down to the third one. Pardon me. 
 

(3) How does the operator allocate exploration and development expenditures to 
existing mining operations and to a new mine? A loss incurred by the new mine merely 
increases. 

 
(4) How does one allocate existing overheads to new mines? The cost of operating 
process facilities? Allocations are complicated by the fact that the new mine may be (1) 
an open pit mine; (2) have a richer grade of ore than existing mines; (3) be of a different 
metal than those being mined, e.g. a copper producer who decides to develop an iron 
mine. Picture the difficulties trying to write regulations to cover all aspects that could 
arise in respect to a particular situation. 

 
Treatment of Joint Ventures. 

 
This is kind of interesting because the NDP has indicated that they have got a very broad perspective, a 
very broad perspective as far as resource development is concerned. They say, oh, we don't mind free 
enterprise, all we are going to do is strangle them with taxation, all we are going to do is expropriate 
them as soon as they start making any money. We really don't mind if private industry comes into 
Saskatchewan and the second thing we are willing to go along on public development and on joint 
ventures. Listen to what he says about the possibility of joint ventures in Ontario. 
 

When an existing Ontario operator decides to develop a mine with another company, 
either Ontario or non-Ontario, the tax implications of a joint venture are of particular 
interest. From the operator's point of view he would probably wish to claim depreciation 
from his existing operation and have a share of the joint venture processing assets attain 
the level of processing allowance enjoyed by his overall operation, even though the 
income from the joint venture could be taxed at its top marginal rate. On the other hand a 
non-Ontario mining company would find that his share of the profits from the joint 
venture is 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1558 
 

taxed at a much lower rate of tax. An anomaly is created in that each mining company on 
the same dollar of income would be taxed at different rates. This would be preferable to 
having a joint venture stand on its own, especially if one of the parties has an exploration 
program operating outside the joint venture. He would have no way of deducting these 
expenses. 

 
Further Processing. 

 
A processing allowance of 35 per cent cumulative is proposed on those assets in northern 
Ontario related to further processing, i.e. past prime metal. The government appears to be 
encouraging the development of manufacturing plants in northern Ontario by utilizing the 
existing mineral operations as a spring-board. Apparently if a producer has an equity 
interest in the plant then he would be entitled to deduct a processing allowance from 
mining and processing income equal to 35 per cent of his share of the assets which are 
held in the manufacturing facility. In addition he would upgrade his processing assets 
which relate to the input to that manufacturing facility that it bears to the total related 
output of existing plants. For example, if a producer from his northern Ontario facility 
produces ten million pounds of refined copper per year and has an equity interest in a 
plant which utilizes one million pounds of that copper production, one-tenth of the capital 
cost of all his processing facilities related to the output of the copper would attract an 
additional processing allowance of five per cent, i.e. in addition to the 30 per cent already 
permitted in a share of the assets utilized in further manufacturing would generate a 35 
per cent processing allowance. The catch, however, is that the profit from the 
manufacturing facility must be subject to mining tax. The normal corporate rates for 
federal purposes and Ontario purposes would apply on the manufacturing profits, i.e. 50 
per cent, if the de minimis rule applies, 42 per cent if it does not. In addition the Ontario 
mining tax rate at the margin of 40 per cent would apply, making a total marginal rate in 
a manufacturing operation of some 80 to 90 per cent. The effective rate would be 
tempered by the increased processing allowances. 

 
Summation. 

 
Now I want to sum up this Ontario tax business for you fellows over there. 
 

Summing up, the Ontario tax system is not a tax on windfall profits but a tax on bigness 
in Ontario. 

 
That is one of the similarities it has with the reserve tax in Saskatchewan. 
 

- The graduated rate structure adds a further complication and a degree of uncertainty to 
planning and forecasting that does not exist for the flat rate of tax. 

 
- The generous processing allowances are negated in metal down-cycles because 65 per 
cent limitation renders a large amount of the allowance ineffective. Retention of the 65 
per cent limitation, but permitting a carryover 

 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1559 
 

of unused processing allowance would permit the evening out of the cycles. 
 

- The marginal rate of 73 per cent does not encourage efficiency, it could undermine 
Canada's competitiveness in the world scene. 

 
- The further manufacturing incentives in northern Ontario when linked to the processing 
allowance and mining taxes for Ontario purposes, manufacturing rates for federal and 
Ontario corporate purposes become disincentives when the processing allowances cannot 
be utilized or when the manufacturing unit increases profits. 

 
- The graduated rate scale in addition to making the producer's life more complicated 
does not fulfil the purpose that the government has intended, i.e. tax windfall profits. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what we have tried to do here today is take those four provinces in Canada 
and try and demonstrate that here in the Province of Saskatchewan, the Province of British Columbia, 
the Province of Ontario and the Province of Manitoba, all the people of those four provinces have 
recognized one basic principle. That the price of mining products has risen dramatically on the world 
market. There is an increased demand for them, the value of the commodity has gone up by leaps and 
bounds. That has created what are known as windfall profits. All the provinces in Canada have accepted 
the proposition that they deserve a much larger share of those mining profits and particularly what is 
classed as windfall profits. Or if you want another word for windfall profits, those profits that are over 
and above increased operating costs, therefore, the governments have all searched out a different method 
of getting a greater return for the people of their provinces. But there is a basic difference between 
Manitoba, Alberta and Ontario from that of Saskatchewan and British Columbia. Those three provinces 
recognize, number one, that their taxation system should be related to income, it should be related to 
profit. Second, that also the investor or the original investor who has spent his money and taken the risk 
originally in that province deserves a fair return. On the other hand in the Province of Saskatchewan the 
NDP have developed a tax system of reserve taxes on the potash industry which is almost outright 
confiscation. It is a lump sum payment, it is not based on profit, very little relation to income and, of 
course, it discriminates against the large producer. For that reason I think it is important that we talk 
about that. 
 
I want to talk a few minutes if I might on the amendment. Then I have another little political science 
lesson for you, but I wanted to talk about the amendment . . . 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — . . . the story of the Fox and the Grapes. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland suggests that I tell you the story about 
the Fox and the Grapes and now I do remember that. It goes back to — Aesop's Fables — you remember 
how greedy the fox was, if I remember the story, is that not true, the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland? 
And in his outright greed, he looked at those beautiful grapes, really the grapes 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1560 
 

are the grapes of Saskatchewan potash. And the greedy fox is the NDP Government. All of a sudden we 
have the fox and the grape story all over, 2,000 years later. The only thing now the fox is the NDP and 
the grapes are the potash. Exactly the same story . . . I am not sure what the ending is because I lost my 
book here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — If I remember the story correctly the fox kept running, wouldn't let anybody 
get all of the grapes instead of trying to get them one at a time. Instead of getting them one at a time or a 
small portion and take his own share, his realistic share, he tried to get them all, and it ended up that he 
got nothing. That is exactly what is going to happen to the NDP in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That's a good story. But there really is quite a bit of comparison there. Because 
what really the reserve tax is and the NDP attitude towards potash is really nothing more than an attitude 
of greed. I think it should be recognized as such. Here it is, no mandate from the people just a greedy 
opportunity to seize the potash companies, to take them over themselves. 
 
I want to talk about another little problem. I want to ask the Government just exactly how the 
Government is going to finance its programs, when you lose the $130 million profit . . . 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — We never had it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well, I think you are going to get that in '76. All the taxes put together, you're 
talking about the royalties, the prorationing, the corporate income taxes, the whole bit . . . You're going 
to get your provincial share, sure you do, Wes. Don't give us that. If you say you don't get them then that 
is the kind of thing you should stand on your feet in this House and tell the people of Saskatchewan, tell 
the Members of the Legislature so somebody will have an opportunity to evaluate, but whether it is $100 
million or $130 million. That is exactly what you should do, Wes. You're a former Minister of Finance, 
you should know those facts. Stand up and tell the people of Saskatchewan so they can make a decent 
kind of an appraisal. 
 
I want to know just exactly how you are going to pay for the Government programs, when you lose that 
$100 million or $130 million potash revenue. I just wonder. Because you are going to have to take that 
money and start paying it back in debt retirement and interest payments. Sure, you are going to build up 
the equity, nobody is debating that. But that is the real question, is it a good deal or a bad deal. Because 
all of a sudden the people of Saskatchewan, because of the way you birds are going, why by 1979 and 
1980, the budget of the Province of Saskatchewan, the debt and expenditures of you fellows is going to 
be $2 billion . . . "birds' is a good expression, because it is going to be $2 billion. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1561 
 

You fellows just turn around and say, what is it from about $450 million to nearly $1,200 million this 
year. If you look at the facts that for the past three or four years, every year you underestimated and 
overexpended in various government departments up to $50 million to $75 million. I would suggest that 
in the past fiscal year you have spent $1,200 million. Four years ago the budget of the Province of 
Saskatchewan was $450 million. If you have that kind of escalation, you are going to have not $2 billion 
by 1980 but $2.5 billion by 1980. Where are you going to get the money to pay those bills? For example 
medicare? Are you going to do the same to all the programs as you do to health, you are starving them 
and strangling them? Where are you going to get this? 
 
The important of potash to the consolidated fund in this province and the tax revenues is very important, 
because you people are spending money like drunken sailors. Where are you going to get it? There is an 
old saying that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, that is right. You have got the bird in the 
hand. You fellows are looking down about 30 years. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The goose in the hand. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The goose in the hand is worth two eggs in the bush, that is a better way of 
putting it. 
 
I wanted to talk — seeing this debate is concurrent and I have given you a good dissertation on the 
taxation policies of various governments in western Canada. I hope all of you will take that, I know it 
was a little complicated, and it may not sink through all of your skulls. But I hope you will take it when 
it comes out in Hansard and read it over very carefully, and I am sure that you will probably get a little 
bit more understanding and insight into the complexities, particularly those new Members who have 
never really become involved in taxation provisions before. But now as you know that this debate now 
on Bill 1, particularly for me, who has not participated before, is concurrent. I want to talk a little bit 
about the amendment for a very few minutes. Then I have one more political science course I want to 
give you. This is very simple, this one and very short, I will save it for the end. 
 
I should like to read the amendment for you just in case some of you may not — you have been away for 
a couple of weeks. 
 

That all the words after 'that' be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

Bill No. 1 be not now read a second time but that the subject matter of this Bill be 
referred to a Special Committee on the Nationalization of the Potash Industry being 
composed of Messrs: Kowalchuk, Thibault, Lange, Pepper, Feschuk, Mostoway, Larson, 
Dyck, Lane, Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) and Wiebe. 

 
I know the first ones. I know that it would be a very interesting Committee because Thibault, Lange, 
Pepper and Feschuk and Mostoway like to win all the money. That is one thing I can assure you, Mike 
will win all the money. I don't know about Larson, Dyck, Lane and Nelson where they would come in. 
 

That such Committee be directed to investigate the effects of the purchase and ownership 
of potash mines by non- 

 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1562 
 

resident, foreign and corporate persons, and governments; 
 

That such Committee will have the power to sit during the intersessional period and 
during any Legislative Session, except when the Assembly is sitting, and that 
notwithstanding Section 58 of the Legislative Assembly Act, (Chapter 3 R.S.S. 1965 as 
amended) allowance and expenses shall be paid to Members of the Committee when 
sitting during a period of adjournment of any Session, at the same rate as prescribed in 
the said section of the Act. 

 
That such Committee will have power to send for persons, papers and records, and to 
examine witnesses under oath; to receive representations from interested parties and from 
members of the general public, and for this purpose to hold meetings away from the seat 
of Government in order that the fullest representation may be received without unduly 
inconveniencing those desiring to be heard; 

 
And that this Special Committee be further instructed to submit its final report to the 
Assembly with all convenient speed. 

 
You know I should like to tell the Members of the Government I don't know how they feel about this 
particular amendment because we haven't heard from them. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Oh yes you have. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well, it is so long and so seldom . . . oh, yes, that ten minutes, the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, that is right, we did hear from him. He didn't say much, but he didn't speak very long. 
 
I am going to tell you this, I think . . . 
 
MR. MESSER: — It's nine o'clock. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I'm getting a little tired, I am not sure I can wind it up, Jack. I wanted to tell 
you that this particular wording came directly from the Minister of Agriculture. I think you people are 
aware of that. It goes right back to that Foreign Ownership Land Act. Remember how you really got into 
serious trouble? The farmers were challenging you, it looked as if the farmers were going to bring in 
their tractors and drive them right up on the lawn of the Legislature. It looked like a minor revolution, an 
agrarian revolution number two in the world. Jack Messer immediately grasped onto the concept, you 
remember referring it to a Special Committee, so we got the A.G. to stand up and refer it to a special 
committee to get them out of the problems and everything else. It came forth with some pretty 
productive measures. It was a good exercise. 
 
Now I am going to suggest to you in all seriousness that this particular amendment is a good 
amendment. I wouldn't even mind seeing you put an expiry date, when the committee should report. Put 
that expiry date on so that you would know, I don't think you are going to be able to pass the potash bill. 
In fact if you people would have accepted this amendment and started this committee in operation prior 
to the Christmas break, and not 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1563 
 

only that they would be liable to be back and finished by the middle of January, have the report in, you 
could take those recommendations, come forward, bring it into the House, and you might have even had 
a potash bill passed by the end of the month. That would really be something and it would show the kind 
of good government and the kind of good management that you people are capable of. I am serious 
about the prospect. 
 
One of the things I think that even Members opposite will agree with, whenever you are asking for 
example, a husband to risk the family budget or the family savings, the most important thing he does is 
consult with his wife. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — In my household it is the other way around. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — In my house it reached that too, but it should be a family decision. In fact now 
it is getting to the stage where my children spend so much of my income that it becomes not only my 
wife and myself but my children become involved and it becomes a family decision. There is a reason 
for that. Because your wife shares the burden and the responsibility of the family and according to our 
laws and so forth she has equal opportunity. 
 
When you look at potash and the expenditure of $1 billion, and for 37 of you people to take on that 
responsibility for one million people without asking them, without going back to the mandate, without 
presenting it to them as an election issue. Some of you people like to go around saying that you have got 
49 per cent of the vote. You have got 32 per cent of the people voted for you. Not even a third. Do you 
realize that, 32 per cent. Not even one out of three people voted for you people. I want you to know that 
one out of three, 32 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan voted for you. That is your mandate. 
 
This particular amendment gives you an opportunity to go back to the people. Wouldn't you really feel 
much more comfortable if you went out — wouldn't, for example, the Member for Weyburn (Mr. 
Pepper) whose people have experienced the exodus of oil industry from his constituency. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — He was re-elected. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I know he was. But he is the only one. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — The Member for Cutknife did. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Do you mean to say that the Member for Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) got elected? 
Where is he? I never thought of that, the Member for Cutknife did get elected. I haven't seen him since 
we came back to this House. Where does he sit? You did see him once? I don't know if he still has his 
beard. 
 
What I am really saying in all seriousness, that here is an opportunity for you to go back to the people. It 
is not a question of saving face. You will get credit for it. People will say that is good government. Just 
think of what you can do. Just think of whom you could call to this particular committee. For example 
you could probably put on a travelling road show as the Member for Saskatoon Centre did with the 
Welfare Committee. You could stop in various rural communities. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1564 
 

You could invite the rural municipalities and the town councils and any other interested citizens who are 
willing to come and make representation. You could probably schedule 20 or 30 meetings which I think 
would be agreeable and acceptable by the Opposition. You could even divide the committee into 
sections, two sections. If you advertise it, that is one thing we wouldn't complain about. Because that 
would be honest public advertising. It wouldn't really be an abuse of the public money even though it is 
related to the potash industry. Then you could give an opportunity for municipal councillors, rural 
people, businessmen from all over Saskatchewan and even some urban people, then you could come to 
Saskatoon and Regina. You could have the Chamber of Commerce, the Board of Trade. We wouldn't 
even invite the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, if the Attorney General objected to it. I think their 
views are very well known. I am kind of proud of them. What really bothered me was that he said, why 
those terrible people they are running comic strip advertising. They are paying for it by themselves. Yet 
his Government advertising, the taxpayers' money, that was fine and dandy. I saw, for example, 
compared to the Government advertising on the potash industry what the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce did was a difference between night and day. The Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce should 
be proud of themselves. 
 
It was certainly unfortunate that the Attorney General got up and attacked them for standing up and 
expressing their own opinion about freedom and the opportunity to speak on one of the basic issues that 
has ever arrived in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I really want to say again about this amendment. You could present to the people of Saskatchewan three 
or four basic fundamental principles that they want to know. You could bring in mining experts from 
outside the Province of Saskatchewan that are not related to the potash industry. You could discuss with 
them exactly what the cost of the mining operation, of sinking a shaft through the Blairmore, would be; 
the replacement cost of the existing mine; what the cost of machinery is at the present time. They could 
project it, they could project it ahead. They could do all those things. 
 
You could bring in a tax consultant. That consultant could assess the reserve tax, what it has done for the 
mining industry in Saskatchewan. What kind of incentive it does, what kind of encouragement to 
expand. And also what kind of return it brings to the people of Saskatchewan. By doing that, I think that 
the people of Saskatchewan would get a clear understanding of exactly what the reserve tax is and what 
a fair rate of taxation is. 
 
The third thing that you could do is get the cost of a new mine, replacement cost is the firs thing; the 
second thing you could get an evaluation of the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan, so you could 
demonstrate whether or not the people of Saskatchewan are getting a fair return for their potash mines or 
from the potash companies. 
 
I think that is important. I think you could even bring in some constitutional experts who could give you 
an expert opinion in fact, you could go to the Appeal Court of Saskatchewan and ask them for an 
opinion or some legal experts as to the constitutionality of the reserve tax. If the reserve tax has some 
threat about it being unconstitutional, you could then 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1565 
 

re-write a new tax act, a new provision and find a tax system that would be acceptable to the potash 
industry and still bring that return that you people want for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have another book, I am not going to read it today, that is for tomorrow. It is Nationalization in British 
Industry. I took this home and read it and I was so excited and so interested by what this expert had to 
say about what happened in the nationalization of British Industries in Britain. I honestly believe that 
every one of you people should take it, and I am going to recommend it for reading. I intend to read a 
good portion of it tomorrow. This is one book that I think everybody should read. I will give you the 
name of the author in case you want it. His name is Leonard Tivey. He is an excellent author and well 
reputed in economic circles. I am sure that if you go you could get a book review that would give you a 
summation of this. What is really does is tell what kind of a mess the Government of England has done 
when it put its nose into the private sector, which didn't have a monopoly. It tells exactly what kind of a 
mess it is. That is unfortunate. 
 
I should like to urge the Government to reconsider the fact of whether or not they will have a committee 
and have public hearings around the Province of Saskatchewan, have the opportunity to call expert 
witnesses. I am sure for example, I personally would like to see Otto Lang or somebody from the Justice 
Department in Ottawa put on the stand so that you and I as legislators in the Province of Saskatchewan 
would have their legal interpretation of what the effects of Bill 1 and Bill 2 will have on 
federal-provincial relations in Canada. 
 
I am like the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron). I abhor the federal-provincial confrontation in 
tax provisions or tax proposals in Canada in the last two or three years, but I abhor more the fact that the 
private sector is caught in the middle, in this constitutional battle in Canada. I think it is terrible. I think 
the Federal Government and the provincial governments should not in any way institute taxing 
provisions without consultation and ensure that they are not jeopardizing — I can sympathize with the 
federal position. As you people may not realize it is the same as in the oil industry. In the mining 
industry exploration and development has really been financed by the people of Canada, not the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In other words depletion allowances and all the tax write-offs of the Federal Government come from the 
people of Canada. They are taxes that they didn't get. And that the mining industry just like the oil 
industry has been financed in western Canada and in the Province of Saskatchewan by the Federal 
Government and by the people of Canada. All of a sudden now that they are in a position where they can 
make a profit and make a level of return to the Federal Government in the form of tax. If I was the 
Federal Government I don't think I would sit idly by and permit the Province of Saskatchewan and the 
Province of Manitoba or any other province in Canada enact provisions which would completely destroy 
the possibility of the federal fair share of the corporate tax dollar. When I say that I mean that. It is the 
Federal Government and the people of Canada who have financed the mining industry in western 
Canada. They are the ones. The depletion allowance and everything else is federal tax revenue not 
received for distribution in federal programs in the Dominion of Canada. I think all of you are aware of 
that. And now all of a sudden when they start to make a profit the 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1566 
 

provinces in Canada are looking at ways and means of strangling the opportunity of the Federal 
Government to get a share of the corporate tax dollar. 
 
I think they are going to take steps to protect it. I am not going to suggest for example that Bill 1 and 
Bill 2 are unconstitutional because I don't think that is true. I think the Province of Saskatchewan 
according to the British North America Act has the right to nationalize the potash industry to set up a 
Crown corporation. But I also know that when you talk about potash it is exported and our markets are 
exterior to Canada except for about five per cent. Therefore, when you start talking about trade and 
commerce, particularly trade and commerce outside the borders of Canada, it means without question 
that the Federal Government then has the right to put on an indirect tax just as they did in the oil 
industry. Of course the confrontation in the oil industry has had disastrous results. 
 
I should like very much at this public hearing to have members and officials of the Federal Government, 
the Department of Justice and get their opinion as to what the particular impact this will have on the 
federal sources of revenue from the Province of Saskatchewan. I don't have to suggest to you people that 
if the asbestos industry did this in Quebec, the mining industry in Ontario, the oil industry in Alberta, the 
mining and lumber industry in British Columbia and other industries, it would destroy Canada and the 
whole principle of tax sharing in this Dominion of Canada which is a great country. This is the thing that 
makes us a great country. We have got a very unusual and distinctive way or sharing the tax revenues 
and the wealth of this country. By the rich sharing with the poor, and it is done through the federal 
system. Therefore, if we say that Saskatchewan can do this, if the Federal Government permits the 
Province of Saskatchewan to do this, and they let the Province of Ontario and the Province of Quebec 
and the Province of British Columbia and the Province of Alberta, it will destroy Canada as we know it 
and will seriously restrict any opportunity for the poorer provinces in Canada. I am thinking particularly 
of the Maritime provinces, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland. It 
would almost completely destroy any opportunity they had of equality in the standard of living in the 
future of Canada. 
 
I had the opportunity of spending a year in the Maritimes going to school. I know that the economic base 
in the Maritimes is very limited. In fact, the Maritimes are very similar to Saskatchewan. For 20 years 
when the NDP were the Government of Saskatchewan they were known for two things; exporting wheat 
and people. For example they say the city of Boston and the state of Maine and all the parts of the 
eastern coast of the United States are almost substantially populated by people who came from the 
Maritimes because of lack of job opportunities. I just point that out that there are very serious 
implications for the Dominion of Canada in the whole relationship of tax sharing and federal-provincial 
relations in this regard. I think that if we passed this amendment we would have an opportunity to get 
some tax experts, it would give us an opportunity to assess the constitutionality, not only the 
constitutionality but the impact upon the whole federal revenue basis and in that way you and I would 
know before passing this particular Act. I notice I think that the Premier and the Attorney General and 
the Government Members are concerned about this too, because I have heard that they are now willing 
to start paying taxes, the federal 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1567 
 

share. They have indicated that they would look at it. This is going to be a very strange piece of action. I 
don't know how it can be done under the British North America Act now because Crown corporations 
are exempt. What are they going to do, ask the Federal Government to create a new tax or are they going 
to make a gift to the Federal Government or are they going to withdraw from federal tax sharing? I 
suggest that Saskatchewan is going to be right out of it very shortly anyway, if the wheat producer 
continues to make this kind of money. So, in reality, I think it is a serious question that this kind of a 
thing could be brought before this committee. 
 
As far as time is concerned, I think that as long as the Premier and the Minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Potash Corporation is negotiating, I understand there was another potash company down 
negotiating with the Government either today or they are coming tomorrow. They are continuing the 
negotiations, they are meeting regularly. The threat of the Act is still there, which is unfortunate in any 
negotiations, it certainly limits the sincerity of negotiations, but they are negotiating with the potash 
industry. There is no urgency to pass this legislation. The Premier knows and I think the Minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation knows that there is no way that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
going to buy all ten mines. It is going to be done in stages. They are going to buy one or two mines. 
They can go ahead and negotiate with those one or two mines right now. And by negotiating with those 
one or two mines they must take some time for any kind of a major change of ownership for that kind of 
a capital investment takes a long period of time. I know from experience with the Prince Albert Pulp 
Mill, the Athabasca Mill. I know that in my brief tenure as Minister of Industry when we were looking 
at Choiceland iron mines, it's a long way down the road. These kinds of negotiations are not 
consummated overnight. In fact, I would suggest that even if he found one of the mining companies that 
was willing to sell tomorrow and they could tentatively agree on an approximate price, it would take six 
to eight months before that contract could be completed anyway. Before all the legal entanglements, 
before all the orders, the value of the production, the mining equipment, the depreciated value, etc., etc. 
could ever be assessed. So there is no real hurry in passing this particular piece of legislation. 
 
In fact, I think that the Minister of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, I am sure would agree with 
me. That negotiations of this kind are long and protracted and that they could go on for months and 
months even though there was willingness from both parties. There is no reason to rush this particular 
legislation through. If we pass this amendment, set up this committee, ask them to proceed with all 
possible speed, by the time the spring session is in, you know when the budget comes down and the 
estimates before the House, I am sure the Government has other legislation, and by that time I would 
think that the committee could come back and report with at least an interim report, which would give 
some guidance to the Government and the people of Saskatchewan as to what their feeling is. 
 
I think it is important also for another reason that you pass this amendment. It think it is important to test 
public opinion. I don't know if the Government accepts this. I am not sure if they are not like the ostrich 
which buries its head in the sand. I am not sure if they are or not because I 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1568 
 

want to tell you something. Most people in Saskatchewan, thanks to the Opposition, are now aware that 
the potash industry is being taken over by the Government. I think, if nothing else, the debate prior to 
Christmas accomplished that particular objective. I think that is important, because any time the people 
of Saskatchewan invest a billion dollars, it is important that all of them know what is going on and what 
is taking place. Had we followed the advice of my Conservative friend there wouldn't be five per cent of 
the people of Saskatchewan even, know that potash existed or that the Government was expropriating it. 
 
I think that was an accomplishment of the six weeks prior to Christmas and a very important one. Now 
that they are aware of this, let's test the political winds. Let's find out just exactly how they feel. Let's go 
out and have some public hearings. 
 
How well do I remember in 1971 when the Premier walked in here and said we are going to be an open 
government. We are going to listen to the people. My God, we had enquiries on everything you can 
possibly imagine since I have been in this House. Things that in relation to a billion dollar potash 
takeover were nothing. People went to Vancouver, Seattle, Denver, New York, all over. 
 
MR. LANE: — Buffalo Narrows. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Buffalo Narrows, no that was Uranium City. We have had people go all over 
for things of rather minor importance. And yet here we have the most important issue and we can't even 
get a feasibility study or a cost study, we can't get any information. If you are an open government, why, 
why all of a sudden have you decided to close the doors on public opinion? Why have you decided to 
close the doors on public reaction? Why all of a sudden have you decided to close the doors on public 
information? Why all of a sudden when you demand that the potash mines disclose all their information 
do you refuse to disclose any to the public of Saskatchewan? You demand so much out of the industry. 
You challenge them for challenging you in the court. You demand disclosures and complete financial 
statements and yet in no way do you want to delay this Bill, you want to get it passed, you want to take 
over the potash industry, you want to get operational. Then can you imagine us for the next couple of 
years trying to get any information out of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation? The Minister is fairly 
reasonable, he actually does give us pretty good information. But I am not sure that will reflect anything 
in the next couple years. I am sure before the next election campaign there is going to be a very, very 
strong reaction, nobody in the Province of Saskatchewan will ever really know what went on in the 
potash takeover, except the Government until the government changes. 
 
Then you are going to find some very dramatic information. That is why I think you people would be 
wise to have a public information program, not a propaganda program, set up by a committee of this 
House. Let the committee put out the information. Show the confidence in the Members of the House, 
your side of the House, like the Member for Melville he was a Cabinet Minister, it is recommended that 
he be on this committee, the Member for Kinistino, he was the Chairman of one of your 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1569 
 

Legislative Committees, he did a good job. Have a little confidence in them. Don't you think he has 
common sense, don't you think he can assess the reports and the implications of the potash industry? 
 
I should like to suggest, Mr. Minister, to the Government and Mr. Premier that the wisest thing that this 
Government could do would be to pause and reflect, take their time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — That is what you told us before Christmas. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That is right. You haven't learned the lesson, Roy. It still applies. That is the 
point I am trying to make. That you haven't bothered since Christmas to listen to anybody. And there is a 
reason. Because you haven't given your own Members the opportunity to speak. In this House, of 
course, I have had ample opportunity, I have been going since 2:30. I have had ample opportunity. But 
you haven't given anybody else the opportunity to speak. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I have had five letters in support and two against. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I heard the Premier get up in the House and give that argument and give the 
statistics to the Member for Elrose when he asked him how many letters and telephone calls he got, he 
had them all numerically listed. We did the same thing if you remember in the Hog Marketing 
Commission. All of a sudden we decided we would ask the people to send us an opinion. We maybe 
only had ten letters, but months later we had sacks full that would have covered the floor of this entire 
Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You saw them, thousands of them. We put a little coupon . . . you remember 
that how we came into this House with baskets and bags and gunny sacks and we presented them here. 
But this is really what you are doing. You are saying because somebody . . . for example, there are very 
few people who are going to sit down and write the Premier a letter and say look, I disagree with this. 
But you give them a coupon, and give them a vote, and give them an address to send it to, and you will 
be amazed and astonished at the reaction. But all I am suggesting that here is an opportunity to let the 
people speak and you have refused to listen to them. We adjourned at Christmas time, we hoped that you 
would go out through Christmas and give an opportunity for public hearings and public presentations. 
 
It was rather interesting, the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) asked the Government if they 
were willing to consider withdrawing the Bill or having public hearings after the Christmas break. I 
don't think that any of you Ministers left your house or your office. Because you certainly didn't seem to 
get any kind of reaction. I should like to see you go out and talk to the union boys. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1570 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — No, no, you are talking to the shop steward, the organizer. Oh no, don't get us 
wrong Roy, that's whom you deal with. You don't deal with the working man at all. The only people 
whom you deal with are the people who provide the funds, the organizer, the top guy. But when you 
come to the little guy who does the work underground who provides the funds, he's the guy. For 
example at Kalium every one of them but one was against the potash. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Perhaps you could get up, are you prepared . . . Well, you know there's a little 
bit there, there is a basement to keep the fire going. But the workers at Kalium certainly, honestly to a 
man. The workers at Kalium almost to a man. At Esterhazy, we all read the reports in the newspaper 
about the kind of time the Premier got at Esterhazy and from talking to people the Press was very kind to 
him. Why don't you go out there and give that opportunity to those, to the working men to express 
themselves. 
 
I wonder if the Attorney General can get up and stand up when closing debate and give a firm 
commitment to this House that the unions, the working people, that work in the potash mines are in 
favor of this takeover. I'd like to know that. I hope the Attorney General will stand up and give us an 
indication that they are. Tell us where he gets the facts. 
 
Now there is one thing about the Member for Saskatoon Centre. He was in a potash seat and he isn't 
there any more, so I don't know how he would ever know. I don't know how you would ever know, Paul, 
you live in the middle of Saskatoon. You used to be a potash constituency, but you are not there 
anymore. You wouldn't know anything. I just have a very few minutes to go here. 
 
One thing I do want to thank all of you across for the courtesy of the way you have paid attention today 
and you have listened and I honestly hope that you have learned something and that you go home 
tonight and take all these thoughts that I have cast out and really seriously sit down and consider them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I hope you will. Did he say he was going to ask a question? No, well, Mr. 
Speaker, I should like to summarize the day and I want to say that it's been enjoyable. I have another 
story for you tomorrow that I think is equally important, oh no, that's private members tomorrow, I get a 
little rest. But I do say this in all sincerity and I'm going to sum up and I'm going to call 9:30. As you 
can see we have almost reached that stage of the period and I want to thank you for listening attentively, 
I want to thank you very much for I hope you will take what I have said to heart and aside from the 
readings which I am sure were a little complicated and it may not have stuck in your minds too much. 
But I wanted to ask you really and sincerely in summing up to say this, that the real issue in this debate 
is not whether or not the potash industry will expand, is not whether or not the potash industry is taking 
you to court, is not whether or not the people of 
 



 
January 5, 1976 

 

1571 
 

Saskatchewan are getting a fair return for the resources, that is not the issue at all. 
 
The real issue is whether or not the potash industry is being treated justly by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. That's the real issue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Whether or not the level of taxation that you imposed on the potash industry is 
equitable taxation, in other words the very basic principle of good taxation policy by our Government 
should be equality, whether you are treating the potash industry the same as you are every other industry 
and particularly every other resource industry in this province. Why have you picked and selected them 
as the ogres, as the bad guys? Why have you turned around and selected them for more harsh treatment 
even than the oil industry? Why have you decided that you are going to destroy them and drive them 
right out of this province, right out of this country? This is the real issue. 
 
The other issue is whether or not the potash companies have the right and the privilege as any citizen in 
this country, individual or corporate to go to the courts if they are being dealt with unfairly. That's the 
issue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That is the real issue, that's the real issue in this particular battle and don't try 
and suggest that you ever had any intention of the potash industry staying in Saskatchewan because you 
certainly didn't provide them with the kind of tax return and incentive in the tax system to stay and 
expand and grow. In fact the very tax that you designed was designed in such a way it would discourage 
them from growth and expansion. I don't think there is any doubt about that. I think any tax expert in 
Canada will tell you that your tax system, that you imposed on the potash industry was designed to do 
one thing, to discourage expansion and growth. That's the real issue. 
 
If you will sit down and put your minds to that thrust and put your minds to that direction, and sit down 
and examine your consciences and present the facts to the people of Saskatchewan which so far you 
have refused to do, then I think there may well be a very, very different outlook on this Bill 1 and Bill 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seeing it's 9:30 I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 



 
January 5, 1976 
 

1572 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o'clock p.m. 


