


























































Hansard: November 19, 1976


 
 

11 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 
 

Friday, November 19, 1976 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PARTI QUEBECOIS 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to put a question to the 
Premier in regard to the serious threat to the unity of Canada posed by the election of the Parti 
Quebecois in the Province of Quebec. 
 
In view of the fact of the November 18th issue of the Toronto Globe and Mail there is a story quoting 
Mr. Blakeney, headlined in the following words and I quote: 
 

NDP Premier sees an alliance with the PQ. 
 
Would the Premier not agree that this unfortunate headline coupled with the failure by his Government 
to make a strong commitment to united Canada in yesterday’s Throne Speech could create a doubt in the 
minds of the Canadian people about his Government’s determination and dedication to take all possible 
action to hold this nation together? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Hon. Member that that was an 
unfortunate headline. I do not agree with the Hon. Member that anyone would take anything particularly 
from that headline. There are many other headlines in many newspapers and, at least in my judgement, 
the position of this Government has been made crystal clear that we are committed to a strong Canada. 
We have said so on many, many occasions and accordingly I think nothing that a headline writer may 
choose to select from a story is likely to change this very firm impression which I am sure is well 
implanted in the minds of all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. STEUART: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I welcome that statement but I wonder then in 
view of that, will the Premier promise this House that no help of any kind, including resources of 
manpower or money, or help of any kind will be extended by Saskatchewan to the PQ Government of 
Quebec until the Premier and the Government of that province give the Canadian people an unequivocal 
assurance that they will not attempt to draw that province from confederation. Will you give that 
commitment to this House now? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will not give the House that commitment. I think that the Premier 
elect of the Province of Quebec has indicated, if I understand his position, that the question of what will 
happen about Quebec withdrawing from confederation 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

12 
 

will be determined by the people of Quebec in a referendum. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: —What . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am speaking, Mr. Speaker, about what the Leader of the Parti Quebecois in the 
Province of Quebec has said. Accordingly, in my judgement, it is clear that he will not be giving any 
unequivocal commitments until after the referendum. Accordingly, what is requested is that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and presumably the governments of all of the other provinces give no aid 
or assistance to the Parti Quebecois until after the referendum. I think that would be counsel of folly. In 
my judgement the vote achieved by the Parti Quebecois was in part a vote against the social conditions 
which obtained in the Province of Quebec immediately prior to the election. This conclusion in my 
judgement, is shared by many others. It seems to me, therefore, that what we in Canada must do is 
attempt to alleviate those social conditions which led to that vote which I say came from frustration. 
Accordingly, therefore, it seems to me appropriate for the Government of Saskatchewan and for the 
governments of all the provinces to assist any government in Quebec with measures which may well 
alleviate the social tensions which, as it appears, have existed in that province. If they wish assistance 
from the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to let us say, the setting up of an automobile 
insurance plan, we will most assuredly consider that request. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not now committing ourselves to granting any request for assistance. I am 
saying that we will not take the position in advance that we will offer no help or assistance to the Parti 
Quebecois until after the referendum. I think that would be, as I have said, a counsel of folly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the Premier cite anything in the 
mandate given to him by the people of Saskatchewan that would indicate in any way permission by the 
people of this province for agreement by the people of this province to give aid and comfort in any 
manner whatsoever? I am not talking about doing anything against them, I have seen this Government 
over there for a long time and they have offered no aid and assistance that I am aware of to the Province 
of Quebec or the people of Quebec. Suddenly with the election of the PQ, which admittedly is a threat to 
confederation, what possible excuse has the Premier got to offer any aid and assistance to that particular 
Government, which, in the opinion of a great many people - you could be right or I could be right - if 
they succeed then they will succeed in convincing the majority of the people of that province to tear this 
country apart, divide this nation, which I think would be an utter disaster for all Canadians. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

13 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I reply under two headings. First, we have given aid and assistance 
to a number of governments in Canada including the Government of Quebec headed by Premier 
Bourassa. It has been the custom in Canada for governments to offer assistance to other governments 
who wish to organize social programs. It happens to have fallen on the Government of Saskatchewan to 
give a fair bit of this assistance because it happens that we have organized first a fair number of social 
programs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I take the position that the Government of Quebec is the Government of the 
Province of Quebec and until there is some more evidence for the fact that Quebec is going to separate 
from Canada I will not turn my back on them. It is our position that those who say the new Government 
of Quebec should be treated as a pariah and should not be associated with on any grounds are fostering 
the encouraging separatism . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . and it is the opinion of this Government that we should regard the 
government that the people of Quebec elected as the legitimate government of the Province of Quebec 
until there is some more evidence to the contrary. We propose to treat that Government as we have 
treated all other governments in Canada, as the government which the people have elected and we will 
offer them such assistance as we might offer to the Government of Alberta or the Bourassa Government 
of Quebec, or to any other government which asks our assistance in organizing any particular program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

REQUEST TO ATTEND FIRST MINISTERS’ CONFERENCES 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the brief answers and questions. Due to the urgency, I would direct this question to the 
Premier. Due to the urgency of maintaining Saskatchewan unity and in fact Canadian unity as it relates 
to the recent election in Quebec, over the coming months, would the Premier give us his assurance today 
that he will extend an invitation to the Leaders of the Opposition parties in Saskatchewan to attend all 
First Ministers’ Conferences which are scheduled in the next little while? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will give the Hon. Member for Nipawin as assurance that we 
would give consideration to extending invitations to all those federal-provincial conferences which are 
open conferences. For those which are closed conferences we will follow the practices which I think 
have almost invariably been followed in the past - that only accredited representatives of the government 
in question are given admittance. And I may say that there were some difficulties with respect to that 
with one of the oil conferences and that was straightened out 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

14 
 

by discussions among the Premiers. That is our position. I don’t say that it is not capable of being 
changed but I am not able to give the assurance at this time that the Hon. Member for Nipawin requests. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — One further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier not agree that these 
current negotiations that are going to be conducted over the next number of months are rather unique in 
Canadian history and rather urgent. Would it not be incumbent upon the Government of Saskatchewan 
to consider very seriously accrediting, if you want, as representatives together with the Premier, the 
Leaders of the Opposition parties in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the suggestion of the Hon. Member is worthy of 
consideration. I certainly will be discussing it with my fellow Premiers, Premier Davis or Premier 
Lougheed, or whomever, to see what their practice is likely to be and I will at least in part be governed 
by what practice is adopted by the other Premiers. 
 

PARTI QUEBECOIS 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE(Regina Lakeview): — To the Premier, Mr. Speaker. The Premier indicated that 
he would require further evidence from the Province of Quebec as to their intentions of separating from 
Canada before any decision was made as to giving them assistance or not. Mr. Levesque is clearly on 
record as indicating what his intentions are. What further evidence do you require and secondly, if I 
may, Mr. Speaker, have you had any communication to date with Mr. Levesque and if not, are you 
planning on a future communication? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Two questions, the latter one, no, I have not had any communications with Mr. 
Levesque other than to send him a congratulatory telegram which was, if I may say so, carefully worded. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Second point, I do anticipate that I will have communications with him because I 
expect that he will be at a federal-provincial conference as will I. I do not know whether there will be 
any communications between the next federal-provincial conference and now; there are none planned. 
 
With respect to the first question, what further evidence do I want. May I recall to the memory of the 
House the fact that the Parti Quebecois was organized in 1966 and has fought elections in, I believe, 
1966, 1970, 1973 and in 1976. In 1966, in its first election, and in 1970 it ran on a straight platform 
saying, “If we are elected we will separate.” In 1973 and in 1976 it changed its platform and said, “No 
longer do we campaign on the platform that if we are elected we will separate. We now campaign that if 
we are elected we will have a referendum.” That strikes me as indicating a significant change in the 
policy of the Parti Quebecois, enough at least for us to attempt to see whether there are ways in which 
we 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

15 
 

can work with the present Government of Quebec within the confines and the context of confederation. 
It seems to me far too soon to write off Quebec and practically boot them out of confederation by 
sending them to Coventry, by refusing to have any association with them whatsoever. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ACUTE-CARE BEDS 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER(Saskatoon-Eastview): — This is a new question, Mr. Speaker. I want to turn 
attention from a national problem to a provincial one and I am sorry that the Minister of Health is not in 
the Chamber this afternoon and in his absence would like to direct a question to the Premier. Would the 
Premier not agree that there are very serious problems related to our acute-care beds, since beds have 
been closed down and that immediate attention is required from his Government to avert a dangerous 
situation? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think the answer to that is, no I do not agree. I think that we are not aware of 
where these acute crises exist and if the Hon. Member has evidence that there are acute crises, and I 
think those were his words, I know that he would make them available to the Minister of Health who 
would be, I am sure, happy to reply. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well I think the evidence is there, Mr. Speaker, if I may direct a supplementary to 
the Premier. Why was it that when the bed utilization rate in Saskatoon was four beds per thousand at 
the same time that the national average was 5.4 per thousand, and the provincial average was 7.4 per 
thousand, why, in the face of these facts did your Department, or your Government, impose a five per 
cent cut in funding which would have resulted in a total of 164 staff being eliminated in three Saskatoon 
hospitals, and 950 surgical operations less being performed in 1976 than in 1975? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not acknowledge the Hon. Member’s figures. I want to make 
that clear, particularly the first one which refers to four beds per thousand. And I think that the Hon. 
Member is aware that the proposals adopted by the Department of Public Health apparently did put 
some particular pressure on Saskatoon hospitals. He will be aware that I met with representatives, the 
chairman of the board in each case, and other representatives on each of the boards of those hospitals, 
and we came up with an arrangement which I think alleviated the pressures to which he referred. I 
believe, at least with respect to some of the hospitals that has meant that, far from any cuts in beds, they 
have as many or even more beds available than they had before. 
 
MR. PENNER: — A supplementary to that question. Do I understand the Premier is trying to suggest 
to this Opposition that there 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

16 
 

are not fewer beds in Saskatoon hospitals open today than there were a year ago, and that there are not 
fewer staff available to treat patients in Saskatoon hospitals than there were a year ago? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rather obviously do not have the figures of the Saskatoon 
hospitals with me. It is clear that the changes which were made which provide for day surgery will, I 
think, provide for the treatment of more patients than a year ago. I may be wrong on that but it is my 
belief. If that is so then it really doesn’t matter whether those patients are lying in their beds in the 
hospital or lying in their beds at home. If they are treated and if they receive the treatment that they 
require, (which is the purpose of having a day surgery proposal), then I think that it cannot be justifiably 
asserted that there has been any diminution in the quality of health care for those patients. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Souris-Cannington. 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON(Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Is the Premier aware that 
his Minister of Health recently was quoted as saying that in Saskatchewan the hospital bed utilization 
percentage is higher than any place else in Canada and that he is shooting for a goal equal to that of the 
national average? Is the Premier further aware that in Saskatchewan our percentage of population over 
age 60 is higher than any place else in Canada and that a goal of national average of bed utilization is 
unrealistic? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes. I am not aware that the Minister of Health made that particular statement. 
Obviously with a number of Ministers making statements and particularly with them being quoted with 
various media, one cannot be sure of all of the quotes. 
 
With respect to the position outlined in the statement, yes, I am aware that the utilization rate is very 
much higher than the national average, 220 as compared with let’s say 155 or thereabouts, 35 per cent 
more. I am also certain that any “shooting” for the national average will certainly take into account the 
age-sex distribution. It is standard to take hospital utilization figures and adjust them for age and sex as 
it is said, because it is known that a different age pattern will produce a different hospital utilization rate 
for the same number of 1,000 people. And similarly a different sex pattern will produce a different 
utilization rate for the same number of 1,000 people. Accordingly, I would think that when the Minister 
was talking about “shooting” he was talking in a general way. We are in no danger of approaching the 
national average if I may say so. Any comment made would be in the context of movements toward that 
direction and is not a suggestion that somehow we are going to be equal to the national average. That is 
simply not a likely attainable goal, and not one accordingly for which we are striving. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Final supplementary. 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

17 
 

MR. PENNER: — I wonder if the Premier would care to comment on the fact that in Saskatoon 
hospitals over the past few years, the average patient stay has decreased. I think the Premier would agree 
that that in fact is where the real saving can occur. There has been significant efficiency attained in those 
hospitals. 
 
At the same time we have got waiting lists that are substantially higher today than they were a year ago, 
in the neighborhood of 500 in one hospital alone, where people are waiting for surgery that they can’t 
get and have, because there have been beds closed and staff taken away from those institutions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Quite frankly, no, I do not agree with those statements. I do not know whether 
they are true or false, and accordingly I am not in any position to agree to them. 
 
The statement made by the Hon. Member talks about the length of waiting lists and the like. I well know 
that waiting lists are somewhat variable items. I have been a Minister of Health and know that waiting 
lists very frequently depend upon the diligence of the medical staff in putting names on the list rather 
than upon the number of people who are effectively waiting for surgery. That is, in fact, the case and 
anyone who denies it I think is not fully aware of the circumstances. I am not suggesting that there aren’t 
significant waiting lists; I am in no position to say whether they are longer than a year ago. I believe I 
am accurate in saying that in Regina they are shorter than a year ago. But I do not know the Saskatoon 
situation. I am very sure that the Minister of Health would be happy to get that information for you, if 
you would like to convey to him your interest in that concern. 
 

PURCHASE OF MOBILE HOMES 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER(Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. Is the Government of Saskatchewan going to exercise its option to purchase 
all or a portion of the 151 mobile homes now on lease to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — The decision with respect to 
taking up that option has not been made as yet and I would not be able to answer it definitely yes or no. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the Minister know that a large number of these 
151 units were occupied during the lease time and are you going to purchase these units that were 
occupied, are you going to take this into consideration in exercising your option? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, there has been no conclusion made with respect to 
the options as yet and therefore I would 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

18 
 

not be able to give any definite answer, yes or now, as to whether they will be purchased or not. 
 

PRIORITIES IN HEALTH CARE FIELD 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE(Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Health, and I see he is following the practice he established in the last session, never being 
here when we wanted to ask questions of him. I will direct the question to the Premier: would the 
Premier give us an undertaking that your Government will set up a task force or a study group to look at 
your priorities and the whole health care field? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — It’s become more and more obvious that there are great difficulties in the cities in 
connection with hospital beds. I am asking the Premier to give consideration to examining priorities in 
health care with a view to determining what is important and what is less important. To me, beds in 
hospitals are important and political gimmicks are little programs like pharmacare, SAIL and free 
hearing aids. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am interested in knowing that pharmacare is a gimmick and I am 
happy to have the Liberal Party on record on that item. 
 
I am sorry that the Minister of Health is out of the House today. He is at Elrose opening a hospital in a 
small centre . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . in sharp contrast to the policy of the Members opposite when they were the 
government, when they closed hospitals at Prelate and Qu’Appelle, at Hodgeville and all the other small 
hospitals they closed. They are now here talking about just how important hospital beds are. They were 
not talking about how important hospital beds were when they were closing them at Hodgeville and 
Prelate and Neudorf; we are opening them at Elrose. We are indeed very, very satisfied with the fact that 
we have not closed hospital beds in small hospitals as was the policy of the Members opposite. 
 
We believe there is no particular crisis with respect to hospital beds in Regina. I have had an opportunity 
to check a number of times as to whether or not there were vacant hospital beds in, let us say, the Plains 
Hospital. I found at times there were various significant numbers. Accordingly, therefore, it doesn’t 
seem a problem about getting more beds. “Small hospitals will not close”, says Steuart.” I still have that 
headline . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the suggestion 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

19 
 

of the Hon. Member that we have a task force, there is obviously some merit I suppose in having a 
further look, and I will ask the Minister of Health whether he has given any consideration to that 
particular proposal. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before I permit a supplementary, a final supplementary, a final supplementary I 
want to caution the questioners and respondents about the practice that we have been using with regard 
to questions and ask them to sharpen up questions and answers. I think an examination of the record - I 
know these two gentlemen will both do this tomorrow - with regard to the sharpness of the question and 
the sharpness of the answer would be of invaluable experience to this House in its further question 
periods. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the Premier to give us some assurance, 
however, that the Minister of Health will attend this Session from time to time in the days ahead. 
 
Would the Premier admit though that your Government has closed down more beds in hospitals than any 
prior administration ever dreamed of closing down? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No. 
 

HOG PRODUCER’S VOTE 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question of the Minister of Agriculture. When are the hog 
producers going to be getting their vote that was promised by that Government, or do they never intend 
to keep their promises? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t recall any time when the 
Minister of Agriculture promised a vote on the Hog Marketing Commission. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I was in the room at the Bessborough Hotel when Mr. Messer 
promised it, there were 500 other people there. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest what the Minister of Agriculture at that time suggested was 
that there would be a vote at the time of the next election, and the people at that time could determine 
whether they wanted the Commission or not. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

RADIO TIME 
 
MR. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like 
to move, seconded by the Member for Tisdale-Kelsey (Mr. Messer), by leave of the Assembly: 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

20 
 

That the matter of division of radio time arranged for the current Session be referred to the Select 
Standing Committee on Radio Broadcasting of Selected Proceedings, the said Committee to report its 
recommendations thereon with all convenient speed. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
MR. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it has been traditional on the second day of our 
sittings to recognize the contributions made to the public life of this province by Members of the 
Legislature who have died. Since our last meeting here about seven months ago the list is a long one. I 
don’t know what that says about the particular stage at which our province is, but it seems that a number 
of people who have contributed to the public life of the province in the past are reaching the end of their 
days on earth. We, therefore, have a long list. I move, seconded by the Member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake (Mr. Steuart): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing since the last Session of seven former 
Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they made to 
their community, their constituency and to this province: 
 
Evelyn Grace Edwards, who dies on September 17, 1976, was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Saskatoon-Sutherland from 1975 until her death. She was born in 1923 in Colonsay 
and received her early education there. She graduated as a Registered Nurse from the Saskatoon City 
Hospital. From 1966 to 1971 she served as an alderman for the City of Saskatoon and was a mayoralty 
candidate in 1971. She was a trustee on the Saskatoon City Hospital Board of Governors, former 
president of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association and past president of the City Hospital Nurses’ 
Alumnae. She was the first woman to be named an executive member of the Saskatoon Board of Trade 
and was also a founding member of the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation and the Council on Aging and 
a board member of the Canadian National Institute for the Blind. 
 
Myron Henry Feeley, who died on August 22, 1976, was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Canora from 1938 to 1948. He was born in 1885 in Belvidere, Illinois, and was 
educated in Mason City, Iowa. At the age of eighteen, he immigrated to Canada and homesteaded near 
Preeceville where he continued to farm for many years. He was active in numerous co-operative 
efforts and served on the local committee of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, worked with the United 
Farmers’ of Canada, and was a member of the local school board. 
 
John Whitmore Horsman, who died on June 10, 1976, was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Wilkie from 1948 to 1964. He was born in Grand Falls, New Brunswick in 1888 and 
attended school there. He 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

21 
 

homesteaded in the Unity district in 1907 where he farmed until his retirement in 1964. For 30 years 
he served his rural municipality, as secretary-treasurer from 1918 to 1938, as municipal councillor 
from 1938 to 1941, and as reeve from 1941 to 1948. For 20 years he served as a school trustee and 
was also a member of the Unity Hospital Board, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Independent 
Order of Odd Fellows Lodge. 
 
John Joseph Mildenberger, who died on August 8, 1976, was a Member of the Legislature for the 
constituency of Maple Creek from 1934 to 1944. He was born in 1895 in Odessa, Russia, came to 
Canada in 1901, and settled near Sedley, where he farmed. He received his education at St. Boniface 
College in Winnipeg and at the University of Saskatchewan. He served in the Royal Flying Corps 
during World War I and again served overseas in World War II, retiring in 1946 with the rank of 
Major. While overseas, he was awarded the Order of Member of the British Empire, that’s the M.B.E. 
Later he worked with the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration in Saskatchewan, was active in 
the Knights of Columbus and the Royal Canadian Legion, and served as secretary-treasurer of the 
rural municipality of Deer Forks. 
 
Hon. William John Patterson, who died on June 19, 1976, was the tenth Lieutenant-Governor of the 
Province of Saskatchewan, serving from 1951 until 1958. He was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Pipestone from 1921 to 1934 and for the constituency of Cannington from 1934 to 
1949 and was Premier of the province from 1935 to 1944. He was born in 1886 at Grenfell, 
Saskatchewan and received his education there. Before entering public life he worked as a bank 
manager, then as superintendent of rural telephones in the Department of Telephones and later as an 
insurance-real estate agent. He served overseas during World War I as a lieutenant in the Tenth 
Mounted Rifles. He served at various times as Minister of Highways, Provincial Treasurer, Minister of 
Telephones and Telegraphs, Minister of Natural Resources and for two years he was a member of the 
Board of Transport Commissioners in Ottawa. In 1955 he received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree 
from the University of Saskatchewan. For 60 years he was a member of the Masonic Lodge and also 
of the Scottish Rite. He held the distinction of being one of the first two Saskatchewan born Members 
of the Legislature, the first Saskatchewan born Premier, and the first Saskatchewan born 
Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
John Robeson Taylor, who died on May 26, 1976, was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Wadena from 1929 to 1934. He was born in Scotland in 1889 and immigrated to 
Canada at the age of 17. He attended Brandon College for two years and then homesteaded in the 
Kelvington-Nut Mountain area in 1908. He served in the Canadian Expeditionary Force in World War 
I and in the Canadian Veterans Guard in World War II. He was an implement dealer in Invermay for 
many years and was a member of the Saskatchewan Implement Dealers’ Association. In the 
community, he served at various times as village councillor, school board member, United 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

22 
 

Church elder and member of the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
Beatrice Janet Trew, who died on June 4, 1976, was a Member of this Legislature for the 
constituency of Maple Creek from 1944 to 1948. Born in 1897 in Coate’s Mills, New Brunswick, she 
received her education in Moncton and Fredericton. She became a teacher and taught in both New 
Brunswick and Saskatchewan. She was active in the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union and served as 
women’s President for five years. She held several offices in the Homemaker’s Club, the Ladies Aid 
Society, later the United Church Women and was a member of the Affiliated Countrywomen of the 
World. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move: 
 

In expressing its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 
May I, Mr. Speaker, add a few words of my own to the more formal words of the condolence motion. 
 
Of the seven, I had known five; Evelyn Edwards, Myron Feeley, Jack Horsman, Billy Patterson and 
Beatrice Trew. 
 
Mrs. Edwards, I, and perhaps other Members, did not know as well since her period of service in this 
Legislature was regrettably short, but she was a valuable Member for two sessions. She showed a 
continuing concern for the day to day problems of ordinary people, particularly the sick and the elderly. 
Her extensive record of community service has been already alluded to in the formal motion and will be 
known particularly to people in the Saskatoon area, where she served in so many public capacities. 
 
We appreciated her efforts in this House. I believe that in the relatively short time she was here, she had 
earned the respect of those on this side of the House as well as those of her own party. We very much 
regretted her untimely passing and feel that this House has lost a valuable Member who would have 
made a great contribution, particularly in the field of health and welfare. 
 
Myron Feeley was well known to me. He was a very active member of our party and one of the 
grassroots individuals who pioneered this province in the early twentieth century. He was a farmer and 
had a solid base in the land. He was involved in many, many co-op organizations and in organizations 
that pioneers established for themselves to make these prairies a habitable place. Myron will be 
remembered by those who knew him, including me, with respect and admiration. I particularly admired 
his work with the Wheat Pool and with the CCF. He was very active in the councils of the party until he 
was quite an old man and even when he was old and not well, he continued his interest. I remember in 
the 1975 election when Myron would have been 89 or 90 he attended our rally in Preeceville and was 
interested in the outcome of the election. 
 
Myron Feeley was a builder and we can see around him in the things he built the sort of Saskatchewan 
which many would like 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

23 
 

to see. I think those who may not have agreed with Myron’s particular political persuasion would be 
prepared to agree that he was a man of great integrity and great ability and made a substantial 
contribution to his community and to the province. 
 
I knew Jack Horsman. A number who are sitting in this Legislature now, a few of us at least, sat with 
Jack Horsman in the last four years of his term in this Legislature. Jack was a Member for whom I had a 
good deal of respect. He was an intelligent man, made intelligent, well thought out comments on the 
affairs of the day and he was well liked. He was a person of good personality and good temperament and 
accordingly established a rapport with Members on all sides of the House. Jack sat not too far from 
where the Member for Wilkie (Miss Clifford) is now sitting, for a period of his time in this House in 
1964. We, who were across from him, as I was, came to like and respect him. Clearly this fondness and 
respect was shared by his constituents because through thick and thin during that particular period, Jack 
was returned to this Legislature, when others of his party were falling by the wayside because at times 
there were difficulties at the polls for his particular party. 
 
I had known Billy Patterson, not as a Member of this House, but in many, many public capacities which 
Billy Patterson fulfilled after leaving this House. Certainly a great debt of gratitude is owed by 
Saskatchewan people to Billy Patterson for his 37 years of public service to this province. I suppose 
when one is referring to a former Premier and a former Lieutenant-Governor one ought to say the Hon. 
William Patterson, but when one speaks of Billy Patterson I think that’s the way one thinks of him. No 
one who performed his first functions in politics in 1905 and continued to perform functions in politics 
right up to the mid-1950s can have done anything else but leave a lasting mark on this province. He had 
a very difficult job as Premier from 1935 to 1944. I don’t think one would envy anyone at that particular 
time being Premier of this province and he discharged his duties commendably, even though there were 
great problems due to drought and depression. 
 
One of the best tributes I could pay to him would be to repeat the praise expressed by former Premier 
Tommy Douglas on the occasion of Mr. Patterson’s retirement from public life. Tommy stated at that 
time that Billy Patterson had brought great dignity and a sense of devotion to his many duties as a 
Member of the Legislature, Cabinet Minister, Premier, Leader of the Opposition and finally as Her 
Majesty’s Representative in Saskatchewan. 
 
I came to know Billy Patterson a little bit better in his retirement. He served as a member of the Board of 
the Saskatchewan Cement Company at the time that I was a member of the Board and I got to know him 
in that capacity. I came to know him later when he appeared at many, many public functions and I was 
always amazed. I can remember on one particular occasion going to a senior curlers’ bonspiel from all 
across this province where the curlers were 55 years of age or over and I was amazed and filled with 
admiration at the way that Billy Patterson could call every second one by name. That is the evidence of a 
person who has been in public life for many years and who has made a host of friends. 
 
He will be held in the esteem of people and I think that his record in this province needs no 
embellishment by me or by 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

24 
 

anyone else in this House. 
 
The other person I knew and knew well was Beatrice Trew. Beatrice was one of the founding members 
of the CCF and as an MLA made a significant contribution to the public life or the province. She fought 
the good fight as you might say as one of the very early women Members of this House and in that way, 
opened some doors to Members who came after her. I knew Beatrice particularly in the early 1950s 
when she served as a board member of a Crown corporation, Saskatchewan Wool Products and I was 
secretary of the board. I came to know her since that time on many, many different occasions. I had a 
great admiration for her contribution to Saskatchewan. She brought the pioneer woman’s 
resourcefulness to many of the problems which she faced. Beatrice was friendly, one might almost say 
jolly, because that was her personality and she kept an interest in political affairs and community affairs 
right up to the tragic accident which ended her life. Beatrice was on the provincial council of our party 
to within a few months of her death and was active in many, many organizations. She was a concerned 
and happy person and she worked hard and well. 
 
I think that all of us are the legatees of the work done by these early Members and that we owe a debt of 
gratitude to them and I am happy that this occasion gives me the opportunity to record my appreciation 
for the work they did for this Legislature, for their communities, and for this province. 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege for me to join in 
with the Premier and other Members in this Assembly to pay a tribute to the seven people who have 
passed away, and all served in this House in various capacities. I’m only going to talk in any detail about 
three of them whom I knew, but they all have something in common of course and that is that they did 
serve, they held strong political convictions and they were convinced that this was the place to try and 
help the people of their community and the people of their province. All of them, with the exception of 
Evelyn Edwards, were older people and they were in the best sense of the word ‘pioneers.’ Most of them 
came from rural Saskatchewan and not having known them, but having read about them and some of 
them I’ve heard a great deal about during my time in public life in this province, I want to join the 
Premier in paying a tribute to them and giving my condolences to their families. 
 
I want to say just a few brief words about the three people whom I knew. The first one was the Hon. 
William Patterson. As the Premier pointed out you never thought of William Patterson as anything but 
Billy Patterson. He served the province for 35 years in different capacities, in fact he served for much 
longer than that, but he served in this House and as Lieutenant-Governor for 35 years. He was Premier 
for nine years and they were difficult years, the worst years of the depression and then the war years. He 
came out of it not bitter. He was defeated and badly defeated at the end of his time as Premier and yet he 
maintained an objectivity about his defeat and about politics and about this province that was admirable. 
 
He phoned me up one time and asked me to take him down to the Cannington constituency. There was a 
meeting there and he 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

25 
 

hadn’t been down to his old home constituency for a long time and I picked him up and I drove him 
down. He talked a great deal about the early days and about his time as Premier and he said something 
that I’ve never forgotten. He said (and this was in the middle 60s I think), “You know, when I was 
Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan almost half of the people were on some kind of government 
help or either straight relief as it was called in those days, or some other kind of government help.” He 
said, “Today we have prosperity like we never dreamed of. We have so many things, so much material 
success in this province that we in our day could never even imagine in our wildest flights of fantasy 
that the situation would be like it is today.” Then he said, “You know, as I look around and I read the 
paper and I follow events I am convinced that there is far more unhappiness and far more bitterness and 
far more antagonism today in Saskatchewan and in Canada generally than there ever was during those 
difficult years of the depression. You know I’ve come to the conclusion that maybe some times we’re on 
the wrong track, that when people really had it tough and they all had it tough, and they had to dig in and 
help each other and they had to work hard and work together, it wasn’t the material success that brought 
happiness, it was that feeling of serving each other.” 
 
In the last years, although he had some tough experiences in politics and some difficult defeats to face, 
Billy Patterson was content and he was happy. He served our party and he served this province and this 
country and he served it very well and I would like to pay a tribute to him and pass on to his wife my 
regrets and the regrets, I’m sure, of all the Members of this Assembly. 
 
John Horsman, I had the privilege of sitting with for a couple of years. He sat right in front of me. It was 
an interesting experience. By the time I came into the Legislative Assembly John had made quite a few 
speeches, but he wasn’t making too many more. He had come to the conclusion, he told me one time, 
that everything that he had to say had pretty well been said and he didn’t get the feeling that he was 
convincing the people on the other side a great deal anyway, so he felt maybe he would be better off if 
he just sat and watched the scene and advised us young fellows. 
 
But in his final speech he made in the House, he gave us notice that he wanted to speak on the radio. He 
wanted to have time and he wanted to speak on the radio. And he told me that it was the first time that 
he had ever bothered to speak on the radio. He didn’t think much of the, as he called it, new-fangled idea 
of having radio in the Assembly, so he started off and it was a warm speech, it was a humorous speech 
and it said more about Jack Horsman than anything else I ever heard. He started off by saying ‘hello’ to 
his mother (his wife - he called her, mother), then he thanked the CCF as it was, over the years, for 
never having built any roads, never having done anything in his seat. He thanked them very much, his 
people didn’t thank them, but he thanked them because that’s why he kept getting elected. He didn’t say 
it bitterly, he just said it quite humorously. But he again was a man of deep conviction and a man who 
was prepared to stand up and be counted, and a man who was prepared to stand up and be counted when 
the going was tough. As a result he gained the respect of people, not just on this side of the House, those 
who sat with him as Members of the same political party, but people of all 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

26 
 

political parties, and people all over this province. Again, he left a family, they are there still in that 
district, and I pay my respects, as we all do, to the memory of Jack Horsman and our regrets to his 
family. 
 
The other person I want to speak about in any detail of course, is Evelyn Edwards, whom I knew for a 
great many years, both in the field of municipal work, in the field of health work and in the field of 
politics. 
 
The untimely passing of Evelyn Edwards was a great loss to her family and my first words are to 
express my sympathy to Arnold, to Brenda, to Bill and to David. Our party, this Legislature and the 
province, will also miss her dedication, enthusiasm and common sense. 
 
Evelyn was a family woman, first and foremost, but she also found time to serve in an unbelievable 
number of other areas. Starting as a nurse, she built, what could amount to a career in the field of health, 
hospital trustee, president of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, founding member of the 
Parkinson’s Disease Foundation and an active board member of the Council on Aging and the National 
Institute for the Blind. These were highlights of her work for better health care. At the same time this 
fine person found time to be alderwoman, a valuable member of Saskatoon’s Board of Trade. She also 
had a deep commitment to politics, and I’m proud that she chose our party as the instrument to express 
her sincere conviction that governmental action is necessary to help people help themselves. All this 
only describes what Evelyn did, it doesn’t tell the real story of the graceful and fine way in which she 
lived. 
 
Mrs. Edwards was a warm, intelligent, humorous woman with a deep belief in people and she spent her 
life making this a better world. We will all miss her and she will live on in the memory of her family and 
the thousands of people who knew and loved her. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure 
that I add the sympathy and condolences of the Progressive Conservative caucus to those already 
expressed by the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I did not know any of the seven Members who died, well, but I did know two of them as passing 
acquaintances. 
 
Evelyn Edwards, I knew in three capacities; as an MLA, as a political opponent in civic politics and as 
the mother of Bill Edwards, who is a very good and close personal friend. If anyone can be, as many 
have suggested that the evidence of their lives is the evidence of their children, then Evelyn was in fact 
an outstanding human being. She was a fine MLA, and a worthy political opponent who at all times was 
honorable, sincere and honest. 
 
Mr. John Taylor is a former Conservative who, I believe, is the last living Member of the last 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan. He sat as an Independent during his tenure of office as an 
MLA, but he ran as a Conservative on many occasions 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

27 
 

during the time when as John Diefenbaker said, Conservatives needed protection under the game laws. I 
have talked to Mr. Taylor on several occasions. He, even during his latter years, was an outstanding 
orator and a very funny human being who kept everyone always in stitches about some very difficult 
times. 
 
I would again add our sincere sympathies to those already expressed. 
 
May God grant all those who passed eternal peace and their loved ones comfort in the joy of their lives. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words in 
associating myself with the remarks of the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of 
the Conservative Party. 
 
I had the privilege of knowing three of these former MLAs, Jack Horsman, first of all. I was just 
beginning my life in politics when Jack Horsman was passing out of the political sphere in the Province 
of Saskatchewan, and yet Jack had that sense of humor and that kindness and that interest in everyone 
that was coming up. I certainly think that he has made a great contribution to the province. 
 
As for Billy Patterson, I don’t think there is probably a citizen of Saskatchewan who has served in as 
many capacities as long and as ably as Billy Patterson. Perhaps no Canadian, or few Canadians can 
present a record of public service that Billy Patterson can. Billy’s wife, Florence, is some kind of a shirt 
tail relative of my wife, and as a result we do have more than just a passing acquaintance with Mr. 
Patterson and his family. Also, Mr. Patterson grew up in what is now my constituency, in the 
community of Grenfell, and some of his family is still there. I do have the occasional opportunity of 
seeing them and like Billy, himself, they are great Liberals and great supporters and it is always a treat 
to go back and talk to them and visit them and talk to them about Billy Patterson of whom they are so 
justly proud. 
 
Well I do want to say that Saskatchewan has lost a great citizen and I hope that perhaps some of us in 
this Assembly now may attain to the same kind of record of achievement that Billy Patterson had. 
 
As far as Evelyn Edwards is concerned, I don’t suppose we shall ever find anyone with the warmth and 
the charm that Evelyn displayed in this House. We are supposed to be coming into the days of 
womanhood and Evelyn Edwards never had to wait for those days to come along. She had that capacity 
and that drive and that spirit that made her all things to so many people. She had the respect and 
admiration in the municipal field of health care as well as in the political life of our province, as the 
other Members have indicated. 
 
I will miss Evelyn as a good and close friend. I think this Assembly will miss Evelyn for her charm and 
that something that she had that none of the rest of us have, and I know that our caucus and the Liberal 
Party will miss Evelyn. But I think the real tragedy of the passing of Evelyn Edwards is that the people 
of Saskatchewan will miss her and what she might 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

28 
 

have accomplished in the years ahead. 
 
I want to pass on my sympathy too to Arnold and the other members of her family. 
 
HON. A. S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Premier and the other 
Members of the House in paying tribute to the late Myron Henry Feeley. 
 
To me, and to the people of the Canora constituency and to the many others, Myron will be remembered 
as a good-hearted friend. He will be remembered as one who always had a soft spot for those who were 
less fortunate. He was always ready to help. His ability to listen to people and compassionately to 
understand their concerns and problems was one of his greatest qualities. Myron Feeley was all this 
because of his genuine interest in people. Serving them was an integral part of his life. Myron, as he was 
known to everyone, had earned the respect of many, his neighbors, his one-time constituents and the 
many people of this province. 
 
Myron loved the farm. He stayed with it for many years, some 70 years in the Preeceville district. He 
was one of the pioneers who had given much of himself to serve to improve our social and economic 
conditions. He envisioned Saskatchewan as a great place, rich in resources and high in ideals. He was a 
strong believer in co-operatives and a great promoter in seeing that people banded together to do things 
for themselves to bring about social change, when that change was necessary. 
 
Organizational skill was one of Myron’s many outstanding abilities. Locally he was instrumental in 
organizing the rural telephone service and the Wheat Pool committee. He served as a Wheat Pool 
delegate for a term. 
 
Myron Feeley’s political life was an interesting one. Here, too, he was a pioneer in advocating socialism 
as a way of effecting social change in the interest of the farmer and the worker. He was one of the ten 
CCF MLAs elected in 1938. He was returned in 1944 and chose not to run in 1948 because of health 
reasons. After his legislative career ended he served long and tirelessly on the provincial council, on the 
executive, and was well-known for his party organization abilities and his fund raising efforts. 
 
A profile in the May 4, 1949 of the Commonwealth, described his efforts on behalf of Canora 
constituency and I quote: 
 

If Canora slips a bit he rolls out the old car and refused to return until his objective has been met. 
Neither snow, nor mud, can hold him back and when he drives into a yard the farmer knows that it is 
time to kick through for the CCF. 

 
Mr. Feeley had strong, practical ideals and once said that the most important things in life were, “Better 
educational opportunities than I had in my youth; a stronger CCF movement; and a world free from 
war.” He did not stop working for these goals or his party. 
 
One of his last gestures was to present a gavel to the 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

29 
 

Saskatchewan NDP for use at the executive and council meetings — a symbol of his wish that the New 
Democratic Party organization remain strong and continue its work towards the well-being of society as 
a whole. 
 
To Myron’s wife, Molly, to his son Jim and his family, and to his daughter Molly Lynn, I extend my 
deepest sympathy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Member for Kelvington-Wadena, Neil Byers, who is unable to attend 
the House this afternoon, I want to join with other Members of this Assembly in paying tribute to the 
memory of John Robeson Taylor and place the tribute on record for the Hon. Member. 
 
There is a time in the development of every era which marks the end of the period of the pioneer and a 
passing into a new era to which they have pointed the way. While they are no longer with us, their 
leadership, integrity and initiative are legacies to us all. 
 
The Hon. Member never had the privilege of meeting Mr. Taylor, but was told by those who knew him 
that Jack, as he was commonly known, was a man of quiet determination. Certainly Mr. Taylor’s drive 
in establishing a successful implement business and his service to the community which he adopted as 
his home, are lessons to all of us in values which are essential to Saskatchewan. Always helpful, he was 
elected to many positions of trust by his community. So today, I wish, along with the Hon. Member, to 
join with other Members of the Assembly in offering sympathy and condolences to the family of John 
Taylor. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join with the Premier and other 
Members of the House who have spoken in tribute of Members of the Legislature who have died since 
we met last spring and to speak very briefly about one whom I knew and knew reasonably well, Mrs. 
Edwards. 
 
I first came to know Evelyn during the Saskatoon civic election campaign in early 1972. I remember 
clearly that my first impression of her was one of a lady who had a deep concern for people. Her work in 
the hospital field has been well documented, as a member of the Board of Governors of Saskatoon City 
Hospital, and later as chairman, she strove to make certain that quality care was routine. Mrs. Edwards 
piloted the first municipal legislation regarding standards for private nursing homes during her tenure as 
an alderman in Saskatoon. It is but one concrete example of her concern for those who were less 
fortunate and who could not care for themselves. As rookie MLAs, Evelyn and I rode many miles 
together. She shared ideas magnanimously and brought a sense of integrity and humility to her task of 
representing residents of Saskatoon-Sutherland. Her sense of humor and her unfailing sense of fair-play 
were a guiding light for all who knew her. 
 
Evelyn Edwards is no longer with us. However, her actions and words, ideals and ideas will always be a 
part of those who knew her. Her vitality and enthusiasm enriched all who worked with her. Her 
contribution toward a better society was significant. 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

30 
 

MR. L. M. LARSON (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition, and other Members who have expressed sympathy and condolences to those who have 
passed on since our last Legislature. 
 
Of the seven, I knew three, Mrs. Edwards, Mrs. Trew and Myron Feeley. 
 
My acquaintance with Mrs. Edwards was brief, as it only began upon her entrance into this House. I 
found that although we didn’t agree politically, we had many human concerns in common. She was a 
very amiable type of person, very pleasant to talk to, and we found that many of the things that we 
desired for our fellowman, we shared. So I extend my sympathy to her husband and to her family. 
 
Of Mrs. Trew, I want to say that she was a very unusual woman, a very unusual lady to be more 
specific. Her character and her principles were without question. My first meeting with her occurred in 
1949 in the city of Saskatoon. We were attending the United Farmers of Canada, Saskatchewan Section 
Convention. At that time there were those who thought we ought to fold the organization up, give it a 
decent burial. Mrs. Trew fought this very vigorously. She campaigned, she lobbied, and she did the kind 
of things that she thought was necessary to prevent this from happening. I was impressed by her 
determination. I was impressed by her ability and I was impressed probably even more by her fair play 
attitude. The lobbying she did was fair, was well reasoned. It was well thought out. There was real 
purpose behind it. I certainly enjoyed working with her and the principles that she stood for. 
 
In later years I had the privilege of serving as an executive member of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union 
Board that was founded at this ’49 convention during her tenureship as women’s president. Again I 
found her a lady of extreme integrity, very high intelligence and unquestionable morals. 
 
I extend my sympathy to her husband and to those who must mourn her loss. 
 
Myron Feeley — I share with the Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla) some of the remarks that he has 
made. But I would say that Myron was all that and he was much more. His compassion to youth - I met 
him as a very young, aggressive, probably not a very polished person. He took the time to call you aside 
and to say, well you know your ideas are good but probably you should look at a little broader 
perspective in your approach and this sort of thing. This was Myron Feeley, always concerned about his 
fellowman, always concerned that you produce the best that you were capable of. And to this end he was 
a shining example. 
 
I recall his retirement from politics. He said, “A man of my age that has given as much as I have, ought 
to step aside, for someone younger.” And he introduced Alec Kuziak, who won the election and made a 
remarkable contribution to Saskatchewan and this House. 
 
This was the other side of Myron Feeley. He rolled up his sleeves and he went to work when a job had 
to be done. He showed leadership, he showed integrity, he showed compassion, 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

31 
 

and he showed the principle that many of us are not prone to accept, that we don’t go on forever, that we 
must train others to follow us. This was Myron Feeley as I knew him. My life has been greatly enhanced 
by the privilege of knowing and the honor of working with a man like Myron Feeley. I join with others 
in extending my full sympathy to his family. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to join with other Members 
of this House who spoke previously. I should like to pay tribute to the seven Members of the Legislature 
who are no longer with us. But I would particularly like to pay tribute to two Members of the Legislature 
who represented the constituency of Maple Creek. 
 
John Joseph Mildenberger was a Member of the Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Maple 
Creek from 1934 to 1944. He was very keenly interested in politics and spent his entire lifetime working 
for the Liberal Party. The Mildenberger name even to this day continues to work in the Liberal Party as 
one of his sons serves as the constituency president for the constituency of Humboldt. 
 
As well as a farmer and teacher, Mr. Mildenberger had an illustrious military career and he served in 
both world wards. In the First World War he served with the Royal Flying Corps and in the Second 
World War he was Saskatchewan’s very first legislator to go overseas. As Mr. Premier mentioned 
earlier while he was overseas he received a war decoration. He retired finally from the army in 1946 
with the rank of Major. 
 
I personally, as a young boy, met Mr. Mildenberger during the 1944 election campaign when he made a 
visit to the home of my parents. One of the reasons I probably remember him at that time is because he 
was doing his electioneering in the uniform of a major in the Canadian Army. He wasn’t successful in 
that particular election and was defeated. As I said earlier, he retired from the army in 1946. 
 
Mr. Mildenberger not only served his country and province well but also was very active in community 
work, particularly in the sports field and also served as a scout master. He was a hard working and 
capable individual. He was supported and appreciated by those who worked with him. 
 
The other person - Mrs. Trew. I did not have the occasion to meet Mrs. Trew, but I did know some of 
the members of her immediate family. All I can say is that the people whom I know and who also knew 
Mrs. Beatrice Trew, spoke very highly of her. She was an involved community worker, who was always 
striving to make her community and the province a better place to live. 
 
I should like to extend my sympathies to her family. 
 
MR. H. H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues from 
Saskatoon who are unable to be here today, I should also like to pay tribute to Evelyn Grace Edwards. 
 
Evelyn Edwards was a Member of this Legislature for a 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

32 
 

relatively short period of time prior to her untimely death of September 17 of this year. 
 
As has already been pointed out, Evelyn was born in Colonsay, near Saskatoon, where she received her 
elementary and high school education. She graduated as a registered nurse from the City Hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
As previous speakers have already indicated, Evelyn was a very active Council Member of the city of 
Saskatoon for a five-year period and was a candidate for the mayoralty in 1971. 
 
Evelyn Edwards was active in community and church affairs and in line with these had also a keen 
interest in health care matters, due to her training as a nurse. She served as a trustee on Saskatoon City 
Hospital Board for a term, was president of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association and also a former 
president of the City Hospital Nurses Alumnae. 
 
In addition to all of these, Evelyn was also active in founding the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation and 
Counselling on Aging. She was a board member of the Canadian National Institute for the Blind. 
 
Her active work on voluntary agencies and elected bodies, both at the community and the provincial 
levels, reflected her concerns in the field of health and her capacity for work in her chosen field. It 
followed somewhat naturally then, that she should be the Opposition’s health critic in this Legislature. 
 
We mourn her untimely passing and express our condolences to her family and many friends throughout 
this province. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of Health, the Hon. Wes Robbins, I should like to pay 
tribute to Beatrice Trew. Others have already outlined and referred to the various contributions Beatrice 
made to her community and her province. She was active in the Farmers’ Union activities, and served as 
a Member of this Legislature for Maple Creek from 1944 to 1948. 
 
Mr. Robbins did not meet Mrs. Trew until a more recent time in the period from 1944 to 1964, when Mr. 
Robbins spent a great amount of time addressing credit union meetings throughout Saskatchewan. 
During this period he had the pleasure on more than one occasion of meeting her at meetings in the 
Cabri, Lancer, Lemsford and Sceptre areas. He found her to be an interested proponent of the self-help 
idea in the field of consumer economics, and credit union philosophy. 
 
Mr. Robbins mourns her tragic demise in a traffic accident, and along with other Members of this 
Assembly and his family expresses condolences to her husband Albert Trew and her myriad of friends 
throughout Saskatchewan. She served her community and the province well. 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I have been asked by the Member for 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency (Mr. Bailey) to join with the Members today in paying his tribute to a 
former Member of this Legislature, Mrs. Beatrice Trew. 
 
The following is a message from the Member for Rosetown-Elrose. 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

33 
 

The small community of Lemsford, Saskatchewan became important to me in the late 1940s. Not 
because it was the home community of the Trews, but rather because it was the home of someone who 
had become very special to me. That special person later became my wife. 
 
It was Christmas of 1949 when I first met Beatrice Trew and her family. The young people from the 
community invited me to join them at a Christmas get together at Aunt Bea’s place. Beatrice Trew was 
affectionately called Aunt Bea by all the younger members of the community. Albert, her husband was 
equally respected by everyone. Although I was a stranger to the community, this first visit confirmed 
everything that I had heard. 
 
Mrs. Trew was a gracious hostess showing genuine concern for friends and strangers alike. As the years 
went on I never ceased to admire and respect the ambition of this former Member. 
 
Her devotion to her family, her community, particularly the young people will always be held in fond 
memory by my wife, the former Helen Anderson of Lemsford, and myself. I am pleased to have the 
opportunity to join with other Members of the Assembly in paying tribute to Aunt Bea and extending to 
her family our deepest condolences. 
 
MISS L. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I should like briefly to add my tribute to two Members 
whom I knew in this House and who have now passed away. Much has previously been said about the 
work and life of John Horsman. Every person who knew Mr. Horsman have their personal and precious 
memories of his that they hold dear. I didn’t know Mr. Horsman as a colleague as the Members 
previously have expressed, but I knew him as a friend in my home area. 
 
Despite the fact that there was 60 years between us, I considered Mr. Horsman a valued and a personal 
friend. Whereas many veteran campaigners would have been doubtful about a young woman entering 
politics and taking over their former responsibilities, John Horsman was one of my top supporters. My 
favorite remembrance of him was when I went into his home to get his support and I asked him if he had 
any advice for me. He said, “Yes, I do, I can tell you how to win.” So being a very eager campaigner I 
asked him how. He just said, “Get more votes than the other fellow.” It was a great boost to my 
campaign to have his public support and was especially rewarding to me when we went mainstreeting 
together in the last election. The admiration and respect that he was shown by people all over the 
constituency and province is not earned by many. Until the day of his death he was able to quote poetry 
at great length. His political awareness never waned and he was always ready for a good political 
discussion - always promoting the Liberal philosophy that he believed in so strongly. 
 
To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to quote from a tribute to Mr. Horsman written in his home town 
paper, the Unity Herald, written by people who knew him best: 
 

Mention has often been made of John Horsman’s public life in school, municipal and provincial 
affairs, but what many people tend to forget, especially the very young, is the fact that he was a 
member of a very special and rapidly vanishing group “The Pioneers” who 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

34 
 

opened our country, who saw the prairie in its natural state and who endured the hardships of primitive 
living. 

 
All were not farmers, some were businessmen, doctors, teachers, but all were as necessary in the 
pioneer days as they are today. 

 
There are still a few left, all are old, many are lonely - speak to them, ask them questions for they all 
love to tell of their experiences, both sad and happy in the early days. 

 
Remember they are living history and when they are all gone you will never see their likes again. John 
Horsman was a people’s politician and a people’s friend. 

 
It was a great honor to have him as my friend and I only wish more people could have been as fortunate. 
 
I should also like to pay tribute to Evelyn Edwards. 
 
Evelyn was a friend to many in Saskatchewan and all across Canada. I first met Evelyn when I started 
university in Saskatoon. She was a type of person who cared for the individual, even a university student 
coming to the city to live for the first time. Due to my personal community involvement in the following 
years, we grew to know each other better and wish this added association, also grew my added 
admiration and respect for Evelyn. Evelyn was to me, personification of all things a lady should be. She 
held on to her principles and beliefs, always making a strong stand for the betterment of the people she 
cared about, the people of Saskatchewan. This determination was felt by many in the province as well at 
times by the other parties in the House. At the same time Evelyn was quick to give credit where credit 
was due, her only goal being to help those who were in need. As new MLAs we became even better 
friends. We were critics for closely associated areas, health and social services and as such Evelyn was 
always ready to assist with advice and support whenever necessary. Evelyn proved to be a superb MLA 
and served her constituents well. She was equally proud that at present it was only the Liberal Party that 
put their trust in women Members to represent them in the Legislature. Above all, dedication, loyalty 
and concern for the individual were Evelyn’s utmost qualities. Being one of the youngest Members, 
along with the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) I can remember after this day last year, she came 
to us and said, being as we were likely to be here much longer, she hoped that someone would have a 
good word to say about her when her time came. As you can see, there is no lack of people that have 
something good to say about Evelyn Edwards. 
 
As a tribute to Evelyn, the Star-Phoenix stated: 
 

Evelyn’s advice and example will always be with us. The things that mattered to her will get done. We 
will see to that. 
 
Evelyn did more in her too short life than many of us can do in twice that length of time. We are all 
better for knowing her and she will be missed by all. 



 
November 19, 1976 

 

35 
 

I add my sincere sympathy to both these families on the passing of John Horsman and Evelyn Edwards. 
 
HON. W. F. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with other 
Members who have spoken in expressing my sympathies to the families of the seven Members who have 
passed away since our last session. 
 
But in particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks about the two people with whom I, as a 
person involved in the health field, was closely associated. 
 
Mrs. Beatrice Trew was a person that in addition to her active involvement in the farm movement, and 
as a Member of the Legislature, had a deep interest and commitment to the improvement of health 
services in the Province of Saskatchewan. There may be some of you who may not have known that 
Mrs. Trew served on the Thompson Committee, formally known as Saskatchewan Advisory Medical 
Care Insurance Committee, a committee that was established in 1960 by Premier Douglas. There were 
12 members on that committee. She was the only woman member on that committee. Her task was to 
bring to the attention of the committee the concerns of farm people, the need to improve health services 
in Saskatchewan and in particular medical care, as well as to have the women’s viewpoint on that 
committee, because when it comes to health care I think it is women in our society who have the major 
responsibility of raising families and are more familiar probably than we menfolk about the needs for 
establishing and developing good medical care. Her contribution was indeed immense in the 
development and establishment of medical care in Saskatchewan, which as all of us know had laid down 
the pattern and the groundwork for a national medical care plan. 
 
So in addition to all those other attributes and contributions of Mrs. Trew, pioneering medical care as we 
now have it in Saskatchewan is one additional contribution that Mrs. Trew made. We should remember 
her for that. 
 
I should like to express my deep sympathies to her family. 
 
Also, I should like to join with others in paying my tribute to Mrs. Evelyn Edwards. I got to know Mrs. 
Edwards when I became Minister of Health, she was at that time a chairman of the Saskatoon City 
Hospital Board. It wasn’t long after becoming Minister of Health that I met her in the delegation which 
came to see me. She was on the executive of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, and later became 
the president of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, I think the first woman to become elected to 
that important office. While we had different political views, our interests in developing better health 
services for the people of Saskatchewan and better hospital services in this area, we had a common 
interest. So I am glad that I knew Evelyn Edwards, not only as a person who was interested in health 
services but also I think we did become fairly good friends. And while we differed politically, jour 
interests were the same to work in the improvement of health services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I express my deep sympathies to her husband and her family and friends. 



 
November 19, 1976 
 

36 
 

MR. W. J. G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to pay my respects to the 
memory of Myron Feeley, whom I consider myself very fortunate to have known. And I do so, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of hundreds of young New Democrats who came to look on Myron as a friend. There 
has been a custom in the youth section of our party to hold a weekend camp every summer at Crystal 
Lake. Myron’s son Jim, whom most of us on this side of the House will know, would drive Myron over 
to the camp and he would spend hours with the young people there talking about the early days of the 
CCF. But he was also vitally interested in the issues of today and he spoke of those issues too with the 
same fervent philosophy of democratic socialism that he had given a lifetime to. We were all impressed 
with Myron’s wit and his wisdom. There is an expression that a prophet has no honor in his own 
country, but this certainly was not the case for Myron Feeley. I had the honor a few years ago to spend a 
day collecting money with Myron in the Preeceville district and the affection with which he was held in 
his own community was very obvious to me and it was very obvious in the amount of money that we 
collected, the high esteem with which he was held. I believe he was held in this high esteem by his 
neighbors of all political persuasions because he was a man who lived by the principles that he preached. 
To Molly and her children, and her grandchildren, I want to extend my deepest sympathy. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse): 
 

That the resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased Members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:47 o’clock p.m. 


	QUESTIONS
	MOTIONS
	CONDOLENCES


