


























































Hansard: November 23, 1976


 
 

75 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

4th Day 
 

Tuesday, November 23, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to welcome to this House a 
group of 47 students from Bedford Road Collegiate in Saskatoon. The collegiate is actually located in 
the constituency of Saskatoon Centre. They are accompanied by Mr. Serienko, Dr. Ens and Mrs. Gough. 

 
I believe that prior to coming to the House they visited the RCMP Barracks in Regina and also the 
Museum of Natural History. I am sure that they found it interesting, and it is to be hoped that they find 
proceedings in this House this afternoon interesting, also. 
 
Later on I will be meeting with them and, hopefully, some pictures will be taken. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I fail to see the humor in my wanting to have some pictures taken of young 
adults who are going to be voters in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — It seems to me that that laugh that you gentlemen just came out with may spell 
your doom. At any rate some pictures will be taken. I have some scenes of Saskatchewan which I would 
like to present their teachers later on as well as some booklets on the province. It is to be hoped, as I 
mentioned before, that they have a good day and a good, safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

DISMISSAL OF RENTALSMAN 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister 
in charge of the Rent Control Program of Saskatchewan. I see by news reports that the Minister has 
dismissed Mr. Ian Rogers, the rentalsman in the Province of Saskatchewan. I ask the Minister if that was 
his decision and, if so, if he could outline to the Members of this House the reasons for the dismissal of 
Mr. Rogers? 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Department of Consumer Affairs): — Well, as all Members know, the rental 
control area is a 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

76 
 

difficult area. The sort of person whom you need in that type of position has to have certain qualities. To 
administer it in a manner that is satisfactory to everyone is an impossible task. You will probably recall 
awhile ago when a committee sat and suggested certain drastic changes in the whole rental procedure. 
You will also recall when the Speech from the Throne came down there were some amendments 
suggested. I felt that if we were going to look at the committee report and make the changes that were 
necessary or suggested, it was necessary that we look at someone in a capacity that had different 
qualifications than the present incumbent. The present incumbent is a very valuable employee. We 
consider him the sort of person that we would like to work in the Government service and therefore he 
has been offered opportunities to work in a couple of other areas and his salary continues until he 
considers which of the opportunities he is going to accept. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister if Mr. Rogers 
is not really the scapegoat for the Government in this? The Government has received some very severe 
criticism from tenants and landlords alike about the Rent Control Program. Can the Minister indicate to 
the Members of the House is Mr. Rogers the scapegoat on behalf of the Government? Could he indicate 
to the Members of the House also what areas of re-examination in the Rent Control Program he is 
proposing and tell us what changes and in what direction he intends to proceed? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, as a very sensitive and conscientious Minister I am listening to the 
people. I’m not necessarily listening to the Member opposite, I don’t find him always authentic and 
accurate. I do think there is a need to look at a new rentalsman. The decision was mine and I stand by it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister tell me what mechanism he 
is using to re-examine the Rent Control Program? Will he give an opportunity for tenants and landlords 
and particularly landlords, because if there is anything very obvious in the Province of Saskatchewan it 
is the fact that rental housing is no longer being constructed. What mechanism is he using to re-examine 
the Rent Control Program in Saskatchewan and will tenants and landlords have an opportunity to voice 
their criticisms? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — As has always been the policy with this Government we have, Mr. Speaker, made 
every effort to keep in close touch with the people who are involved in this sort of program. The 
committee that was given an opportunity to report is a clear indication that the former Minister did 
exactly that. We will be looking at the committee report carefully, we will be doing some in-house 
studies of what has been going on and an announcement will be made in due course. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I wonder if the Minister would indicate whether 
having enticed this career public servant into resigning as a deputy minister to take that position, 
whether he will now be returned to the rank of a deputy minister in some other department or whether, 
having used the man, like using him as your scapegoat, 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

77 
 

you now intend to shunt him off into some other area? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — As usual the Hon. Member for Wascana is jumping at conclusions. His mind is as 
active as a jack rabbit. There was no enticement to the deputy minister from me and I think all of his 
observations are in error. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — A supplementary question, Mr. 
Speaker. As a result of the dismissal of the rentalsman and in view of the temporary nature of the entire 
rent control procedures and in light of the fact that the rentalsman, Mr. Rogers, was very, very actively 
involved in the preparation of the legislation, would the Minister not consider withdrawing the 
legislation at this time? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member will receive this information in due 
course. 
 

BEEF MAKES PEOPLE FEROCIOUS 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 
Premier in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture. I am sure the Premier is aware of a statement 
made in Calgary last weekend by the Federal Minister of Agriculture, Eugene Whelan, to the effect that 
beef makes people ferocious. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I would like to know if the Government of the Premier agrees with Mr. Whelan, 
and I would ask the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture, if he would concur in this 
statement? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I am sorry, he is attending a function at a small hospital in his 
constituency which apparently missed the axe which was being swung by the now Member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. It is at Langenberg, for those who wish to know the answer. That isn’t Neudorf, or 
Maryfield or Qu’Appelle, it is Langenberg. 
 
The question asked by the Hon. Member is one which I am unable to answer. I want to advise him that 
the Mr. Whelan referred to was the Hon. Eugene Whelan, the Minister in the Federal Liberal Cabinet 
and not the Hon. Ed Whelan in our Cabinet. Accordingly, I think that Liberals should take responsibility 
for his statements and I think I will decline. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — In view of the drastic situation that the cattle industry is in right now and in view 
of the fact that the cattle industry doesn’t need any more irresponsible statements, such as this, 
particularly from someone in Mr. Whelan’s position, would the Premier agree with me that Mr. Whelan 
should resign. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

78 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I think the Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) has suggested the appropriate 
answer which I will adopt. Yes, indeed, I think Mr. Whelan should resign together with all his 
colleagues. And we should have another Federal Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Perhaps I should be addressing this to the Member for Shellbrook (Mr. 
Bowerman). Would the Premier also agree with the federal agriculture Minister when he indicated that if 
you eat better, you love more? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I don’t consider that to be of urgent public concern. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOBILE HOMES 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of DNS. In light of 
the detailed and lengthy reply to my question regarding the 150 mobile homes on Friday, the Minister 
has obviously a detailed report before him or access to a detailed report. Will he advise if it is the 
Government’s intention to continue to rent these mobile homes to DNS employees or government 
contract employees? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, that I 
understood the question, is it whether or not we are going to lease the trailers to DNS employees or what 
other kind of employees? 
 
MR. LARTER: — Is it your intention to continue leasing them to the DNS employees or people who 
are doing contract work for DNS in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Any work that may be undertaken in the northern administration district with 
regard to construction projects or housing projects or the teachers for example, the northern school 
board, if those are who you might be referring to as people who would be living in the trailers, I would 
then say, Yes, it is quite possible we will be leasing them to some of those people. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary. Is it the intention of the Government to subsidize rent as they do in 
government owned homes in northern Saskatchewan, and will these subsidies be included in any union 
agreement, or any contract, and if so, do they have the approval of the public sector Price and 
Compensation Board? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The rental structure, I believe did have the approval of the Price and 
Compensation Board when they were established. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

79 
 

I don’t know whether these will be taken into the union agreement or not. It is a matter of negotiation by 
SGEA and the Department. I can’t tell you whether it will be or not. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Is the Minister aware that this method of salary subsidy was disapproved of by the 
Public Accounts Committee last year and can the Minister tell us why he persists in following a practice 
which has led to substantiated documentary abuse in northern Saskatchewan? And which puts DNS 
workers in substantially better houses than the non-government employed citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of any province in Canada nor do I think that the 
Northwest Territories Government expects or has any of its employees living in non-subsidized housing. 
That particular situation has existed in the northern extremities of all provinces of Canada and in 
Saskatchewan as well. It is one where it has had to provide either salary incentives or some other kind of 
incentives to have people move to those isolated locations. It has been a long tradition in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. It isn’t anything new that came about as a result of the establishment of the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan and it is true I believe in most other provinces. In fact the rental subsidy 
provided in northern housing in Saskatchewan is similar to that in Alberta and in Manitoba. Their 
subsidy system was looked at when we were developing ours. 
 

PRAIRIE CO-AX 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I wonder if the Minister of Government Services would comment on certain 
remarks that he made about an hour ago on a radio program. Yesterday in the absence of the Minister, 
the Premier told us that in dealing with Prairie Co-Ax in Moose Jaw, it was the intention of the 
Government to in essence, lie in the weeds, to wait to find out what the company did and to pounce upon 
them as it were . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Member, I think will agree with me that the Minister is not to be 
asked to comment on reports of that nature, that includes radio or television reports. If the Member 
wants to direct a question to the Minister, that is fine. But he shouldn’t ask him to comment on a report. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — They were his own words, Mr. Speaker. I wonder whether the Minister would 
indicate whether it would be the intention of the Government to seek an injunction to stop the company 
duly licensed in Moose Jaw if acting upon that duly licensed authority from the Federal Government and 
their licence from the city of Moose Jaw, if they now proceed to lay cable, will you use your authority to 
obtain an injunction to stop them from laying that cable or would you nationalize the cable if laid? 
 
HON. E. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — I would doubt, Mr. Speaker, very 
much, I wasn’t here yesterday, I didn’t have the opportunity of hearing the exchange but I would doubt 
very much that yesterday the Premier said we were going to lie in the weeds and pounce on them from 
behind. 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

80 
 

We have never wavered in our position with Prairie Co-Ax. We have told them publicly, we told them 
privately and we have told them before the city council that in our view only Sask Tel has the right to 
use the streets and lanes. That position has been crystal clear from the beginning. If the Hon. Member 
for Regina Wascana has misunderstood it, I guess he is deserving of our pity because I don’t think 
Prairie Co-Ax has misunderstood it. The question arises as to whether or not we would actually sue them 
if they went ahead and used the authority. We have told Prairie Co-Ax that they should recognize legal 
proceedings as one of the options open to use. We might well use the option. I don’t think at this point in 
time it would be proper for us to announce we are going to sue them and what fashion that suit will take. 
But we have warned Prairie Co-Ax the bylaw which was passed by the city of Moose Jaw is in our view 
void. If they attempt to proceed and use whatever authority they think they have got, they might well 
find themselves facing a suit. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister would indicate whether you have ever 
told the Premier that you have specifically told Prairie Co-Ax because that is not what the Premier told 
us yesterday. Did you report to the Premier that you had conversations with Prairie Co-Ax because the 
Premier yesterday told us that they had no policy, that you hadn’t decided what you would do. And, that 
you didn’t know whether you would seek an injunction. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The Hon. Member is not listening very closely. I did not say that we would 
sue Prairie Co-Ax. I thought I just finished making it clear that I refused to say that. All I am saying is 
that it is one of the options open to us. We have warned Prairie Co-Ax that we might exercise that option 
and that is as far as it has got. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Have you ruled out the possibility of taking 
action against the city of Moose Jaw and if they lay the cable, would you tell us, whether you would 
seek an injunction to stop them from laying the cable? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I have answered the question twice, I guess I can keep on 
answering it until the Hon. Member for Wascana understands it - that seems to be a difficult process. 
 
I will say again, it is open to us, our position is that Prairie Co-Ax has no authority to lay cable, it is 
open to us to sue them. We have told them that we may well exercise that option, we haven’t made any 
commitment to sue them and I am not going to make that commitment here. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister. 
The Minister has referred to telling Prairie Co-Ax this, and telling them that. Is it not true that you have 
never held a meeting with Prairie Co-Ax, is it not true that Prairie Co-Ax asked for a meeting with Sask 
Tel which was refused? In effect, you, your Government or Sask Tel has never sat down yet to this point 
in time with Prairie Co-Ax. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

81 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, that’s not true. Indeed we have another meeting set up for some time 
next week with Prairie Co-Ax. I won’t be there personally, but the Sask Tel officials are meeting with 
the officials of Prairie Co-Ax. The answer to your question is: — No, it is not true. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary. Would the Minister indicate whether in your meetings with 
Madam Sauvé on Monday, if you are offered the Selkirk-Portage La Prairie-Brandon settlement, is it the 
intention of the Saskatchewan Government to accept the Manitoba bargain as reported in the press and 
elsewhere by which the rights to pay TV are bargained away in favor of getting cable for Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We have never been offered the Manitoba agreement. I think the position of 
the Government of Saskatchewan is that we are not prepared to sign the Manitoba agreement because 
the Manitoba agreement commits the Federal Government to nothing. Our experience in dealing with 
the Federal Government is if they don’t put their commitments in stone, if it is not written with perfect 
clarity, you can’t depend on them to keep their side of the bargain. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

CHANGES IN CROP INSURANCE PROGRAM 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture, I 
should like to direct this question to the Minister of Finance. Is the Minister of Finance aware of any 
changes which may be coming about in the increase of the insurance premiums for the Crop Insurance 
Program in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, No, I am not aware. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In view of the rather dismal soil conditions 
that exist in Saskatchewan this fall, I wonder if the Minister of Finance would be able to tell this House 
at this time, if they would give any indication of the possibility of supplementing funds should this 
rather dismal picture continue until next fall? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll have to wait and see what the weather is going to look like and 
based on that, a government policy may be determined. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Would the Minister not agree that it is 
better for a government to look ahead a little, perhaps to make plans now, rather than wait until a 
disastrous condition hits Saskatchewan and we are faced with serious conditions for which we are not 
ensured? 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

82 
 

PRAIRIE CO-AX 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Minister of Communications. 
Can he give an assurance to the House that no action will be taken by the Government of Saskatchewan 
against the city of Moose Jaw in any way in respect of the licence that the city gave Prairie Co-Ax to use 
the city’s streets and lanes? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, Mr. Speaker, all options are open to this Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary. Do I understand the Minister to say that the Government has 
not ruled out taking action against the city of Moose Jaw? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, you do not understand properly, that seems to be a problem over there 
on the other side of the House today. 
 
What we are saying is that I don’t think the Provincial Government can give a commitment that in any 
eventuality no matter what happens, the city of Moose Jaw isn’t going to be involved in a legal dispute. 
That just doesn’t make sense, and I think frankly if the Hon. Member for Regina South thinks about it, 
for a moment, it won’t make sense for him. 
 

SAFETY OF AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — A question to the Minister responsible for SGIO, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year I asked the Minister a very important question with regard to automotive safety in the 
province, I will repeat it again this year and hopefully I will get a satisfactory answer. Will the Minister 
assure this Assembly that written off vehicles are not being repaired and placed back on Saskatchewan 
highways without proper safety inspections? 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister in charge of SGIO): — In answer to the Hon. Member’s question, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been a constant surveillance on this matter. I think if you put a specific question on 
the Order Paper, we could give you some specific information. He may find later on in the Session that 
there will be some legislation that will be of extreme interest to him in this respect. 
 
MR. HAM: — That is not an assurance in my opinion, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately we may have some 
deaths, if we haven’t already had deaths with regard to repaired vehicles which are unsafe. 
 
But will the Minister assure this House that he will take steps to formulate policies for these crucial 
inspections? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, when the legislation is introduced, I am sure the 
Hon. Member will realize that we have done something positive in this respect. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

83 
 

MINISTER OF HIGHWAYS 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the House Leader. Due to the 
large number of questions that we have and concerns over the conditions of Saskatchewan highways, 
could the House Leader give us any indication when the Minister of Highways will be back in his seat in 
the Assembly? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways is involved in a 
very important out-of-province conference involving Ministers of Highways, a very legitimate function, 
for not only that Minister, but I think for other Ministers as well. As the Premier has pointed out, the 
attendance in my judgment of Ministers has been excellent in this House. 
 

PRAIRIE CO-AX COURT ACTION AGAINST CITY OF MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Minister of Communications. 
The Premier gave us an assurance yesterday in your absence in the House that no action would be taken 
against the city of Moose Jaw as distinct from other parties. Your response earlier to me indicated that 
you haven’t ruled out that course and that you and the Premier are in conflict in that respect. Can you 
tell us what circumstances you foresee that the Premier doesn’t in which you might take action against 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I think that question is too hypothetical to answer. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — That’s a fair question . . . 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. D. H. Lange, 
(Bengough-Milestone) for an Address-in-Reply. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, since this is the last time I will 
speak in a Throne Speech debate as the Leader of the Opposition, and the head of my party, I hope you 
will bear with me, if I put some personal observations on the record. 
 
First, let me say how much I have enjoyed being a Member of this Assembly, as an Opposition Member, 
then on the Government benches, now as Leader of the Opposition. It has been the greatest experience 
of my life and I think we are, all of us in this House, a lucky and privileged group of people. I always 
feel differently when I walk into this Chamber because no matter how dull the debate or irrelevant the 
speech, I know we are making history and we are at the centre of things as far as action in the Province 
of Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
Saskatchewan politics are exciting and this Legislature has a reputation of being one of the most active, 
controversial and vital in all of Canada. I am aware and I hope all Members will 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

84 
 

always remember that we are following in the footsteps of some of the greatest politicians in Canada’s 
history and I hope we conduct ourselves accordingly. I hope this House never loses its strong character 
or its fiery debates because I am convinced this is the way great legislation is born. Some casual 
observers of our House go away with a feeling that we are not serious or our actions demean the 
democratic process. This view is often expressed and sometimes leads some of our Members to question 
our procedure and our conduct. Mr. Speaker, I will admit that we could all do better. But I challenge 
those critics to sit in this House day in and day out and follow every question and every Point of Order 
and every debate. I am convinced that if they do this and are fair-minded, they will be as convinced as I 
am that this Assembly is a strong, a serious and important institution in the democratic process and 
should not be tampered with in a major way. We must of course update our methods, but never let us 
lose the central character of this House that guarantees and is in fact the very essence of freedom of 
assembly and freedom of speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first became active in politics in 1946. I came back from the Second World War and 
found we had a socialist government in Saskatchewan under a name I couldn’t pronounce but whose 
initials I never forgot, that was the CCF. I must admit that some of their ideas I liked; to bring secondary 
industry to Saskatchewan, to take an independent stance from Central Canada and to bring about some 
needed social reforms, I found appealing prospects. However, as I observed the CCF in action I became 
concerned about the methods they used to achieve these laudable goals. 
 
The secondary industry would be run by the government, remember the woollen mill, the door factory, 
and all the other dreary list of Crown corporations that failed, dashed our hope for a larger base than 
agriculture for our economy. The social reforms came, but they were government controlled and 
administered at the expense of local and individual control. 
 
Let me give you some examples. The Hospital Plan was basically good, but it took all the control away 
from the local hospital boards and lodged it in Regina. The bad results took a long time to surface but 
they are tragically apparent today. Few people in the local communities have any sense of responsibility 
to the local hospital, so a kind of a contest is developed to see how much they could take out of our 
hospital plan and how little they can put into it. Thus, we now have the spectacle of hospital services 
declining, especially in rural Saskatchewan while costs mount to unmanageable heights and the 
Government takes refuge at pointing the finger at the former administration and saying at least the NDP 
are doing better than those dirty Liberals did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this must be cold comfort to the sick people waiting months and months for hospital beds. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The CCF began the process, the NDP have raised it to new heights of taking 
control away from locally elected school trustees. The results are obvious, education is in a mess while 
costs rise at an alarming rate and the Government’s only answer is more centralizing of power and an 
ever growing bureaucracy, including a new department in education complete with a new minister. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

85 
 

A look at welfare tells an even sadder story. Controls snatched away from the hands of local people and 
moved to Regina. I ask you to look around us thirty years after the great socialist reform was launched in 
welfare. The slums are still with us, the poverty on the reserved is still with us, only worse, the jails are 
still full and the gap between the rich and the poor is wider than ever. The socialists did stake out an 
independent position from eastern Canada, but instead of making us more independent we have become 
the worst beggars in Canada at Ottawa’s door. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, every Throne Speech, including the last one spends more time 
whining to the Federal Government for more help than on any other single subject. The independence 
theme of the CCF and the NDP has only been a political ploy. In fact, they have made our great province 
a dependent colony of the Federal Government. One statistic will suffice to prove this point. 
 
Last year when Saskatchewan was enjoying the greatest prosperity, our government depended on 
Ottawa for almost one-third of its budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of what I have just spoken about had not happened in 1946, but the trend was clear. 
The trend was clear for anyone to see who wasn’t blinded by the something for nothing philosophy of 
the CCF movement. I decided that since I didn’t like what was happening I should get involved in 
political action. I couldn’t join the Conservatives because they had sole out to Tommy Douglas and the 
CCF. 
 
A look at the history of the Conservative Party might be interesting because like most political parties 
they haven’t really changed, they are just attempting to do the same old thing in a different way. In 1929 
they were elected to govern Saskatchewan, and an examination of their personnel and platform is 
worthwhile. The Tories of that day were motivated above all else by a hatred of Liberals, some of them 
even threw in French and Catholics for good measure, in fact most of them didn’t really think there was 
much difference. They gathered around them a group of candidates, some of whom were dedicated to 
the Conservative philosophy but many whose only goal in life was to be a Cabinet Minister or to whack 
the hated Liberals. This motley crew which was the 1929 election and produced a government the likes 
of which, for incompetence and dissension has never been equalled in the history of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not suggesting the present Conservative Party is the same 
but a few similarities are beginning to surface. 
 
In 1934 this so-called Conservative government was wiped out to a man, not one of their Members was 
re-elected. The same fate awaited them in the 1938 provincial election, again, not one Conservative was 
elected. Wracked with frustration and with their hatred for the Liberals now fanned to a white heat, the 
leadership of the Conservative Party in about 1943, made a fateful decision. They decided to support the 
CCF in 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

86 
 

the 1944 election in a desperate effort to wipe out those terrible Liberals. They did exactly this by design 
and with instructions from their leadership, the Tories worked for the election of the CCF in 1944. 
 
Now my dad told me when I came home in 1946 the CCF committee room in Prince Albert looked like 
a meeting of at least half the local Chamber of Commerce. The Tory theory was to elect those crazy 
radical CCF, defeat the Grits, and then knock off the Socialists in 1948 with a Conservative government. 
The Tories overlooked a few things, one of them was Tommy Douglas. In his heyday he could charm 
the spots off a leopard and he convinced most of the Tories to stay with them. As the old saying goes, 
“They came to scorn, and they stayed to pray.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Those old Tories hated the Grits and if you wanted someone to pound, destroy, and 
generally chew up the Liberals, Tommy Douglas was your man. The results of course are history, the 
Conservatives as a provincial force disappeared for over thirty years and only surfaced under their 
present leadership. But the present leader seems bent on repeating the same mistakes of the past, 
gathering around him a staff of disgruntled ex-Liberals and now welcoming to his front bench the same 
type of individual. An examination of speeches clearly indicates once again the Conservative leader is 
launched on a hate campaign, hate Trudeau, hate the Liberals, hate the NDP. 
 
This may appear to be a successful strategy. I predict, Mr. Speaker, that it will fail because most of our 
people want much more than this from a person before they will trust him with their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn to the Liberals because of their strong belief in the dignity, the worth and the 
intelligence of the individual. The Liberal Party has made many mistakes but one mistake it never made 
is to think that the state should be supreme or that the individual was created to serve some master plan 
of government planners, no matter how well intentioned they may be. 
 
Another mistake the Liberals never made is to believe that government was created to benefit the 
privileged few or that government should shrink from acting against the powerful in our society on 
behalf of ordinary men and women. That is why I chose the Liberal Party and I have never regretted that 
choice. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I have never regretted that choice, Mr. Speaker, even when the easiest course 
would have been to follow the majority because our basic philosophy was out of fashion at the time. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is such a time. Our basic philosophy may be out of fashion at this time but I have 
never been more proud to be a Liberal and my message to those who may be questioning all political 
parties is simply this. Go back to fundamentals, go back to square one, choose the party that more than 
any other has built this nation into the envy of the world. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

87 
 

Go back to the political party that has given Canadians more of the goods of this world, more prosperity, 
coupled with more individual freedom than that enjoyed by the people in any other nation in the world at 
any time in the history of the world. That is the Liberal Party and make no mistake it continues as the 
strongest force in Canadian politics because its basic belief rests on people and on people alone. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — That, Mr. Speaker, is why I chose the Liberal Party and that’s why today I remain 
loyal to the Liberal Party. 
 
I now take a look at the Socialist party 30 years later, they have a new name, the NDP, but in truth little 
else about them has changed. Today I will use three yardsticks to measure the performance of the 
Blakeney NDP Government, the same ones that applied to the old CCF: — competence, responsibility 
and a respect for the law. 
 
I sincerely believe that this NDP Government is incompetent, irresponsible and they obviously are 
convinced that the normal laws don’t apply to them. Let’s deal first with the incompetence of this 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to begin with, it is difficult to measure the competence or efficiency of a government by 
examining a department of government. I’ll use the Department of Agriculture as an example. Every 
government, no matter what their stripe, boasts that the more they spend on the Department of 
Agriculture the more concern they are showing for our farmers. Now the truth is that most of the money 
spent in this department has little or no effect on the individual farmer. In fact, if the Saskatchewan 
Department of Agriculture disappeared, six months later most farmers would be unaware of the event. 
 
For example, in 1973, or it might have been in 1974, the fact that I can’t pinpoint the exact year is 
significant, the Department of Agriculture carried out a major re-organization. Towards the end of the 
year in question, I was told by a very senior official in the department that production in the department 
had dropped severely during that year of change. 
 
I mentioned to him that it was a queer thing but I had not heard one complaint from any farmer about 
this drop in production by the Department of Agriculture. This senior official thought for a moment and 
then he said, “You know, it is a queer thing, neither did I.” The truth is that most of our departments 
have doubled and tripled their size under the NDP, but it is hard to measure their impact in the area of 
their particular concern. 
 
Under the NDP the Departments of Education, Health and Welfare, to cite the three largest, spend most 
of their time and money chasing paper within their own departments and nagging people outside of the 
department who are really doing their best to develop our education, health and welfare programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to measure the efficiency of a government but you can do this with Crown 
corporations. A Crown corporation will either make money or lost money, they will provide good 
service or bad service, their prices will either rise or fall and you can measure why any of these things 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

88 
 

have happened. 
 
Let me give you a few examples to show that Mr. Blakeney is running the most incompetent 
government in the history of this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, there are 19 Crown corporations 
presently operated by the Government of Saskatchewan involved in utilities, insurance, transportation, 
investment, furs, minerals, printing, oil, potash, water, housing and forest products. Two of these, the 
telephone and power utilities have been in operation for a long, long time. They are monopolies, and the 
fact that they operate under the Government has been accepted by the majority of our people. 
 
The other 17 were either instituted by the CCF or by the NDP and most of them compete to some extent 
in the open market. In 1975, during the greatest economic boom this province has ever experienced 
these 17 Crown corporations managed to lose over $4 million of the taxpayers’ money. Mr. Speaker, 
with the exception of Saskatchewan Minerals, a company producing sodium sulphate, a product in great 
demand whose price hit an all time high last year on the world market, the other 16 government operated 
enterprises lost over $9 million. A loss of $9 million when most other Canadian companies were running 
up record profits. 
 
All this under the guidance of Mr. Blakeney who says, please trust me when I risk hundreds of millions 
of dollars of your own money in oil and potash. This is a record of disgraceful incompetence and 
indications are that the 1976 figures will be even worse. 
 
I would like just to take for example, the Saskatchewan Forest Products Company. Last year the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation lost $2.3 million in the face of a building boom. When most 
companies selling building products were making huge profits, Mr. Blakeney’s timber company was 
chalking up record losses. This year I predict they will break their old record and lose over $4 million of 
the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Now how did this happen when most people in the lumber industry were showing a profit. Well, Mr. 
Blakeney made up his mind that if he ever became Premier of this province he would show the world 
how terribly we Liberals had exploited our forest resources. First, he spent over $6 million in two years 
trying to prove that Karl Landegger was dishonest and that the Prince Albert Pulp Mill was a bad deal. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he found out the opposite was the truth. Mr. Landegger was an honest man and the 
pulp mill was such a good deal he has never changed one sentence in the contract or even uttered a word 
against it in the five years he has been Premier. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — On the other hand he hasn’t had the courage or the good grace to admit he was 
wrong. However, Mr. Speaker, he was committed to change our forest policy, so he hired Mr. Springate 
and Associates to be his guiding light. 
 
First they did a study of our forests, then they recommended a new and larger annual allowable harvest 
of the best wood 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

89 
 

in all parts of the North. Their next step was to recommend a whole series of mills and plants to utilize 
these so-called new-found resources. Then they designed plywood plants, stud mills, lumber mills and 
treatment plants to turn our forest resources into saleable products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was not the last of Mr. Springate’s services to Mr. Blakeney and the people of 
Saskatchewan, he even took over the management of some of the new facilities he had recommended 
and designed. For all this Mr. Springate was paid hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 
Although there is an open and flagrant conflict of interest in all this, we could not complain too strongly 
if Mr. Blakeney had received value for the huge sums of money he spent with Springate and Associates. 
The unfortunate truth is he got taken to the cleaners and his whole forest development program will 
collapse like a deck of cards. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — To begin with, Mr. Springate recommended much too high an annual cut. Our 
forests cannot sustain all the mills and plants that have been built and are being planned. Some of the 
facilities are in the wrong location. For example, the mill at Carrot River was doomed before it was ever 
built. The plywood plant at Hudson Bay ran way over cost and will only show a profit if the books are 
rigged. The crowning piece of insanity has to be the plans to build a $10 million head office for the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation which has less than 40 people working in its head office. 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, for all this our efficient NDP Government pays their friend, Mr. Springate 
a commission. 
 
Before leaving the Crown corporations I will admit that under the present Government the Power 
Corporation and Sask Tel showed a combined profit last year of $25 million. But, Mr. Speaker, please 
don’t get carried away with admiration for the business acumen of the NDP Government. Under the 
Liberal administration these two corporations made annual profits as high as $47 million, almost double 
last year’s performance. 
 
I will only touch on two more examples of the Blakeney Government’s monumental incompetence. The 
first is the $10.2 million they paid for 45 per cent of the Intercontinental Packing Plant and it still stands 
as a record in this nation of government stupidity. The Premier at that time had in his possession annual 
statements of that company indicating that Mr. Mendel himself placed a total net value on the company 
of around $7 million. The report of Dun and Bradstreet was not difficult to obtain and it set the net 
worth of Intercontinental Packers at slightly under $6 million. But Mr. Blakeney cleverly ignored all this 
evidence and instead he relied on the figures of an insurance evaluator who said for insurance purposes 
the replacement value would be about $23 million. He then had Mr. Messer, his then House genius for 
good deals, work out 45 per cent of this amount and he paid Mr. Mendel $10.5 million for less than half 
the company. 
 
I might point out that so far the Government’s return on their investment in the “People’s Pork Plant” 
has been less than one quarter of one per cent. 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

90 
 

Mr. Speaker, their record in paying top dollar for second rate oil property is well known in that industry 
and has made SaskOil a poor joke right across Canada. But the pièce de résistance has to be the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 
You know there is an old saying, I don’t know whether it is a religious saying or not, but there is an old 
saying, “Why buy the cow when you’re getting the milk for nothing.” The Government was making 
over $100 million a year from the potash industry with nothing invested and not a cent risked. We will 
leave aside for the moment that they may have been getting the money illegally, because that piece of 
stupidity didn’t really have to happen. But not satisfied with this happy state of affairs that group of 
incompetents across the way paid $128 million for a ten year old mine that cost less than $80 million to 
build ten years ago. Mr. Speaker, I know they tabled a beautiful thick, red book that is supposed to be 
proof that they struck a good deal but I am unimpressed. As I pointed out on Thursday, if you look hard 
enough, you pay high enough, you could get some so-called expert to put a kosher stamp on a pig, or tell 
a good Catholic the meat he was eating on Friday was really a fillet of whale in disguise. I wouldn’t trust 
most consultants as far as I could throw them and that is what you should do with most of them. All I 
know for sure is that the Duval Corporation grabbed the $128 million and they never stopped running 
until they hit Dallas, Texas. I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayer got trimmed again and the NDP built 
another monument to their own incompetence. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the second yardstick we should measure this Government by is their 
sense of responsibility. The question is, has Mr. Blakeney and his Government, handled our affairs in a 
responsible manner. Now the answer can be found in the records. Spending has more than tripled since 
the NDP assumed office. Our population is almost the same but our Government spends three times as 
much money. New programs are started before old ones are made financially secure. The number of 
people working for the Government has increased more in the last five years than the total in any 15 
year period in Saskatchewan’s history. Office space has increased at a rate that is almost out of control. 
While the Government leases every building program that will add hundreds of thousands of square feet 
of office space to the present establishment. 
 
This is a spendthrift Government with no thought of tomorrow, they have mortgaged our future and that 
could well be a difficult future during the next four or five years. 
 
The handling of resource taxation must, of course, stand as Mr. Blakeney’s single most irresponsible act. 
By this one piece of mismanagement he could cost our people hundreds of millions of dollars and place 
a crushing financial burden on us for years to come. 
 
You know I am convinced that a great deal of the trouble the Premier finds himself in is because of the 
advice he is receiving from the paid staff he has surrounded himself with. Here again in the handling of 
the public service the Government has used bad judgment. On top of all this the Blakeney administration 
has blown the greatest opportunity ever presented to this province to build a sound, broadly based 
economy. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

91 
 

Mr. Speaker, I realize these are serious charged but a more detailed look at each one of them will prove, 
I think, the truth beyond doubt. 
 
Let’s look at spending. The last year we were the Government in 1971 our budget was $450 million. 
Now I agree this was a net budget, it did not include some transfer payments from the Federal 
Government and if you add those the total of our budget was probably somewhere over $550 million. 
The last budget just brought down by the NDP just last spring amounted to $1.3 billion or $1300 
million. However, to get the real figure that this Government will spend in the current year, you must 
add on supplementary expenditures. Going by their past history this will probably add up to over $100 
million, giving us a grant total to be spent this year of $1.4 billion. This means that roughly for the same 
number of people the Blakeney Government are extracting and spending an increase of $900 million, 
about triple what was spent five years ago. 
 
I mentioned new programs started while old ones experience great financial difficulty. Of course the 
classic case is our hospital plan, it is in serious trouble. Thousands of sick people are forced to wait 
months to get a hospital bed. This unhappy situation has been developing for many years but the 
Government under two Health Ministers who refused to face up to the facts and attempted to place the 
blame on our local hospital administrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they were short of money one could have some sympathy for them but I ask you to look 
around at what is really happening while our hospitals close their doors to sick people. New government 
buildings springing up in every community, the daddy of them all is being built just back of the Health 
Building. I predict it will cost at least $75 million, if they ever tell us the whole truth. You add this to the 
new government buildings to be constructed in Saskatoon and Prince Albert and every other city and 
every large town and it probably adds up to close to $200 million in new government buildings. $200 
million in new government buildings, enough to run our health plan, our share of the health plan, the 
hospital plan for about two years. 
 
Then there are the potash mines. Already $128 million committed, plus all the money already spent on 
huge salaries and fancy head offices, first in Regina and then in Saskatoon. Again enough money to pay 
our share of the hospital plan, our share for about one year and one half. Added to this we have the 
Hearing Aid Plan, we have the Drug Plan and the Family Income Plan. Now all of these plans have 
merit but surely it is an act of an irresponsible government to start two costly health projects and still 
jeopardize the basic hospital plan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Please don’t blame it on the Federal Government. They have been warning the 
provinces for six or seven years that they intended to put some control on their portion of cost-shared 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present NDP Government must present a rather pathetic sight when they go crying 
poor mouth to Ottawa in the face of their record of throwing money by the hundreds of millions of 
dollars. Ottawa doesn’t believe them and neither 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

92 
 

do these unfortunate people waiting for hospital care when they see this vicious waste on all sides. 
 
I talked about the way Mr. Blakeney and his swollen Cabinet are hiring new people. In spite of the fact 
that they use every device to hide the truth, we know that the NDP have added over five thousand new 
people of the Government payroll since they came to office. 
 
To give the people some idea of the magnitude of people our NDP friends have larded onto the payroll, 
let me point out that five thousand people with their families would make a city the size of North 
Battleford, or one larger than Weyburn. And Mr. Speaker, I again remind you that all these new 
employees are to govern the same number of people. No wonder we have little unemployment in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Blakeney puts them all on the public payroll. You know, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
use hiring new people if you don’t give them a car, or a typewriter, or a desk and office space. Let’s just 
imagine what these new people have cost us in the way of this kind of equipment. All this means is that 
Mr. Blakeney has used the people’s tax money to buy at least a thousand new cars probably, two 
thousand new typewriters, five thousand new desks, probably three thousand new filing cabinets and at 
least five hundred thousand feet of new office space, all costing at least one hundred million dollars and 
this cost goes on, not only goes on year after year, but it will increase as time goes by. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, millions for cars, typewriters and staff, but starve our hospitals to pay for it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, the question of civil servants raises an interesting point. 
 
Since coming to office our Premier has cleaned out every old, long-time deputy minister who was 
working for this Government when he took power. I think of respected men like Harold Horner - 
Agriculture; Mr. Meldrum - Attorney General; Lloyd Holmes - Highways; Ted Walters - Municipal 
Affairs; Lyle Bergstrom, Education. All these long-time public servants have been shunted aside for a 
new breed. The new ones are young, they have strings of degrees after their names and they are all 
dedicated socialists. 
 
They have something else in common. They haven’t got the slightest idea of the value of a dollar, nor do 
they have any great degree of common sense. During their short lives they have been busy spending 
other people’s money and their contempt for those who earn these dollars is obvious from the way that 
they throw it around. This group reminds me of the people the old CCF gathered around them. during 
the 1950s almost every young man in Canada with a Master’s Degree or a Rhodes Scholarship, whose 
head was full of dreams of a socialist Utopia, converged on Saskatchewan. Some of you will remember 
the names - Al Johnson and Don Tansley; Tom Shoyama; Cass-Beggs; Bill Haney, Art Wakabayashi; 
George Botham, and there was even one named Allan Blakeney. I know all kinds more. Like their 
present day counterparts they had degrees, they had idealism, but they also had a lack of common sense 
and they had the overpowering urge to spend someone else’s money. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

93 
 

When we became the government they either left on their own accord, or on our accord. There was a 
great outcry because they had the reputation of being the most outstanding civil servants in all of 
Canada. If you don’t believe me ask any of them, because this exalted reputation was self-created. They 
were, on top of everything else, great self promoters. You just had to ask any of them and they would 
tell you all the rest of them were the greatest public servants this country had ever seen. Oddly enough, 
and tragically enough most of them were snatched up by Ottawa, by the Federal Government. I think it 
is fair to say that the ex-Saskatchewan group have been the most influential bureaucrats in Ottawa in the 
last ten years. 
 
Now you know, Mr. Speaker, they have been a very powerful group down there in Ottawa. There are 
those who think, there are those people, strange as it may seem, in Canada who think that the Federal 
Government is in a mess. There are those who are convinced that Ottawa has been spending money 
lately in a reckless manner. People who feel that many federal programs were useless or overlapping and 
have damaged our economy, and among those I number the Premier and his Government. Of course, the 
easiest thing is to blame the politicians. There is no question they must shoulder the major portion of the 
blame. But anyone who knows Ottawa is aware of the extent to which the politicians depend on the 
senior civil servants. The truth is our exported brain trusters have helped get the Federal Government 
into the same mess we find ourselves here at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, we in Saskatchewan have that in common, and one other thing. We 
have the same kind of bureaucrats. In fact, most of them came from the same training ground, the 
socialist Government in Saskatchewan. 
 
I suggest to the Premier that he hire a few people with some experience in the business world to add a 
touch of common sense and sanity to his Government. 
 
I’m not suggesting, Mr. Premier, you replace all of your whiz kids, just a few of them, so you will get 
another point of view. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I stated that the Premier’s greatest blunder was the way he taxed potash and oil. 
Let me make it clear that I believe a provincial government has the right to tax any resource as high as 
they want to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — That’s crystal clear. I may question the wisdom of overtaxing any group because it 
will discourage and drive them out of our province, but I have never questioned their basic right to do it. 
 
However, Mr. Blakeney decided he would camouflage or hide the huge taxes he was levying on the oil 
and potash, so he charged them a whole variety of taxes. This was done in an effort to conceal from the 
public the enormous taxes he was gouging from these two industries. I guess he felt that Saskatchewan 
people are basically fair and they would have been 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

94 
 

shocked at his greed. The unfortunate result of the Premier’s duplicity is that the courts may say his 
taxes in the form that they were levied are unconstitutional, in fact beyond the powers of the provincial 
government. If they do this and order the Government to pay these taxes back, we will face the worst 
financial crisis in our history. The fact that we did not need to be in this position had our Premier acted 
in an honest straightforward manner makes his irresponsibility all the more unforgivable. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, to point out a little fact to the Government opposite. It hasn’t rained 
in Saskatchewan for months. Everybody but the Government opposite is aware of this and is worried 
about the potential drought. Our Government evidently doesn’t believe we can ever have tough times 
down on the farm again, because they are not only spending every cent they can lay their hands on, but 
they are borrowing hundreds of millions of dollars that will have to be paid back in the future. 
 
Why is this Government not making contingency plans in case we have a few tough years in 
agriculture? Why are they not setting this money aside now when it is easily available so they can tide 
our people over the rough years that may lie ahead? Why do they add new programs, new Cabinet 
Ministers, new expenditures on to the public purse with evidently no thought of tomorrow? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because they are the most irresponsible group of men ever to control the government 
of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — They live for today, they spend as if there is no tomorrow. They have not only 
blown the greatest opportunity handed to them in the past five years, but they have mortgaged our future 
to a degree unheard of in any province in Canada. 
 
I said the third yardstick I would use to measure the performance of the NDP is their respect for law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not questioning the determination of the Government to enforce the laws on the 
people of this province. I am concerned about how they apply the law to their own actions. In fact, a 
look at their actions over the past five years shows all too clearly that Mr. Blakeney and his Government 
often consider themselves above the law. There is, unfortunately, a degree of lawlessness about this 
Government and I believe it is time our people were made aware of this serious trend. Surely one of the 
basic tenets of democracy is that the law applies as equally to the government as it does to ordinary 
people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Let me cite a few examples of the NDP Government’s attitude towards the law. 
Let’s take cable TV. The Government of Saskatchewan does not have the constitutional power to 
legislate or govern in respect of cable television. That power, under the BNA Act, lies with the Federal 
Government solely. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

95 
 

The CRTC, under the authority of Canada’s constitution granted licenses to four groups - two co-ops 
and two private companies. That was July 15 of this year. In any other province in Canada that would 
have settled the issue and the cable companies would now be in business, but not in Saskatchewan. 
Despite having no power in this area, no right under the law of Canada, this Government moves in and 
thwarts the licencees in their plans. That in itself is bad enough. But they did more. 
 
The government of the city of Moose Jaw granted the right to Prairie Co-Ax (a company licensed to do 
business in this province by that very Provincial Government) to use its streets and lanes for cable. The 
Provincial Government then attempts to bulldoze by coercion and threats (and we saw more of it today) 
the people in Moose Jaw not to let these TV people use their streets and lanes despite the provisions of 
The Urban Municipality Act, the law of Saskatchewan which clearly states that the municipality has the 
right to regulate and control its own streets and its own lanes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — So here is the Provincial Government putting itself above and beyond the law. In 
the first place it has no authority over cable TV, under the constitution of this country, yet it persists in 
taking that authority unto itself. In the second place it uses its muscle in Moose Jaw saying in effect to 
the local government, “You better not let the TV company use your streets and lanes or we will move 
against you.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — When clearly the law says it’s the right of the municipality to control their own 
streets and lanes. 
 
Let’s look at another part of their government, at the actions of the Saskatchewan Public Sector Price 
and Compensation Board. 
 
The Government established this so-called anti-inflation board without legal authority. There is no 
provision in the law of this province for this board and the powers it is exercising. I will give you an 
example. The employees of the Workers’ Compensation Board entered into a contract with the board. 
The Public Sector Price and Compensation Board attempted to roll back the settlement. The employees 
went to court to enforce their contract. They had to sue to get what was rightfully theirs. This provincial 
Government, acting outside of the law, without authority, tried to prevent it. Again, above and beyond 
the law. 
 
Let’s look at the Land Bank. the law of this province demanded - I am sorry the Minister of Agriculture 
isn’t here - that the Government appoint a Land Bank Advisory Commission and that no appeal board 
could be appointed or that certain other decisions could not be made by the Minister of Agriculture 
without first referring it to the Advisory Commission. The Minister of Agriculture said, and I will be 
polite, “to blazes with the law.” and went right ahead to appoint the appeal board and make other 
decisions without consulting the Advisory Commission as the law clearly required that he do. He didn’t 
consult it because it didn’t exist. Its non-existence was actually 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

96 
 

unlawful. He was in breach of the law for over two years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Let’s look at transportation. The Government, that Government, out of neglect, got 
into a squabble with CPR trucks. Again, it assumed unto itself power it didn’t have. It laid 17 charges 
against CP trucks. Then it gets into court only to concede it didn’t have the power to lay the charges in 
the first place. It tucked its tail between its legs and withdrew, or tried to, but the judge wouldn’t let 
them withdraw, he threw the whole thing out of court. 
 
How about our senior law enforcement office, the man pledged to uphold the law in this province, the 
Attorney General. After the fracas in Saskatoon last winter in a hockey game, a young hockey player 
was charged. The Attorney General charged him in an effort to come to grips with violence in hockey. I 
think this is a commendable move. The accused appeared in court and after hearing the judge ruled there 
was not sufficient evidence of guilt to put the boy on trial. Then the Attorney General moved in and 
single-handedly overruled the judge. He laid a direct indictment, forced the accused to go to trial despite 
the judge’s ruling. Again, a bulldozing. Again, “we’ll take the law into our own hands” and to hell with 
anybody else. 
 
These incidents are bad enough, but the situation regarding the taxation of the potash and oil, I think is 
even worse. 
 
When the Government was faced with the possibility of the enormous taxes they had taken from the 
potash industry that may have been collected illegally, their reaction was typically arrogant. In fact, 
lawless. They said in effect, “even if what we did was outside of the law, we won’t give the money 
back.” That’s theft by any other name. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — They propose to take the same attitude and they are taking the same attitude with 
the oil industry. 
 
CIGOL, an oil company, has taken the Provincial Government to court, also claiming that the taxes 
taken from them were done in a manner beyond the powers of the Government. In arguing the 
Government’s case before the Supreme Court, George Taylor, the NDP lawyer, was asked by the 
Supreme Court if what the Government of Saskatchewan had done to this company was just and 
equitable. His answer, the answer on behalf of the Blakeney Government, says a great deal about their 
attitude towards law. Mr. Taylor’s answer, speaking for this Government, said in effect, “justice and 
equity don’t matter, it is only government policy that counts.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Again, to the devil with the law, we’re above it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I know what they 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

97 
 

will say opposite. They will say who cares about a cable TV company, who cares about a single young 
hockey player, who cares about the giant potash or oil corporations. But I say to you that a government 
who acts above the law in these cases will do it to anyone any time it suits their purposes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Disrespect of the law by a powerful government threatens the freedom and rights 
of every individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government is guilty of incompetence, irresponsibility and actual lawlessness to a 
degree that will be condemned by every fair-minded person in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I urge them to show more respect for local government. Take away some of the 
powers from those back room planners you’ve hired and begin to act within the laws of this province 
and this country. I am afraid I have no confidence that they will change their ways and a motion to give 
all Members the opportunity to show their displeasure with the Government will be introduced by the 
Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) who will follow me. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my speech that I was never more proud to be a 
Liberal than I am right now. One of the reasons for this pride is the calibre of the two young men who 
are seeking the leadership of our party, Ted Malone and Tony Merchant. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — These two individuals are capable, dedicated and sincere men who have already 
made a great contribution to this province and to the Liberal Party. Either one of them will make a fine 
leader and an outstanding Premier. The future of our party, and indeed of Saskatchewan, is assured 
when we have men like this serving in public life. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I wish them both well and I pledge my full and enthusiastic support to whichever 
one is chosen by our convention on December 11th. 
 
I closing, I want to thank my colleagues. No one could have had better co-operation and support than 
was given to me during my tenure as leader. While I don’t agree with the Members opposite and it is 
obvious, or those Members to my left, I respect their integrity and I promise I will continue to make 
their political life as uncomfortable as I can for a long time to come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — I thank the members of the press. Unfortunately for me they always reported me 
accurately. Occasionally they made 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

98 
 

the odd mistake and even made me sound intelligent from time to time. A difficult feat. 
 
I want to acknowledge a debt that I owe to the staff and the executive of the Liberal Party. They were 
loyal, hard-working and a tremendous help to me at all times. In closing I just want to say that I thank 
my wife. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before I begin my comments on the Throne Speech I should 
like to pay recognition to the fact that we have just heard the last speech that Dave Steuart will make on 
the Throne Speech debate in his capacity of Leader of the Opposition. His quick mind and his quick wit 
never paralleled before in these Chambers. I am confident that history will record Dave Steuart as one of 
the greatest debaters and humanitarians ever to grace these Chambers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I welcome this opportunity to say how great a privilege and pleasure it has been for 
me to serve in this Legislature under the leadership of Dave Steuart. He may be the smallest guy in size 
in this Legislature, but without any doubt he’s the biggest man in stature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — The fact of his leadership is indicative in the quality of men and women which Dave 
has attracted to devote part of their lives as he has, to serving the people of Saskatchewan in the capacity 
as Members of this Assembly. Dave is turning over to the new leadership a vibrant party with 
unqualified principles and dedication to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Dave on behalf of our caucus, thank you for a fantastic five years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — In my capacity as Opposition critic for agriculture, I should like to deal for a few 
moments with what effect if any, the implementation of this Throne Speech will have on the agricultural 
industry in this great province. 
 
As a rule, the Throne Speech lays out the very general direction in which the Government wishes to take 
this province and to deal with the various segments of our society in the coming year. In all due respect, 
Mr. Speaker, if this Throne Speech is an example of things to come, its implementation will have no 
effect whatsoever on our agricultural industry. 
 
The Throne Speech has done an adequate job in vaguely outlining the problems which agriculture may 
face in the coming year, but again it is completely void of any suggestions or proposals on how this 
Government intends to deal with and to tackle those problems. 
 
The Government recognizes that while this year’s wheat 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

99 
 

crop of 550 million bushels is the largest in the province’s history, clouds on the horizon still appear. 
Recent declines in grain, hog, cattle and dairy prices give a considerable cause for concern. These, Mr. 
Speaker, are problems that are man made not necessarily problems created by provincial or federal 
governments, but problems which are created by international and world events, which to a small extent 
can be solved by co-operation with our federal and world counterparts. The Federal Government has 
made an attempt, while not adequate in this regard, but our Provincial Government is content only with 
confrontation. 
 
Besides the apparent decline in the price of products which we produce, we must be aware as well of a 
large part which mother nature plays in regard to our greatest industry. At present we are witnessing an 
extended drought period. What will happen to our provincial economy if because of weather conditions 
we are not able to produce even an average crop in 1977? What will happen to our already hard pressed 
livestock industry if we are not able to produce the hay and feed grains that are required to maintain that 
industry? 
 
During the past number of buoyant years in our agricultural industry adequate time was available to 
make contingency plans and programs. One must ask, what has this Government done to prepare itself 
and our agricultural industry for this eventuality? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have a right to ask and also to receive answers as to what the Government 
intends to do in case our greatest industry does find itself in difficulty. It is no longer good enough, Mr. 
Speaker, nor acceptable by the people of Saskatchewan for the Ministers to try to shift the blame with 
the hope that some other government will come along and bail them out. 
 
Saskatchewan again, let me repeat, has gone through one of the greatest periods of prosperity in its 
history. Again, thanks to agriculture. Now that clouds are appearing agriculture could be facing a 
difficult period. The people of Saskatchewan are rightly asking, what are you intending to do to combat 
those clouds? They are asking, what did you do during those good years? They are asking more and 
deserve better than what you have outlined in the Speech which we are now debating. They expect and 
deserve more than just lip service. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Let’s pause for a moment, Mr. Speaker, and look at your record. Crop insurance and 
the Grain Stabilization Bill, two excellent programs, but programs that were implemented not by your 
Government but by the Federal Government. the Grain Stabilization Bill, a program that if grain prices 
continue to decline and our markets become sluggish, will prove to be the salvation of our agricultural 
industry in Saskatchewan. What did your Government and Minister do to contribute to this program? At 
each and every opportunity you’ve condemned, ridiculed and opposed it. You were not concerned about 
the agricultural industry, but more concerned about some cheap political gain that you could derive out 
of it. 
 
Again, let me repeat that if grain prices continue to decline, and our markets become sluggish, the Grain 
Stabilization Program which you opposed so violently could prove to be the 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

100 
 

salvation of our agricultural industry in this great province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — During those good years of high tax revenue, again because of agriculture, where was 
your Government when universities and farm organizations were recommending more dollars for 
agricultural research? They recognized the need to keep our industry ahead of the times. They knew that 
more time, effort and research was required in developing new crop varieties, drainage, irrigation and 
land use policies. The potential for expansion is almost limitless. Huge acreages of land await more 
intensified utilization. Alternate sources of livestock feed can be developed. The list again, Mr. Speaker, 
is unlimited. What the Government appears to have forgotten is that the most important role of 
government is not regulation, but research. At the moment your Government is pouring millions into the 
various social welfare and giveaway programs. Millions in your desire to control potash and other 
industries, already established and producing in this province. As a result, Mr. Speaker, you are 
sacrificing the millions needed by agricultural research. 
 
In your efforts to make sure that the idle and lazy continue to lead the good life you are ignoring and 
cutting research budgets in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is alarming and could constitute the biggest single threat to the future security 
of our food supplies. 
 
You go on in your Throne Speech to say that despite the record wheat crop, net farm incomes are 
expected to decline this year. But that’s where it stops. No proposals to ensure that net farm income does 
not decline. What does your Government intend to do to ease or slow down that apparent decline in the 
farmers net income? 
 
Let’s look again at your action to date. First of all because of your desire for more forms of taxation you 
increased the price of the farmers basic expense, farm gas and diesel fuel. The single, most vulnerable 
expense that a farmer can have. By your actions you increased the price of farm fuel by over 14 cents a 
gallon and tried desperately to put the blame on the shoulders of the oil companies. 
 
You then tried to gain some political advantage. You introduced The Farm Cost Reduction Program. In 
glowing press releases you announced the program, said that we as a government are concerned, we will 
ease your cost in farm fuel and we’ll be sending each and every farmer a cheque once a year. What those 
glowing press releases didn’t say was that we as a government increased the price of your fuel by over 
14 cents a gallon, but we are going to keep ten cents to help buy potash mines. We will refund back to 
the farmer only four cents a gallon, providing that the farmer uses 2,500 gallons of farm fuel or less. For 
every gallon of farm fuel that a farmer uses over 2,500 we’re going to keep the entire 14 cents. 
 
What we see here is a deliberate attempt by this present Government to hide one of its most unfair forms 
of taxation. Again, instead of keeping down farm costs, you have added to it and you’ve added to it 
considerably. One again has to ask, why? 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

101 
 

During this period of agricultural prosperity this Government has been preoccupied with its insane 
desire of control and ownership of our potash industry. The people of Saskatchewan are saying that it’s 
time this Government gets off its potash kick and starts paying some attention to our basic industry, that 
being agriculture. If the Government is sincere about developing this province and investing $1 billion 
in development, I suggest that you turn to this province’s greatest resource and its greatest industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may sound old hat and it may be an old refrain, but agriculture remains one of our most 
important industries and with proper attention and with proper concern will retain that status for a long 
time to come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the bread basket of this nation and yet the only 
agricultural products that we produce in this province are grain, livestock and similar products produced 
by farmers. This province is literally a desert in terms of the manufacture of agricultural products to 
service and maintain the agricultural industry. We must again, Mr. Speaker, depend on other provinces 
and other countries to service that industry. Millions and millions of dollars leave this province each and 
every year just to service that industry. 
 
For example, this year alone over $160 million will leave this province for the purchase of agricultural 
machinery and repair parts. Would it not be wiser, Mr. Speaker, to take part of that billion dollars to 
develop an industry to manufacture those machines and equipment right here in this province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Speaker, if this Government has run out of ideas, as the Throne Speech certainly 
leads one to believe, why not correct a mistake which you made three years ago when you cancelled the 
South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project, one of the worst decisions this Government or any 
government in the Province of Saskatchewan has ever made. One only has to go back to the winter of 
1972-73 when hay in southern Saskatchewan was non-existent, to realize just how vital future and 
further development is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s strange, but we don’t even produce enough potatoes or peas to feed ourselves in this 
province. We have no plants to process these products even if we did produce them. Again, we have to 
rely on other provinces to put this kind of food on our table. 
 
We are looking at more opportunities for our young farmers to find land, to make a start. Irrigation will 
provide an excellent future for from six to eight farmers on the same acreage that now provides a living 
for a one-family farm. 
 
The future of increased production to feed a hungry world lies in irrigation. We have that potential, all 
we need is a government with the courage to develop that potential. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

102 
 

MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. The potential in this province is just as great if not 
superior to any other province in Canada. Again I say, all we need is a government with the courage, the 
proper perspective and the right political philosophy to build this province into one which we can all be 
proud of. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Speaker, I would briefly like to turn now to the segment of the Throne Speech 
which deals with the serious cost price squeeze that Saskatchewan cattle producers have been caught up 
in. You announced the continuation of the Cash Advance Program and the cash grant of $50 per cow 
sounds like a good and timely program, but only on the surface, Mr. Speaker. One has to read the fine 
print to realize the gross discrimination and unfairness of this program. This program alone, Mr. 
Speaker, will do more to encourage cow-calf producers out of the cattle business and into straight grain 
farm production. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — If we are to encourage the cow-calf producers to remain in this industry he must be 
treated fairly. The grant should be paid on the cow-calf portion of his farming operation, independent of 
this grain operation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — It is unfair, Mr. Speaker, for this Government to play the kind of a game of 
discrimination within our agricultural industry. One has to ask why the discrimination and it is difficult 
to find and understand the reasoning behind any kind of an answer that they may come up with. There 
was no discrimination against the hog producers when their industry was in difficulty and a grant was 
paid independent of their grain operations. Although at the time it was politically unwise to show that 
discrimination because this Government was trying to protect its political life and was trying to have a 
compulsory market commission, accepted by the agricultural industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — That grant at that time, despite its political overtones, was fair because it was made 
available to every hog producer independent of his farming operation and was geared basically to 
maintain and protect that hog industry. You are taking exactly the opposite approach in regard to the 
cow-calf program. In order to treat the beef industry fairly it is 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

103 
 

imperative that the eligibility for the cash grant under the Beef Industry Assistance Program for cow-calf 
producers be determined solely on the net income received from the beef portion of the farmer’s total 
farming operation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I urge the Government, Mr. Speaker, to look seriously upon this recommendation. 
 
Questions also arise regarding the establishment of the Hog Marketing Commission. The Minister in 
introducing this program stated very emphatically that in order to stabilize hog prices and increase 
production the Marketing Commission was the only answer. 
 
On these two points alone, Mr. Speaker, one must say that the program has failed. Hog prices have not 
been stabilized. In fact they have dropped from $66 in November of 1975 to $46 today. where is the 
stabilization in that kind of a drop? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Whether it is the fault of the Commission or not, you have failed to maintain producer 
confidence in the hog industry. In the past 12 month period, 132,000 fewer hogs have been marketed 
with no attempt by your Government to restore that confidence in our hog producers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last segment of the Throne Speech on agriculture deals with the Land Bank and the 
mention of some proposed amendments. Time will tell what the amendments will be. And if they will be 
adequate to dissipate some of the clouds on the horizon that appear in regard to this province’s Land 
Bank program. The year 1977 as well will be the year that we should have an indication of this 
Government’s true intention of making Land Bank land available for sale. We await, Mr. Speaker, with 
anticipation. 
 
What is more disturbing, however, is that while Saskatchewan agriculture has gone through its most 
prosperous period in history, one has to question the viability of the Land Bank program. The increasing 
percentage of Land Bank lessors who are unable to pay their cash rentals is alarming. As an example, a 
farmer and his wife were in my office yesterday morning. He operates two sections of cultivated and 
pasture land. He leases though, six quarters of those eight from the Land Bank - $3,600 rental fee. He 
has been unable to pay that cash rent during the four years of existence on that Land Bank farm. Because 
of his arrears only partially in each and every year, the Land Bank Commission is now charging him an 
outrageous 14 per cent interest on the portion due on that rental. Fourteen per cent interest! And the 
Government opposite starts to criticize the huge companies and loan companies that are gouging the 
poor people of this province. Mr. Speaker, it is time that you looked closer to home as to who is gouging 
whom. 
 
Let’s go on to see what else happened. Last week the sheriff arrived and sealed up his bins. What has the 
gentleman got left to do? So the Land Bank counsellor arrived, his only suggestion was this. Give up 
your lease, we will put you on some small acreage and we will make sure that you receive welfare. 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

104 
 

Is that your answer to the people who want to farm in this province? But the sad part about this whole 
situation, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular producer prior to his involvement with the Land Bank had 
been successfully farming for the past 14 years on a crop share basis, so that when he took over the land 
under the Land Bank, because of your high rental rates he was unable to pay that cash rental even 
though the agricultural economy has been extremely buoyant. 
 
One must ask why the government has set the guidelines in regard to the lease fee for Land Bank land 
according to the price which is paid for that land. In effect when the Land Bank purchased the initial 
land they paid too much money for that particular piece of land. One has to question this. 
 
So I asked this farmer and his wife who were in my office yesterday morning, what do you feel is the 
solution to your problem. He said three things. First of all, a lower interest rate on his arrears; secondly, 
I would ask that the land Bank Commission come out and re-evaluate that land. Re-evaluate that land to 
its productive capacity and base the rental rate on that productive capacity, not on the purchase price of 
that land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Say thanks brother-in-law. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Saskatoon said, that I should thank my brother-in-law. 
As if it were my brother-in-law that was leasing the land. I would like to invite him to come along with 
me, I invite the former Minister of Agriculture, I also invite the present Minister of Agriculture to come 
along with me and drive out to that gentleman’s farm. Let’s find out if he is my brother-in-law and let’s 
find out if he is serious and if he does have a serious problem. Mr. Speaker, I am confident that his 
problem is serious and I sincerely hope that the Government will take the appropriate action to look after 
that problem. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Who’s at fault? 
 
MR. WIEBE: — The former Minister of Agriculture says, who is at fault? I say, Mr. Speaker, let’s look 
at who is at fault. Why should this particular farmer who has been leasing land on a crop share basis for 
14 years been able to successfully farm. He then takes over Land Bank land four years ago on a cash 
rental basis and he finds himself in trouble. If that doesn’t indicate that there is something drastically 
wrong with the Land Bank rental base, then I don’t know what does. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I echo, Mr. Speaker, the emphasis placed by that particular farmer in his suggestions. 
First of all reduce the amount of interest rate on the amount of arrears and reassess that particular land to 
productive capabilities, not to the outrageous price which the government paid for it initially. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is surprising when something is said in this Legislature that touches a nerve, the 
Government Members opposite appear to wake up, put their newspapers down and react. I am confident, 
Mr. Speaker, that I have struck a nerve. I 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

105 
 

hope that by striking that nerve that the Government will take a second look at their Land Bank program 
and come up with one that is going to be fair and equitable to people that happen to be in this same 
particular situation as this gentleman is. 
 
I invite the Members opposite to come to my office and I will show them the notes on this particular 
case and they can then go back to their Land Bank office and check it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should now like to turn for a few moments to some of the concerns which lie within my 
constituency. The Member yesterday in moving the Throne Speech Debate seemed to spend a 
considerable amount of time on the concern which farmers have in this province, about a particular grain 
company by the name of Cargill. I say, Mr. Speaker, yes, my constituents have a concern about Cargill. 
But they also have the same concern about Pioneer, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and United Grain 
Growers. 
 
Let’s take a look at what is happening. We have spent a lot of time in the past number of years on rail 
line abandonment and what is going to happen in case some of our branch lines are abandoned. How far 
will the producer have to haul to that inland terminal or that high through-put elevator. What my 
constituents are asking is that, if their particular branch line is abandoned and they then haul to the main 
line, how much further on that main line will they have to go to find an elevator that will accept their 
grain? I say this quite sincerely. I say this as a member of a local Wheat Pool committee. I say this as a 
former chairman of that local Wheat Pool committee. Regardless of whether my branch line stays or 
goes, my elevator goes. There is as much concern by all people in my constituency not only for Cargill 
but for Pioneer, Wheat Pool, United Grain Growers and all elevator companies conducting business in 
this province. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, it is time you got off that kick of only one company. Remember that we have a 
responsibility in this province, not to try and gain some political marks by condemning one particular 
company and saying nothing about the other. If we are going to condemn one we are going to have to 
look just as broadly at the others as we are about those that we condemn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I have a concern over a particular stretch of highway in my constituency. I am 
sorry that the Minister of Highways is not here, but I have talked to him often enough about this 
particular highway. Last year I made a request of the Government, privately with the Minister and in this 
Legislature regarding this 21 miles from No. 1 Highway south to Hodgeville. I got a sympathetic ear but 
I didn’t get any work done. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — That’s a pretty big lane to your house. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — That’s not to my house. That particular highway for the edification of the Member for 
Saskatoon happens to lead to the former Member of the Gravelbourg constituency. He was one of the 
gentlemen who happened to be around when the last election was being run and I happened to be 
running in the same constituency that he was. So, Mr. Speaker, let me point out that I am just as 
concerned about a highway coming out to my farm as I am concerned about a highway going out to my 
opposition or my 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

106 
 

opponent’s farm. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this Government will be just as concerned about providing 
that highway in the Morse constituency as they are concerned about providing a highway in the Member 
for Tisdale’s constituency or any other constituency. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I am going to have ample opportunity to convey the concerns of my constituents at 
a later date in other debates. In closing, because of this Government’s inability to recognize many of the 
needs and desires of the people of Saskatchewan, I wish to move an amendment, seconded by the 
Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Nelson), that the following words be added to the motion: 
 

But this Assembly regrets that the Throne Speech has failed to: 
 
(1) recognize the need to provide concrete solutions to our agricultural problems and to provide 
adequately for agricultural research in the province. 
 
(2) provide any programs to deal with our serious crime rate which is one of the highest per capita in 
Canada. 
 
(3) stop the reduction of our health services and denounces the Government for making these services 
less available to the population of Saskatchewan. 
 
(4) include any proposals for dealing with the problems confronting our native people. 
 
and further condemns the Government for using the taxpayers’ money to finance high risk investment 
projects. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a word or two just before we 
call the question. 
 
In my first words will be ones of congratulation to the mover and the seconder, the Hon. Member for 
Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) and the Hon. Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think each of them did an outstanding job. Both are young Members under 30, 
they are not the only young Members under 30 in the House but they are among the few who are under 
30. I think it does credit to any House to have Members who are as articulate, thoughtful and as clearly 
talented as those two young Members are. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Each of them is serving his constituency well both inside and outside this House. 
I want also to welcome my two colleagues to the Cabinet, Dr. Faris and Mr. Vickar, the Member for 
Arm River and the Member for Melfort. I think that each will acquit himself well, as I think Members 
opposite will soon find out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

107 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to address a few words to Members opposite on the remarks which have 
been delivered in this House this afternoon by the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart) 
and the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe). 
 
I extend my congratulations to the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake on his career as Leader of the 
Opposition and his previous career as Member of the Opposition in the early days of his career and then 
as a Cabinet Minister for seven years in the government which preceded ours. His career has indeed 
been an outstanding one and he has discharged his duties as Leader of the Opposition in this House with 
distinction and ability. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I rather think as a matter of fact that when in a couple of weeks there is a 
leadership convention, we will find that there is a campaign perhaps led by the Member for Thunder 
Creek (Mr. Thatcher), I don’t know, to ‘draft Dave’ and to offer yet a third alternative to the delegates at 
that convention. Certainly there have been strenuous efforts to find a third candidate. I think that the 
merits of the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake should not be overlooked. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to comment just very briefly on a couple of the remarks of the Member 
for Morse. He spent a good deal of his time talking about the Land Bank and how this program to get 
young farmers on the land has its defects. He found one case, where in his judgment, one of 1500 
farmers who have not benefited from the Land Bank. All I can say is that Members opposite did not run 
that risk when they were in office. 
 
When they were elected in 1964, they were elected on a program of getting young people on the farm, 
by providing loan money at low rates of interest, to a high percentage of the value of the land. I invite 
anyone to read that literature. In seven years they provided not one dollar to not one farmer for one acre 
of land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — So they took no risks. They took no risks about the program having one of 1500 
being unsuccessful. They took no risks because all of the young farmers lost under their program, not 
one in 1500, but all of them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And note carefully what the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake was saying. 
He started out with his usual comments about the inefficiencies of Crown corporations. I was struck by 
the remarks of the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, the manner in which they were delivered, the 
exceptionally fine way in which they were delivered, having regard to the exceptionally poor quality of 
the content. This will naturally affect any one. 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

108 
 

Because I think a style of delivery like that deserves better of the content. One of the things which struck 
me is that somehow the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan lost $9 million. I sent out for the book and 
wondered what Crown corporations he was talking about. It certainly wasn’t the Power Corporation 
because he concedes it made some money. And certainly wasn’t the telephone corporation, because it 
certainly made some money. It certainly wasn’t those corporations administered by the Government 
Finance office, because, although some of them lost money and some of them made money, the total net 
profit was $2.6 million. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I discovered that what he had added up presumably was the Land Bank 
Corporation and the FarmStart Corporation and the losses of those corporations. Then I listened to the 
Member for Morse who argued that these corporations would suffer still greater losses by lowering their 
interest rates. I heard the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake say that those losses suffered by Land 
Bank and FarmStart in assisting young farmers to get on the land were somehow evidence of 
inefficiency. This indicates just what is wrong with the Liberal Party figuring. 
 
MR. STEUART: — I didn’t use any. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, the Member says he didn’t use any. I say that he did use those figures. For 
you cannot get Crown corporations which lose $9 million without them. $9 million was the figure, I 
fortunately made a note. 
 
Let’s take another aspect of the speech of the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. It always fascinates 
me to see how they go about arguing that when the Liberal Party does something it is great, but when 
somebody else does it it is bad. Please recall to mind the points made by the Member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake and how proud he was to be a Liberal and how outstandingly the quality of the 
administration of the Liberal Party was because it had brought to Canada the good life, better than 
anywhere else in the world. But he then said that there are terrible problems in Ottawa, that the Federal 
government, not the Liberal Party, mind you, but the Federal Government is doing a terribly bad job. 
And that it is not the fault of the Liberal Party which after all is only the Prime Minister and the Cabinet 
but it is all those nasty public servants . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . those nasty public servants who are doing this terrible thing of causing the 
Federal Government to do a bad job running this country into debt and adding huge deficits when the 
Liberal Party is offering us the greatest administration that Canada has ever seen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — This is absolutely classic. It indicates the deep dyed suspicion in the minds of all 
Liberals and indeed of all Tories of any public servant. Public servants are in the minds of Members 
opposite, there to be vilified, there to have heaped upon them, all abuse which ought properly to fall 
upon the 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

109 
 

Members of the Liberal Party. I must say the Member for Thunder Creek is honest enough now and then 
to identify those politicians. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The Federal Minister of Agriculture’s name leaps to mind. Those politicians 
who ought to bear some of the blame along with these terrible public servants for all of the chaos and 
mess that we have had described to us as being in Ottawa. 
 
Then there was another fascinating part of that argument. You heard that argument which said that the 
Saskatchewan budget had gone up by so much - I forget how much - was it double or triple whatever the 
figure is. And that therefore this Government was extracting all of this extra money out of the same 
number of people. That is what he said. Then in the next breath he says - what a shameful thing it was 
that this Government wouldn’t tax to provide for its own programs but went off begging to Ottawa and 
not only begged to Ottawa but that one-third of its budget came from Ottawa. Now, what is the 
problem? Is the problem that we are getting too much money from Ottawa and not levying enough taxes 
or is it that the budget is going up too much so we are levying too many taxes? 
 
MR. STEUART: — Both. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake suggests that we get about one-third 
of our budget from Ottawa and somehow that this is reprehensible. Well, there is hardly a government in 
Canada that doesn’t get a third of its budget from Ottawa. When I say from Ottawa, I mean from those 
shared taxes which are no more Ottawa’s than ours. 
 
It is I think clear that some time ago in the course of building the good life that the Member outlined, we 
in Canada decided that we were going to have some national programs providing national standards for 
basic welfare programs. I use the term welfare broadly. Programs like hospital, medicare, the Canada 
Assistance Plan, secondary and post secondary education and the like. The money for these programs 
came from Ottawa. Far and away the greatest sums of money we get from Ottawa come under those four 
headings. I think that is good, not bad. I think it strengthens Canada, does not weaken Canada. I think it 
does not indicate any lack of merit on the part of provincial governments, that they share with the 
Federal Government in the provision of these national programs. I think it indicates a high level of 
responsibility, a high level of devotion to the national welfare that we as provinces and the Federal 
Government can get together and provide programs of this nature. I say that we should continue to 
provide these and if scorn is to be heaped on anybody for participating in these programs it should be 
heaped upon the Federal Government now for attempting to withdraw from these programs. They are as 
necessary today as they ever were. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The Member went on to talk about the decline in local autonomy and gave many 
examples. I will just touch upon one. Local school boards. He talked about how local school boards do 
not make the decisions they made presumably 25 or 35 years ago. 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

110 
 

I invite anyone, because I used to do this as an occupation as a recreation to get some minutes of school 
boards of 25 or 35 years ago and get some minutes of school boards today and find out what the school 
boards were talking about 25 or 35 years ago. They were talking about who would provide the wood and 
how they were going to get water to the school, and whether the roof needed new shingling. And did 
they talk about hiring teachers, of course not, we have nothing to do with hiring teachers, that was all 
done by the superintendent, hired by the Department of Education. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Hire, fire . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I invite the Hon. Member to read these and he will find that in the vast majority 
of cases the effective selection of teachers was done by the school inspectors as they were called. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Roy knows. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The Member for Rosetown-Elrose knows that what I say is right. He knows too, 
that 25 years ago school boards spent no time at all talking about curriculum, it was all assumed that was 
to be done by the Department of Education. Now, today we see school boards sitting down, talking 
about what program they should offer, talking about what the young people in their area need by way of 
education. I think anyone who fairly looks at that will see that boards now are coming to grips with the 
real issues in their communities. And what’s more they have got the cash so that they can make 
decisions which make some sense in the light of their community problems. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I will certainly want to address myself to some of the comments of the Member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake on resource taxation. He is attempting to stake out a piece of ground for the 
Liberal Party. He forgets that last year in this House the Liberal Party voted that they would not have 
anything to do with Bill 42. He says that, he does not say what the Liberal Party would have done and it 
was open to them at any time since 1973 to tell us what they would have done with respect to oil 
taxation. They have been completely silent. They have taken the position that all of the money that is 
collected under Bill 42 should go not to the Government of Saskatchewan but to the oil companies. And 
now they want to withdraw from that position. They are trying to back up a bit because they know that 
that is no longer an acceptable position. Even governments like the Tory government in Alberta and the 
ultra-Tory government in British Columbia are collecting oil royalties of a size that are much greater 
than the Liberals would have contemplated. So they have got to back up. They have got to find a piece 
of ground, and they haven’t got one yet. They are clearly identified with wanting to repeal Bill 42 and 
put nothing in its place. And they are going to stay stuck with that problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — They don’t have any place to 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

111 
 

move. They have had three sessions to indicate what their policy is and their total policy statement has 
been repeal Bill 42. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of points before I ask to adjourn. I am sorely tempted to speak 
on cable television since I have heard more mis-statements on that issue in the last couple of days than I 
have heard for some time, but I will wait until tomorrow for that. I heard, for example, that somehow we 
were disregarding some law when we say that closed circuit television is an area of provincial 
responsibility. I am baffled to know what law we are disregarding. All I can say is that in Ontario closed 
circuit television operates and it operates not under federal jurisdiction but under provincial jurisdiction. 
I would have thought that what was constitutional in Ontario was constitutional in Saskatchewan. So it 
is pretty clear, I think, that the assertions of Members opposite that somehow closed circuit television is 
a constitutional prerogative of the Government of Canada bears no resemblance to the truth. There is 
simply nothing there. 
 
So far as cable is concerned, we are saying that any cable company duly authorized by the CRTC can 
use Sask Tel cables. Nobody has ever suggested otherwise. We are saying perfectly clearly that this is 
the case. We now know that our proposal cannot possibly hurt the CRTC licensees. There was a feeling 
that somehow unless the CRTC licensees owned a part of the cable that somehow we were going to 
control what they broadcast. That was always nonsense, it was always a specious argument on the part 
of the Federal Government and now they have been good enough to concede that it is a specious 
argument by signing a deal with Manitoba which presumably eliminates that argument on their part. 
They are perfectly clearly saying that there is nothing wrong with a provincially owned telephone 
company owning all the cable. That is what they are saying. 
 
Now that they are saying that in Manitoba, why aren’t they saying it in Saskatchewan. They aren’t 
saying it in Saskatchewan because they want a quid pro quo. And the quid pro quo they want is 
something for which they have no constitutional basis. You can bet your bottom dollar that if they had 
any constitutional basis they would go ahead and take it without asking us. But what they are asking is 
that they want to make a deal to switch powers from the Federal Government to the Provincial 
Government, powers which they don’t have. And powers which they are trying to enforce by holding to 
ransom, potential TV viewers in this province, saying that they will not give their licensees the right to 
do something which in Manitoba they permit because they want to extract from the Government of 
Saskatchewan, a right which belongs to the Government of Saskatchewan. That, by this party which has 
such a firm and devoted devotion to the law as explained by the Members opposite. I think it is pretty 
clear that what is going on here is a power play. It is an extra legal power play, and accordingly does not 
have much to comment it. 
 
The Member opposite apparently feels that it is inappropriate to ask citizens to go to court and it is 
inappropriate for us to go to court. Any time we go to court we are somehow taking away somebody’s 
rights. We are breaking the law. If we ask the Public Sector Prices and Compensation Board to test its 
powers in the courts, we are breaking the law. 
 
If the Attorney General uses a power which every Attorney General in Canada uses very frequently the 
direct indictment one, 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

112 
 

we are breaking the law. If we attempt to exercise our constitutional rights for closed circuit cable 
television we are breaking the law. If we don’t agree forthwith to bargaining away our constitutional 
rights, we’re breaking the law. It is clear in their minds that whatever the Liberal Party says is the law 
and when we disagree with them we’re breaking the law. 
 
I think it is worthwhile to pursue a little more a couple of the points that they have raised. One of them 
was the vilification of senior public servants. I want to say that while Members opposite don’t like 
public servants, we believe that the public servants in this province have done a good job for the people 
of this province and are continuing to do a good job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — They work hard and they help to run our public business well. This Government 
and the New Democratic Party believes that the public wants to be served by public servants and served 
well. We are friends of the public servants and we’re friends in government and out, and we think 
politicians should particularly guard that respect they have and be friends of public servants. Our Sask 
Telephone repair men and our social service case workers and potash miners and our nurses and our 
teachers and our highway employees, our safety inspectors, they are not faceless bureaucrats, they are 
people, and the great majority of them are hardworking people. I imagine many of them are sick and 
tired of being criticized by Members opposite as somehow being lay-abouts who don’t earn their bread. 
It is an easy game to play, no names, just that public servants don’t do their job right. Easy game to play, 
no names, just a general smearing, but thousands of good Saskatchewan people who are trying to do 
their job, are caught up in the smear. That’s the sort of target which the Opposition likes, they can’t hit 
back, nobody is named, it is just all of you people are somehow lazy and don’t earn your keep. 
 
All around us I think are examples of the good work of our public servants. He, of course, named the 
ones who are poor, some of them. The successor to Mr. Horner was suggested that he was incompetent; 
the successor to Mr. Meldrun, it was suggested that he was incompetent . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Biggest, craziest spender . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, there we are. No, there is no suggestion that that indicates any lack of 
confidence to say that a person is the biggest, craziest spender that this province ever saw, but otherwise 
he is perfectly competent. 
 
All around us we see examples of the good work of our public servants. When given an even break we 
think, our public servants show they can compete with the best of them. We look at Sask Tel and I say 
that Sask Tel runs as good a telephone company as is run in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Look at SGIO. It may well be that the SGIO will or will not make a profit, but 
taken in conjunction with their rates, they run as good an insurance company as anywhere in Canada. 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

113 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Let’s look at Sodium Sulphate, and Sodium Sulphate competes with private 
companies in this province and sells its commodities to private enterprise elsewhere in Canada and in 
the United States. They do a pretty good job. You bet they do! Yet the Members opposite are trying to 
say that all these Crown corporations except Power which is all right, and Telephones that’s all right and 
Insurance that’s all right, nothing wrong with the bus company, Sodium Sulphate that’s all right, but 
somehow the Crown corporations are all bad. On we go and on we go, and now he reduces it to one or 
two. I reject this negative campaign to discredit our public servants and discredit the whole idea that if 
you work for the Government somehow you are a second class citizen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It is the whole idea that somehow if you work for the government and you do an 
honest day’s work you are a sucker, that’s the idea they are trying to get across and it’s a bad idea, it’s 
out of date and it never had anything to commend it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I saw the other day that the Member for Nipawin was suggesting that somehow 
civil servants didn’t like to take orders from the elected officials. I am glad to see that the Member for 
Nipawin indicates that that is an accurate statement. So many of his statements are inaccurate, that we’ll 
add this one to the list. But because I am happy to have the acknowledgement that in this Government as 
I suggest in most governments in Canada, although I gather from the Member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake does not agree with the Federal Government of Canada, in most governments in Canada the public 
servants do the proposing and the elected officials do the disposing. That’s how we work in our 
Government. We make some mistakes, and we get some advice, some of it may be good and some of it 
may be bad, but we are prepared to take responsibility for our mistakes, we do so and ask to be judged 
on the basis of our record. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I think maybe one of the mistakes was to provide air time for some of the 
speeches we hear in this House. But other than that, we think that we do not too badly. 
 
We rather say that we think public servants are entitled to a living wage and we hear a lot of comments 
about how public servants are getting too much money. We believe that our public servants generally 
are paid fairly, we bargain and we bargain hard. We have tried in the last several years to raise the level 
of wages of public servants at the bottom of the scale and we make no apology for that. We try to pay 
somewhat competitive wages for our public servants at the top of the scale. We do not pay anything like 
the wages paid by the Tory government in Alberta where deputy ministers get an average of $12,000 
more than our deputy ministers, we do not pay anything like the wages paid to deputy ministers in 
Ottawa where they may get close to 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

114 
 

twice what our deputy ministers get. Why in Ottawa they have deputy ministers who can retire at 55 on 
pensions which are very nearly as high as the salaries we pay the deputy ministers. Now that is the way 
presumably that Liberals run governments, that is how they bestow their blessings on their senior public 
servants. We think it is better to try to keep down the wages of senior public servants. In a sense you 
might say that we are very nearly the Canadian leader in offering anti-inflationary salaries to senior 
public servants. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Certainly your Attorney General . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The Member for Regina South makes clear that we do not pay as high for our 
lawyers as they do in Alberta. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about Jack Kinzel . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Members opposite are now busy naming names, they never did that before, but 
we are happy to have them. 
 
We know that on the whole our people are good people, they serve us well and in my judgment they 
deserve the commendation and not the abuse of all Members of this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about my constituency and then I will 
ask for leave to adjourn. 
 
I have been in this House since 1960. I have seen the city of Regina and watched it with a good deal of 
care since I have been a Member representing this city. Considering all things I would say this city has 
never had a better year than 1976. I suppose it could be argued that 1975 was a better year, or 1974 was 
a better year, but certainly when you are looking for a year when Regina has prospered, 1976 is a pretty 
good year. If you looked at years when Regina did not prosper, when things were really tough, you 
would have to select a year like 1969 or 1970 or perhaps you might even have to go back as far as 1934 
or 1935. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — When you are looking for the longest leanest years when this city had really 
tough times, you must go back to a Liberal year or Tory year when free enterprise had its full play. Free 
enterprise showed what it could do 1969 and 1970 in this city and in this province and people in Regina 
are not soon going to forget those lean, gaunt years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Last year we had some games this is new, this the Western Canada Summer 
Games, this hasn’t been in the Speech in previous years. I want to compare that with games operated by 
Liberal governments. I want to tell you how we can run our games here with a cost of $1 million or so, 
break even and 



 
November 23, 1976 

 

115 
 

leave our city with a track, with a swimming pool and other solid evidence that the games were here and 
the facilities were provided. 
 
I don’t want to talk about how a provincial Liberal government operates games, how they operate games 
which leave them with a deficit of $1 billion. But I think if anyone wishes to look at the records and I 
know they are not really comparable but to the extent that there is comparability, I suggest our people in 
Regina ran games infinitely better than did the people in the Liberal Province of Quebec. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I won’t tell you about the success of our football team this year, you know that 
well. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What else do you . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well knowing Members opposite, if we don’t win the Grey Cup next Sunday, by 
next Monday Members opposite will be blaming it on this Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to just remind Members what has happened with respect to housing in 
this city. Think back to 1970, the last year when the free enterprisers opposite were managing the affairs 
of this province and this city. During that time there were 418 housing starts in 1970. Mr. Speaker, 418, 
and they counted them all. I don’t know what they will be this year, last year 1975 there were not 418 
but 2,982. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We confidently believe that there will be more this year. We think that this 
indicates the sort of leadership which has been given by our Government. We have not only provided 
support and assistance for the housing industry, we have provided money for lots, for developing lots, 
we have provided money so that there will be serviced lots in this city and we have provided the city of 
Regina with very substantial unconditional grants to allow them to build services in this city. This is in 
sharp contrast to what was done when Members opposite were sitting on the Treasury Benches. How 
many lots did they develop in Regina in 1969 and 1970 or 1971? I suppose it would have been absolute 
folly for them to develop lots because no one was building any houses, but it seems that they ought to 
have had enough faith in the future that they might have provided some funds to provide some lots so 
that when New Democratic Party prosperity came, there would have been a few lots to build houses on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Just look back on what happened in this city. This year the building permits are 
going to be greater than at any time in the history, and the last record was 1975 and the record before 
that was 1974. Look at the new projects in this city. A 



 
November 23, 1976 
 

116 
 

new city hall in which we have $2.5 million of Community Capital Fund money and some other funds; a 
new government building, which the Leader of the Opposition was very critical of; a new Agridome, a 
good deal of provincial government money in that; ring road, $66 million planned to update the city’s 
hospitals; a downtown re-development project involving Sask Tel and SGIO, rail line relocation 
proposal, which the Government is giving some assistance on. This is the sort of action in Regina we 
could have desperately used in 1969 or 1970 or 1971. I won’t talk about what we could have used in 
1933, 1934 or 1935. But in any case at any time when the Tories were in charge and the last years when 
the Liberals were in charge this city stagnated and that’s the only word you can use, “stagnation.” Since 
1971 we have had prosperity, you can say it isn’t the fault of our Government, or our Government 
shouldn’t be given the credit, you can say that, but our policies have assisted in that prosperity and we 
take full credit for that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Just listen to what has been done in housing. In the last two years senior citizens’ 
highrise, 140 units, 35 low rental family homes; helped in building 153 co-op housing units; built 153 
rental units for people of moderate incomes; developed 500 lots in the northwest of the city; bought 640 
acres of land for future development in the southeast of the city. In addition we gave 650 senior citizens’ 
home repair grants. Now that in two years is performance! And in no four years or five years or no ten 
years can any Tory or Liberal Government match that two-year record. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will have a great many more words to add to this debate, 
accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

AGE OF PREMIER IN 1933 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Just one question. Was Mr. Premier 
alive in 1933, ’34 and ’35? And if so, how old was he? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Premier was alive, he wasn’t in Regina and he was on a 
quick guess, eight, nine and ten. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will not permit a supplementary on that one . . . 
 
I think the Members are expanding to fill the time allotted to them in this particular situation. I will 
move on to Ministerial Statements. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 o’clock p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	QUESTIONS


