
























































Hansard: March 18, 1976


 
163 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

5th Day 
 

Thursday, March 18, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I am very delighted to introduce to you and 
through you to the House 29 students from St. Edwards School who are here in the west gallery this 
afternoon. I believe they are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Mike Drabyck and Mr. Bob Isinger. I 
hope that they have a good afternoon in the House, an interesting one and an educational one. I look 
forward to meeting them in the rotunda at 3:15 this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — It is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
House a group of 18 students from Major High School and their principal, Mr. Wirgis. They are sitting 
in the east gallery. I also would like to welcome them on behalf of the Member for Kindersley. The town 
of Major itself is in his constituency, but fortunately we share both the rural area. It is my pleasure to 
welcome you here, I hope you have a good visit and a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group this afternoon 
on behalf of the Premier, who asked me to convey to the group his apologies for not being able to 
introduce them himself, as he is out of the country today. He asked me to introduce a group of 27 
students who are in the Speaker’s Gallery. The 27 students are from the Institute of Applied Arts and 
Sciences at Scott Collegiate, they are a group of new Canadians, Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by 
their teachers Mrs. Beaglehome and Mrs. Zikman. I am sure that all Members of the House would like 
to welcome these new Canadians to our country, to our province and particularly this afternoon to our 
Legislature. I look forward to meeting with you after you leave the House this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — I should like to introduce to you and through you four members 
from the Parkland rural municipality. They are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery. From left to right is Herb 
Dunser, Clem Wildeman, Frank McNick and Lawrence Ferguson. The boundaries of the rural 
municipalities, the north boundary, before the new municipality of Meadow Lake was formed was 
bordered by an LID (Local Improvement District). They are down here to attend the SARM convention. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
164 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to 
the Legislature 60 students from St. Patrick and St. Joseph’s Schools in Swift Current. It is unfortunate 
we couldn’t have the St. Patrick’s group here yesterday. They are seated in the east gallery and they are 
accompanied by their teachers Mr. William Shumay and Frank Hegel. I will be meeting with them later 
and I wish them a pleasant trip home and an educational afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I too should like to welcome the students 
from Swift Current, even though they are not part of my particular area. I should like to go a step further 
and welcome the students and in particular one student, we happen to be neighbors, and as she looks 
over my farm in my absence, a special welcome to Leanne Cote. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce three 
members from the RM of Humboldt, the members of the council, Mr. Bolster who is the reeve, please 
stand up, they’ll know who you are, Mr. Baum and Mr. Limerick. I am sure that their trip to the 
Legislature this afternoon will be educational. I wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Tabling of Certain Documents Re Broken Agreements 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 
the Attorney General. Does the Attorney General recall that on the opening day in his speech, the 
Premier in discussing the agreement that was made between the Government as represented by the 
Attorney General, the Liberal caucus as represented by myself and Mr. Malone, and the Conservative 
caucus as represented by the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) and the Member for Rosetown (Mr. 
Bailey), came to an understanding about the procedure that would be followed when we reconvened or 
when the House was called in regard to advancing the Budget and other procedures. The Premier said 
then that there were letters signed, which there were, and they would table those I understand. I have 
listened to the Leader of the Conservative Party ask that those letters be tabled. Now I am asking the 
Attorney General on behalf of our caucus to table those letters, those letters of understanding, because 
there seems to be some doubt being cast that they do in fact exist. I am asking the Attorney General if he 
is now prepared to table the letters of agreement? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to table the documents as 
requested by the Leader of the Opposition. This is not strictly speaking to the question but I will simply 
identify the documents. One is a document, a carbon copy of a document, dated January 28, 1976 to Mr. 
D. G. Steuart, Leader of the 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
165 

 

Opposition. The next document, a photocopy of that letter and the original sent and returned to me. The 
next document is a letter dated January 28, 1976, to Mr. R. A. Larter, MLA. The next document is a 
photocopy of a piece of paper which was returned signed by Bob Larter. 
 
I will ask for a copy to go to the Leader of the Conservatives, to Mr. Larter and to Mr. Steuart and the 
balance be tabled in the House. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Attorney 
General. In his remarks the other day, the Leader of the Conservative Party, the Member for Nipawin, 
indicated as well that there were other agreements of an informal nature that were made in the corridors, 
or not here. As you are aware, the Liberal Party is not aware of any of these agreements. Firstly I should 
like to ask you whether there were such agreements, and if so, would you please tell us what they were? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, there were no such agreements. The substance of the speech of the 
Leader of the Conservatives as I gather a few days ago, was to the effect that there were suggestions at 
all times by me, in particular, although I think it was I and the Premier that he said that there would be 
third party funding. I think that those conversations can be fairly summarized to say, to choose the 
words of Mr. Larter yesterday, my position has been that I think there needs to be more research funds 
for the Conservative Party and I am sure that there will be more research funds for the Conservative 
Party. I as one Member of the Government will do all that I can to assist them to get more of the 
research funds, but that we would have to await the recommendation of, as it turns out now, the Mr. 
Justice Hughes Committee. 
 

Tabling of SARM Brief Re Load Limits 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I have a question directed in the absence of the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, to the Deputy Premier. Certain statements were made by the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs yesterday that he had received representations from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities with regard to load limits which he referred to in his speech to that particular convention. 
 
The Minister had agreed to table in the House, yesterday, a copy of a brief to which he referred that it 
was in this brief that the SARM referred to these stated load limits of 32,000, single axle and 50,000 
tandem. Has the Attorney General had conversations with the Minister so that we may have that 
information today? Is the Attorney General prepared to give us or refer us to, or show us the alleged 
brief that was referred to by the Minister of Municipal Affairs? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, as I am sure all Members will know what the Hon. Minister in 
charge of the transport for the Government said was that in at least one brief there was the request for 
the reduced weight load limits by the SARM and that he would be prepared to table that brief. I have not 
personally spoken to the Minister since he gave that answer. I believe that answer 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
166 

 

obviously is on the record and the Minister will have to fulfil it. Unfortunately, he is out right now, I 
assume at the SARM meeting itself. So I would suggest that the Hon. Member wait until tomorrow or 
the earliest opportunity that the Minister returns so that the brief can be tabled. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of a supplementary. Has the Government opposite overnight or in the last day 
received representations from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities with regard to the 
statements made by the Minister and was the effect of those representations to deny the statements made 
by the Minister of Municipal Affairs? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can simply answer for myself and just get some informal reading 
from some of the Ministers here. I know of no such representation overnight. It may have been made to 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs. I simply don’t know that because I haven’t seen the Minister all day. 
There is no Cabinet date today and accordingly I have no knowledge to deny or to accept that 
suggestion. 
 
Having said that, I am left in the position of saying that the position is as was stated yesterday by the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 

American Association of State Highway Officials 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Highways, maybe to his seatmate, is this Government aware of the damage factor of surveys 
done by the American Association of State Highway Officials and this apparently is the factor used by 
the Department of Highways in Saskatchewan as well as Manitoba? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — If the question is, am I aware of this 
Association, the answer is that I have heard of them, yes. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that by this survey a 
tandem axle semi-trailer truck has a damage factor of 47.2; a tandem truck 45,000 pounds has a damage 
factor of 41.3 and a single axle truck has a damage factor of 82.7? 
 

Opening of Neuro-Science Ward 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, a question directed to the Minister of Health. 
Could you tell this House when the neuro-science ward of the Plains Health Centre will be opened? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — I didn’t get the complete question. Would you repeat 
it please. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — When will the neuro-science ward be opened at the Plains Health Centre? The 
date had been announced April 1st. 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
167 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I will take that as notice and find out and get you the answer. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Borrows Money From Bond Market 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Could the Minister tell me if it is a fact as to whether or not the Saskatchewan Government went to the 
bond market to borrow money recently? And if it is a fact, how much was borrowed and what was the 
effective interest rate? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — The answer is, yes, the amount borrowed was $75 
million and the rate was 10.25 per cent. It was borrowed on the Canadian market. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that the city of Winnipeg 
recently also went to the United States market and borrowed money at 9.25 per cent, I am told? And 
could the Minister please tell me why? Is it a reflection on the credit of the Province of Saskatchewan, 
because of their tampering in the resource industry? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Member is placing argument, I think, rather than getting strictly 
to the question. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I will get to the question. If this is a fact of a difference of one per 
cent what would it cost the taxpayers’ of Saskatchewan? And can the Minister explain why this higher 
rate was paid by the Province of Saskatchewan than an individual city? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the bond market varies. There is also the question of the exchange 
rates that have to be considered when you go outside the Canadian market. We have decided to go to the 
Canadian market, where we have traditionally borrowed and we thought, in fact we know, that the 
interest rate is a good rate. Our rating in Saskatchewan is better than eight of the other provinces and this 
is an excellent rate we received. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskoil’s Purchase of Atlantic Richfield 
 
HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister 
in charge of Saskoil, may I reply to a question that was asked Tuesday last and for which I took notice 
on behalf of the Minister. 
 
The Hon. Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) asked two questions regarding Saskoil’s purchase of 
Atlantic Richfield. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
168 

 

First, where did Saskoil obtain the money? Was it from the Energy Fund? 
 
No, it wasn’t obtained from the Energy Fund and the funds were obtained by Saskoil from the 
Department of Finance out of the Department’s current cash position. The money is a temporary loan to 
Saskoil until permanent financing is arranged. 
 
What was the interest rate? This was the other question that was asked. 
 
Saskoil is paying interest on this loan, the yield to the Department of Finance would be 9 3/8 per cent. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister tell me whether any 
independent studies were taken by Saskoil or by your department in connection with the purchase of 
Atlantic Richfield to arrive at the figure of $23 million? That is, was anybody retained to investigate the 
company and to see that their assets were indeed worth that amount of money? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — It is my understanding that from the discussions that I have held with the Minister 
that there was no consulting firm retained, but the very adequate and capable staff at Saskoil made 
comparisons and did a great deal of investigating before the purchase was made. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Would the Minister then be prepared, surely to heavens he doesn’t expect this 
House . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . to accept it. Is it a policy of this Government that they as purchaser will do 
their own evaluation and will the Minister be willing to table, to the Members of the House, for the 
public of Saskatchewan, the evaluation that the Department of Mineral Resources or Saskoil did in 
evaluating Atlantic Richfield? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — It is the policy of the board and the management of Saskoil to make its own 
adjudication and where it is considered necessary to have consultation or consultants hired, that will be 
done. But each case will be considered on its own merits. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Member asked you whether you would 
table what was done by the Saskoil officials in connection with this purchase. Are you prepared to do 
that? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I take it as notice and I certainly hope that the Members will raise it in the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The report that was done by the officials of 
Saskoil, does it show that the 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
169 

 

price of $23 million was a proper price to pay or did it recommend a higher or lower price? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — My suggestion is that the price that was paid would indicate that the 
recommendation was received and it suggested that was the price that should be paid. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Why was the money not taken from the 
Energy Fund for this purchase? It is my understanding, of course, that this was the purpose of the 
Energy Fund, to acquire assets of this nature. 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member’s question I indicated that the 
financing was of a temporary nature and perhaps after the board of directors has carefully considered 
permanent financing that will be the case, but at this stage in the negotiations or in the purchase that 
hasn’t been done. It might be eventually. 
 

Provincial Office Building in Swift Current 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) and 
the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) raised a number of questions with respect to the failure of 
pilings associated with the construction of the provincial office building in Swift Current and they raised 
the question further as to whether the piling failures represent some additional cost to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think I can assure the House that an adequate level of control of expenditures of provincial funds has 
been and will continue to be exercised with respect to the building of the provincial office building in 
Swift Current. And, in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, meetings are scheduled for discussion with the 
consultants Building Design 2, with the general contractor, Poole Construction, and with the 
sub-contractor who is responsible for the placing of the pilings, Western Caissons, and an attempt to 
resolve the difficulties will be, I think, accomplished by that meeting. 
 
MR. HAM: — A supplementary. I asked the other day, Mr. Minister, whether in your opinion, or in 
your investigations that the pilings had failed as a result of the moving of the building site? Have you 
found anything in that regard? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I believe that there is no suggestion that has been made that the site was 
inappropriate. I think those are matters that will have to be determined by further studies by people who 
are more closely associated with it than departmental people. Consultants, in addition to Poole 
Construction and Western Caissons, are going to be in a position to deliver to the department further 
information that will, I believe, resolve the problem and give us a firm understanding as to why the 
pilings failed in this particular case. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
170 

 

MR. HAM: — A second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could 
assure me that the building in fact had not been moved, the building site? My information leads me to 
believe the building site had been originally suggested at the south end of that particular full block, and a 
result of the location over the tracks, the Government insisted it be moved to the north end of the block, 
and I was told this area of the site did not have soil samples taken and this, in fact, is why the piles 
failed. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I am not sure there is any evidence to indicate that to be the case, and as I said 
earlier, on two separate occasions, only moments ago, I think the meeting with the people who are 
responsible for the construction, the general contractor, Poole — Western Caissons, the department and 
our consultants, Building Design 2, will attempt to establish what the cause of the failure was and we 
will be in a position to evaluate at that time. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — There was a rumor regarding this entire question in Swift Current. Could 
the Minister, at a later date, bring a further report to this Legislature regarding the answering of some of 
the rumors, in effect one of them, that the wrong set of blueprints was sent out by the department to the 
contractor, Poole Construction, in Swift Current. The second rumor being there is now a court case 
pending in regard to this. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of replying to hearsay evidence and I think it would 
be most inappropriate for me to comment with respect to the rumors that may or may not have any 
validity. I think the Member has been in the House long enough to know that we should not be required 
to reply to that kind of hypothetical question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Flooding — Souris Valley 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, to the Hon. Mr. Byers. Is the Minister aware of the 
possible grave flooding danger in the Souris Valley this year, and is the Government taking any 
emergency steps in meeting the potential of a very bad flood in Souris Valley, and especially in the 
Estevan-Roche Percee area? 
 
MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, the Government is certainly aware of the grim prospects of severe 
flooding, particularly in the Souris River Basin this spring. The Souris River Basin had about twice the 
average normal rainfall last year, much of it coming in the latter part of the fall so the water table is very 
high. The snowfall throughout most of the Souris Basin this winter is about three times the normal 
snowfall. And if the Member asks if the Government has taken any action to prepare for the possibility 
of flooding, I remind him that he was at a meeting in September that I spoke at in Estevan, and at that 
time I urged the local government officials to begin preparations at that time. He was at that meeting and 
he sat by my side when I made that statement. 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
171 

 

But more seriously, Mr. Speaker, the organization in the Provincial Government, that is responsible for 
working with local people and local governments is the emergency Measures Organization which comes 
under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Municipal Affairs. The Department of the Environment, through 
its hydrology branch, operates a forecasting unit which is working closely with EMO. For the benefit of 
the Member, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell him that I met with two councils from his constituency this 
morning and we discussed a great number of the details with respect to flood preparations for Estevan. 
The hydrology branch is going to set up a flood forecasting branch in Estevan almost immediately. We 
have taken steps to . . . 
 
MR. MALONE: — Order, order! 
 
MR. BYERS: — Well he asked for preparations that we are taking and this may not interest the 
Member for Lakeview — whose constituency fronts on a river, but I am sure it interests other Members. 
We are setting up an office in Estevan to facilitate flood forecasting. The provincial Emergency 
Measures Organization is having a meeting tomorrow with local governments in the Souris Basin to 
ensure that all possible steps and precautions are taken. One area that he may be concerned about is 
Roche Percee, where dikes were built last fall. We are sending Department of Agriculture forces to 
Roche Percee to inspect those dikes and to ensure the local people that proper steps will be taken to 
ensure that those dikes hold, or try to. These are some of the things that we are doing. We have made 
provisions to cut the coal-haul road to the SPC power plant, which is always a major issue down there, a 
step that should be taken. Mr. Speaker, I didn’t want to take the time of the House, but I want to assure 
the Hon. Member that this Government is doing everything possible to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think it is obvious without the Minister stating it that the 
Government is doing everything possible. 
 
Supplementary. 
 
MR. LARTER: — The flood has passed, I won’t ask any more. 
 

Cypress Hills Provincial Park 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, a question about Cypress Hills Provincial Park. Is it true 
that a program to build a store and a program to build a cafeteria at the park has been postponed or 
cancelled? 
 
HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism & Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to 
the Hon. Member’s question, I would prefer that this be delayed until the Budget is presented. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
172 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this was in last year’s budget, was it not? The plans were 
already made for constructing in this present year and the tenders were supposed to be let early in 
December or in January. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, nevertheless we still say that perhaps we should delay with this 
until the Budget is presented. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Speaker, does this mean then . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think the Minister has given his answer. The Member for Moosomin. 
 

Deer Population 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources, the Hon. Member for Canora. I feel this is a very urgent problem, not maybe 
right now, but in the very near future. We are going to have a mass death rate in the southeast part of this 
province of our deer population. We have had heavy snowfall and I want to know what is the 
Government going to be prepared to do about it if that be the case? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, I am not aware of the 
conditions existing in that part of the province. Nevertheless, I will take note of the question. 
 

SARM Resolution on Potash 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister in charge of the 
Potash Corporation and the Premier to whom I addressed this same question last December, I direct this 
question to the Attorney General. Is the Attorney General aware that Resolution, I believe it is number 
77, that is now currently before the SARM Convention, dealing with the potash, is the deputy leader 
aware that the Government will take the same stand in the answer that the Premier gave me in 
December, should this Resolution pass in the affirmative, a simple majority? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the question last session as I recall was, what would the 
Government do if the SARM unanimously passed the motion? I think that was the source of some 
response as the Member will recall, the Premier’s answer was that if it was unanimous then we would 
have to reconsider the policy. And I think I can stand by that policy. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. This particular resolution requires a simple 
majority. Is the House Leader prepared to state what the Government would do in the event that this 
resolution did pass the convention by a simple majority? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that is a hypothetical question. You are asking me to 
comment on something that may or 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
173 

 

may not happen. We will just wait and see if it happens. All I can tell the Hon. Member is that the 
Premier gave an excellent address to a packed SARM group with a standing ovation and I am very 
optimistic. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — May I rise on a Point of Order before we proceed to the Orders of the Day? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — May I just make one point before I give you the floor. On Orders of the Day, 
yesterday the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) requested a ruling from me on a question which he had 
asked. He has agreed that he will discuss the matter with me privately rather than expect a ruling in the 
House. 
 

Tabling of Certain Documents Re Certain Agreements 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to rise on Points of Order while we are still breaking in this 
Question Period but I think the ruling you made earlier today concerns me somewhat on your ruling out 
of order on the third supplementary in the questions to the Attorney General about the agreements 
between the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party and the Government. You have indicated this was 
not of public urgency. May I, with respect, suggest to you, Sir, that in my view it is. During the last few 
days we have allegations from the Members who sit to my left, we had certain allegations by the 
Premier as to certain agreements that were made or not made as the case may be. Now I realize, of 
course, we have an opportunity to debate this on the Throne Speech Debate, however, the Attorney 
General to date has not risen to take part in that debate. I am not sure whether he is going to, it is 
perfectly within his mind as to whether he is going to speak or not. But we have been here now for 
several days, these allegations are still hanging in the air and we felt that it was time to clear up the 
situation once and for all, because the Attorney General, as I said, has not spoken in the debate and he is 
the one with the knowledge of what took place on that side of the House. I feel that these types of 
allegations hanging over the head of the Legislature are of public concern and of urgent public concern, 
because we must ensure that we govern ourselves in this House in the appropriate manner and there are 
allegations of broken agreements and so on back and forth and I think that impedes the entire business of 
this House and that these matters should be cleared up both for the purpose of the House and for the 
purpose of the public. That’s why the questions were asked today and that’s why I take exception to you 
ruling my third supplementary out of order because I felt that it wasn’t. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Any further comments? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — If I might speak to that Point of Order. I should like to agree for once with the 
Member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, may I ask that this microphone be tuned up a bit. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
174 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I report to the Member that I had it personally checked today. It’s working fine. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is there any way to have it lifted up, Mr. Speaker. It’s difficult for me to lean over. 
 
For a change I should like to agree with the Member for Regina Lakeview. I also should like these 
allegations cleared up. I should like the matter brought before this House and I am very sorry that you 
did rule the question out of order. We would have had some supplementary questions to that very 
question ourselves. We think it is a matter of urgent concern as well. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Any comments? A reply of ‘no’ was heard. 
 
As I recall, if my memory serves me correctly, the question was put to the Attorney General, is the 
Attorney General about to table the documents that the Premier referred to? The Attorney General tabled 
the documents. Then followed questions on the matter. I stated at the time, after a question, a 
supplementary and the two answers, that I was not impressed with the urgency of the matter. I was, 
earlier on in the Session, impressed with the urgency of the matter. As a matter of fact its urgency began 
to decline once the Session was in session, at that point, the urgency of it declined and I feel that any 
further discussion on the matter in this Question Period is academic discussion and is really of no 
urgency to this House. 
 

Concern Regarding Question Period 
 
MR. LANE: — On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official Opposition we would like 
to express some concern about the Question Period. The Question Period will not function with an 
absence of a large number of Cabinet Ministers. Now I realize the difficulties that the House Leader may 
be in and certain procedures were developed in the Parliament in Canada in Ottawa to deal with Cabinet 
Minister being required to be there on certain days. We found our hands tied today on several areas of 
questioning which we wanted to proceed upon, but due to the absence of Cabinet Ministers we were 
unable to do so. I should like to bring that particular concern of the official Opposition to Mr. Speaker’s 
and the House Leader’s attention. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t really know how proper it is to make a comment on this, 
but I assume you will allow me a brief response in the light of the fact that the Hon. Member . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — You are talking on what would appear to be the Point of Order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I just simply want to say, Mr. Speaker, that all Members would appreciate, I am 
sure the Member for Qu’Appelle does, because he prefaced his remarks, that it is sometimes very 
difficult for Ministers to be here not only for Question Period but for other functions of the House, 
unfortunately. I 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
175 

 

know that, for example, the Premier and the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation (Mr. Cowley) 
are both away together on a mutual matter of business which will take them away from the House for 
two or three days. The Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) as the Minister of Highways 
(Mr. Kramer) is, is involved with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and so it goes. 
Another Minister is involved in an opening in Saskatoon and that is going to happen. It happens in 
Ottawa and it happens in every other Legislative House. All that I can tell the Members of this 
Legislature is that we will have every Minister here who can be here. I think they want to be here as 
many of them as they can, but I would ask Members to understand on very many occasions it will not be 
possible to have total attendance or perhaps even as good attendance as the Members would like. 
Somebody from the front Benches will be here and we will take notice and we are obligated to answer 
on the following day or as soon as we can. I don’t think any Member will be prejudiced by that 
procedure. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — With regard to the matter I think it is borderline whether it is in fact a Point of 
Order. It may be an observation that the Interim Committee Report didn’t deal with this. In fact I don’t 
believe the committee discussed the matter at all about the attendance of Ministers. If it was discussed it 
was only in a passing fashion and nothing was put in the report about it. It is not within my power to 
obligate the Minister to be here and the Attorney General has expressed the view that he would like 
them to be here as much as possible and I think that is all we can do about the situation. I am sure that 
the Members of your caucus on the Interim Committee will raise the matter when the subject is 
considered again by the Special Committee. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address-In-Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. D. G. Banda (Redberry) for 
an Address-in-Reply. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, when I say this, this is a normal 
preoccupation with all Members when they stand in the House and say, I had not intended to participate 
in this debate. However, something happened yesterday that disturbed me and I think it is about time 
that somebody in this House brought the issue out in the daylight and started to call a spade a spade. 
There is a headline in the Leader-Post that the Liberal high jinks disturbed the Conservatives. Well, I’m 
going to tell you, Mr. Collver, the Conservative high jinks of the past week has disturbed the Liberals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will ask the Member to direct his remarks through the Speaker and if he 
wishes to refer to a Member he may refer to the Member by his constituency. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Agreed, Mr. Speaker. I should like to suggest to 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
176 

 

you, Mr. Speaker, and to Members of the House that for the past week the Liberal caucus has sat here 
silently and watched the most childish, picayune fight between the Conservatives and the NDPs that I 
have ever witnessed in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader stands on his feet and talks about the 
decorum and the dignity of this House. I suggest you have destroyed more decorum and more dignity 
yesterday in your childish behavior in the last ten days than in anything I have ever seen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The Saskatchewan Legislature has a reputation across Canada, a reputation that 
I think is enviable. Every press in the Dominion of Canada aspires when he is a rookie to come in 
Saskatchewan because of the vigor and the enthusiasm and the volatile debate that occurs. Everyone 
does. The Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly has drawn the respect and admiration of everybody 
across Canada for its behavior. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No one, Mr. Speaker, enjoys this place more than I do. Nobody enjoys the 
heckling, in fact if I stand on my feet and the people remain silent, I think I might as well stay home. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Agreed. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — That’s right. And after listening to the rubbish from the Member for Moose 
Jaw South (Mr. Snyder) yesterday, I wish I had. But to stand here and come in here and we watched an 
agreement, and that’s the reason, Mr. Speaker, we asked these letters to be tabled. I am going to read the 
letter because one of the things that disturbed me most that neither the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) 
nor the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) stood up and mentioned this letter when they spoke 
in this debate. It says: 
 

Roy, re your letter and the three clauses agreed on, this is in a line with our unanimous consent. 
Bob Larter. 

 
Unanimous consent, whereby this House was to prepare for the Budget. I wouldn’t even have minded 
and I am not sure that anybody in this House would have minded if you gentlemen had come in here and 
participated in the Throne Speech. I had never seen the debate degenerate, never seen it degenerate to 
the childish things that we have listened to in the past four or five days at the cost of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. You wanted us to sit here for seven days and debate the Throne Speech and three-quarters of 
you haven’t even spoken. And when you do get an opportunity you run out of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
177 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I suggest to you, Mr. Leader of the Conservative Party, that you go back over 
the annals of the Debates and Proceedings for the last three and one-half months and then find one 
reasonable contribution that your party has made to the Legislative debate in this Assembly about one 
major issue including the potash issue or anything else. 
 
We have stood up and listened to debate on the Throne Speech and I am not proud of the NDP either. 
Never did I see any greater . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . . never in the history of any parliament in Saskatchewan or in Canada that I 
know of, did the Premier stand on his feet on opening day with the judges and the audience, and then go 
into a vicious, personal, political attack on an individual Member. Never. And that is exactly what it 
was. We have attempted in this House, the Liberal Party, to encourage responsible debate on the Throne 
Speech to get it over and to get on with the business of the House. In fact we have only had one Member 
speak until yesterday for five minutes other than the Leader of the Opposition to establish our position. 
Then, to say that the Liberals disturbed you, I am going to tell you I think the people of Saskatchewan 
should be disturbed with you and disturbed with your behavior. I am going to tell you something, Mr. 
Leader of the Conservative Party, if you don’t like the way the House runs, then move a resolution and 
debate it in the House. Please don’t tell me about it in the corridors. Because when I leave this place I 
think it is time that the debate is finished and I don’t like a childish pout here or in the corridors either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review this. What is the supposed excuse? That the 
Conservative Party wants more research funds? I am going to tell you, you have now double the 
research staff that the Liberal caucus has, right today, right now. We have one research person for 15 
people, you have one research person for seven. That is more than 100 per cent. 
 
I am not going to talk to you about the resolution that is now before the House. I am not going to talk to 
you about the Judge Hughes Commission. I intend to make a presentation, it has been a long and 
difficult struggle for this Assembly to get research funds for the Opposition. It is not very many years 
ago when the Liberal Opposition didn’t even have an office in this building. The office was downtown 
in the McCallum Hill building. And that was, I suppose, in the early days of the NDP or the CCF. All I 
am going to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is time we stopped the childish behavior in this House and wasting 
the taxpayers’ money that we have for the last five days. I urge the Members of the Conservative caucus 
to stand on their feet when I sit down and express themselves to the importance of the Throne Speech 
Debate and why they wanted to carry this on for seven days. And the next time they want to attack the 
Liberal caucus I should like to have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of having the Leader of the 
Conservative Party or any Member of their caucus discuss publicly the behavior of the 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
178 

 

Liberal caucus in this Assembly and the behavior of the Conservative caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that I respect this House. I am going to tell you another thing, Mr. 
Leader of the Conservative Party. There has never been a man, there has never been a Premier of the 
province, there has never been a man who has been the Prime Minister of a country, that didn’t have a 
respect for Parliament. But you, I say, Sir, don’t have any respect for Parliament. The rules and the 
regulations and the operation of this Parliament, this Assembly and all parliaments have been built up 
through trial and error over hundreds of years. They are there to generate the same kind of respect for 
individual Members and for the protection of all Members of the House. You know, when you start 
talking about the heckling, yes, I like vigorous debate, and when I feel strongly about something I want 
to get up and express it in a vigorous manner. I suggest to you that any time you have got something you 
want to oppose to my socialist friends opposite, because I abhor everything they stand for, and then turn 
around and indicate something worthwhile and you’ll get the wholehearted support of this Liberal 
caucus in every way that you want it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I don’t want to continue this, I just think it was like a child picking up his 
popsicle and running home yesterday and I hope I will never witness that again. Any time you want to 
heckle me I just urge you to go ahead. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Right. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I’d appreciate it. In fact I think my best speech is under some heckling. And 
certainly when we have some one with as divergent views as those people over there and we over here, 
believe me when the Attorney General says something I don’t agree with, I will heckle him. But I also 
say this, that there is built up in this place respect for individuals, an individual who has to have a 
personal opportunity to defend himself that respect comes from the defence that he makes in this 
Assembly and not out in the corridors nor not in the caucus rooms behind his back. I hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that the kind of behavior we witness now, I am going to urge before Members of the Conservative 
caucus who haven’t spoken to stand up and speak this afternoon. I am going to urge anybody over on the 
other side of the House who hasn’t spoken to speak on something worthwhile and, as I say, not the 
rubbish we listened to yesterday. Let’s get this voted on, let’s dispense with this Throne Speech and then 
get on with the business. We have got a lot of Bills that we can at least proceed with until the Budget 
Speech comes down next week. And don’t let anybody suggest to you that the Attorney General and the 
Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) could not have presented the Budget. They wanted to carry on the 
childish fight and embarrass the Conservative Party as much as the Conservative Party tried to 
embarrass them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — The only sufferers, Mr. Speaker, were the people of Saskatchewan and I 
suggest it is time we put a stop 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
179 

 

to this childish behavior. I suggest to the Conservative Leader and the Conservative caucus that they 
grow up and remember that this is a parliament and if they want to speak, speak in here, express their 
views, I’ll accept their criticism and I will be glad to defend myself when the time comes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on my own accord and I wish to rise and 
speak in the Throne Debate. Perhaps for the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley I should read from the 
Rules and Procedures under Section 18, Decorum No. 3: 
 

When a Member is speaking no Member shall interrupt him except to raise a Point of Order nor 
pass between him and the Chair. 

 
He states he has been here longer than all of us and I agree he has been. He has been a very good 
parliamentarian in his own right but perhaps he should read that book again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should begin at the beginning by obtaining the right to represent my constituency 
of Swift Current. I, as an MLA, believe all MLAs are sincere and dedicated and wish to represent their 
constituencies well. I came to this Assembly expecting to find Opposition Members criticizing in a 
constructive manner and, of course, the Government willing to accept at least some criticism in good 
faith. Instead, to my dismay, I have discovered an arrogant government when one must count the fingers 
of a Cabinet Minister at his suggestion after this gentleman’s handshake. I have discovered a 
government that makes a mockery of reasonable suggestions and refuses except on one occasion and 
may I remind the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley again that it was his caucus that made agreements 
that suggested the amendments to The Residential Tenancies Act and that was all that was passed 
insofar as amendments were concerned on the three major bills. Some observers say that this was the 
most arrogant Government they can remember in all their years involved in this Legislature. I can’t 
judge, I can only repeat what I hear. It seems most unfortunate that both the Government and the 
Members to my right appear to be caught up in a political gamesmanship and we just heard some. 
Criticism has reached a point where most speeches are composed entirely of personal attacks with little 
or no productivity. I am convinced we are elected to debate, I agree, Mr. Member, discuss and attempt to 
arrive at reasonable conclusions and answers, not to delay, obstruct or ridicule or not to listen. It appears 
both Government and the official Opposition have been caught up so long in this game that they cannot 
even accept that it exists. This caucus is not afraid to admit that we are wrong and as the Member for 
Estevan indicated the other day, God help us when we can’t admit we are wrong in a democracy. 
 
Perhaps I am naive and disillusioned but it seems that every time I spend time away from this 
Legislature, and I have respect for this Legislature, I realize there must be a better way. This much is a 
guarantee, when the Progressive Conservative Government is elected in 1979 there will be a change. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
180 

 

MR. HAM: — Probably the most common concerns expressed to me by my constituents is the lack of 
facilities at Swift Current. The citizens at large desire far more dentists, a second TV service and indoor 
pools and many other advantages so common to larger centres in Saskatchewan. You may ask how does 
the provincial Government effect these changes, quite simply to allow reasonable growth, a consistent 
growth in Saskatchewan through an atmosphere of confidence. I know that in the last four years our 
Saskatchewan population has increased somewhat but it has never exceeded the national average for the 
last 40 years. It is the only province in Canada to have a percentage decrease. 
 
The Government enjoys comparing our situation to Alberta and, believe me, so do I. My city and 
Lethbridge were approximately the same size in 1939. Lethbridge has a poorer quality of farm land in 
the district, hit as badly in the 30s as Swift Current but under successive governments which allow 
people to succeed with confidence Lethbridge has grown to approximately 50,000 people. They now 
boast of all the advantages that Swift Current desires plus they obtained our western Canada hockey 
league team mainly due to its arena and its crowds. Everyone and everything must grow, yet our 
Government insists they know best. 
 
Bill 42 was successful in forcing many families out of Swift Current. Today production is so 
unpredictable that no one in the oil production business has any confidence for the future. This problem 
was not only caused by an NDP Government but also a Liberal regime in Ottawa. Both of these 
Governments, in which I see very little difference, have convinced me that they know better how to 
control the public lives in the future than the public do themselves. Without a directional change 
regarding provincial diversification in the industry and the climate of confidence, this province can be in 
very great difficulty. It concerns me very deeply. This Government boasts of a bright economic picture 
in Saskatchewan and that is very good. But this Government did not assist the growth of wealth in 
Saskatchewan. It was simply a world demand for grain and I am very concerned when prices fall and 
they will some day, the economic climate in Saskatchewan will be terrible. 
 
History has shown us that our economy rises and falls too greatly and without some stability, now the 
potash industry reflects this aggravated situation. Our Government’s answer is to frighten off any 
potential investors, not to encourage them. Generally this business goes to Alberta, and yes, I will make 
those comparisons with Alberta that the Saskatchewan NDP doesn’t like to hear. 
 
Alberta provincial tax 26 per cent, Saskatchewan provincial tax 40 per cent and announced it’s going up. 
Alberta sales tax nil, Saskatchewan five per cent. Alberta crime rate per 100,000, 1.9, Saskatchewan’s 
crime rate per 100,000, 2.6. Alberta average annual income $7,137, Saskatchewan average annual 
income $6,606. Alberta percentage of total Canadian earning over $25,000, 7.39, in Saskatchewan 
percentage of total Canadians earning over $25,000, 3.57. Alberta average weekly salary or wage $200, 
Saskatchewan average weekly wages or salary $181. Alberta education expense per pupil — and we 
boast so much on how much we spend on our students — Alberta spends $1,109, Saskatchewan spends 
$958. We boast so much in Saskatchewan and we should, 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
181 

 

how we protect our pensioners. Alberta guaranteed monthly income to pensioners, including federal aid, 
singles $255, couples $495. In Saskatchewan, single $233 and couples $480. Alberta, let’s use medicare, 
let’s use the example of doctors and people, free or otherwise. Alberta, number of persons per doctor 
667, Saskatchewan 729. Mr. Speaker, this comparison was only brought out as a result of the continual 
references by Members opposite. 
 
However, I can not leave these comparisons until I complete the civil service comparison made by the 
Minister of Highways the other day. I question whether he used Crown corporation employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before closing I commend the Government choosing Swift Current for the 1976 Summer 
Games. It is commendable that this event can be located throughout Saskatchewan and all centres. Mr. 
Speaker, as much as I feel we have too much government today the Throne Speech and its limitations 
are good. 
 
However, I cannot support the Government and cannot support the Throne Speech. 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate 
this afternoon I want to join with other Members in congratulating both the mover and the seconder for 
their noble contribution to this Throne Speech Debate. The Member for Athabasca (Mr. Thompson) one 
of the newly elected Members from northern Saskatchewan has certainly proven to be in the short time 
he has been in this Assembly an able spokesman for the people of his constituency and I know that he is 
going to speak for them and act for them just as ably as he does in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — I want to also congratulate the Member for Redberry (Mr. Banda) who has certainly 
proven in the time that he has been here to be a very able spokesman for the farm people and for the 
people who live in our small communities. He is able to articulate well on their behalf. 
 
I want to join with all Members in offering our sincere wishes to Dr. Stephen Worobetz as he steps 
down as Lieutenant-Governor of this Province. He has certainly given loyal service to this province in 
that capacity in the six years that he served in that capacity. We wish him well in his new endeavors and 
his retirement. I want to join in extending congratulations to His Honour Mr. George Porteous on his 
appointment as Lieutenant-Governor of this province and I’m certain that he will exercise his 
responsibilities in this position in a statesmanlike and diligent manner. 
 
To the other Members who have participated in this debate, I want to offer my congratulations for their 
contribution large or small. 
 
I know there has been some debate going on in this House as to the length of time that should be 
devoted to this particular Throne Speech debate. Mr. Speaker, as a Member of this Assembly, who like 
the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
182 

 

and other Members of this Assembly had the privilege to be school teachers for a number of years and 
who endeavored in our small way to cultivate an interest among our young people in the parliamentary 
process, the Legislature, Parliament and its function. 
 
I am somewhat appalled and stricken by the attitude that has been displayed by some of the Opposition 
Members with respect to participation to this Throne Speech Debate. They lament that the Throne 
Speech document itself may not have been as extensive as it might be. I think it is a sad commentary on 
our parliamentary system when Members arrived in the Legislature, having been endorsed by their 
constituents, some with sizeable pluralities or majorities, that they don’t recognize that the Throne 
Speech Debate is a forum and a proper forum to debate any and every issue that affects the welfare of 
each and every single citizen and community within this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — It is an opportunity for them to stand up and to criticize or to applaud the operation of 
any government program. These people sought election to this Chamber far less then one year ago and I 
am certain that they must have made some commitments to their constituents that if they would simply 
put their trust in them for three or four years that they would give it their best and that they would 
deliver for their constituents to ensure that government programs, whether they sat in opposition or on 
the government side, that their constituents were receiving a fair deal and a fair share of the government 
programs that are here. 
 
I wonder what they were saying about such programs as the Land Bank ten months ago. We heard some 
criticisms of that program last year and yet scarcely a Member has risen in this House where he can be 
challenged to substantiate his charges of what he thinks of the Land Bank program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — One of the greatest programs since The Homestead Act which I know in my own 
constituency has been responsible for about 40 or 45 young farmers getting established on the land and 
several receiving assistance under the Farmstart program. I wonder what they said as they went about 
the small towns. Did they concur with the government programs of the community capital fund, winter 
works programs, and the dental programs and all of these? And yet we have scarcely heard a word from 
one of them to offer their comments or analysis of those particular programs. 
 
There is still time, Mr. Speaker. We hope that we will hear a more penetrating analysis than we have 
been afforded the opportunity in the last few days. 
 
I want to direct a remark or two to the previous speaker, the Hon. Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham). 
I know that he is a new Member, and I know the difficulties of speaking in the Legislature for the first 
term or two. But I was somewhat shocked at his comment that this is an arrogant government. Well, I 
want to say to the Hon. Member for Swift Current that 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
183 

 

we, since we came to power in 1971, have taken some very major steps to open up the doors of 
government so that the individual and organizations have access to the Government on a daily basis. 
They now have access to the Government as to how we can improve the laws and the programs of the 
province. I don’t know, throughout the course of the year, how many delegations this Cabinet meets. 
They are very, very numerous. This Government has instituted a system of regional cabinet meetings, 
where individuals and organizations and councils can come to the Cabinet and say these are the needs of 
our community and our region. And the Cabinet Ministers travel throughout the area they are visiting. 
They have been very beneficial in developing and improving programs. 
 
We have set up many advisory councils. I doubt if there are any Ministers in this House who do not have 
an advisory council. A group of citizens who give their time and they’re rewarded with little more than 
their expenses to advise the Government on a great number of issues. I have one in my Environment 
Advisory Council. 
 
Our Government does not believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Cabinet Chamber and the confines where the 
public service work are the sole source of all wisdom. We are fortunate to have hundreds of people in 
this province who are skilled and talented and are willing to offer their advice and suggestions to the 
Government for programs that will benefit all of society. And I think he should have explained in a little 
more detail whether he regards these steps as marks of arrogance. 
 
The establishment of the Provincial Inquiry Centre means that each department of the Government, 
virtually each Minister’s office, is as close to the citizen as his own living room. These I think, Mr. 
Speaker, are the marks of a responsive and concerned government interested in people and not an 
arrogant government as the Hon. Member for Swift Current suggests. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BYERS: — He spoke of lack of facilities in his community, of the need for dentists and the need 
for swimming pools. What a more golden opportunity was there for the Hon. Member for Swift Current, 
and this could apply to all his colleagues, to rise and comment on where he feels the deficiencies are in 
the conditional grants that we have instituted for urban government right down to the smallest organized 
hamlet in this province amount to $20 for every man, woman and child. 
 
In addition there is the Community Capital Fund. And then he started to compare some of our programs 
to Alberta. But he missed one. He was talking about taxation and this and that and what he neglected to 
point out to the House is that in Saskatchewan medical care premiums are only known now in the 
history books of this province. Whereas in the province of Alberta they are still $12.40 per month per 
family. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Members, many of the Members are new to this Assembly. 
Therefore, I should like to devote some of my remarks to the . . . 
 
MR. MALONE: — . . . on decorum . . . 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
184 

 

MR. BYERS: — No, I am not an authority on decorum and therefore, I will not transgress on areas 
where I am only slightly conversant. 
 
On some of the programs within the agencies and departments have come under my jurisdiction, the 
Department of the Environment, the Department of Telephones. 
 
First of all I want to turn to a few issues relating to the Department of the Environment. When our New 
Democratic Government was first elected in 1971, Mr. Speaker, we were charged with the ten point 
program of environmental protection and improvement, based upon resolutions that originated in 
previous constituency conventions of our party. In our first term of office we delivered on each and 
every one of those. When we sought re-election this past June, four additional and more specific 
objectives were added to the list. Once again they were based upon resolutions approved at our party 
convention. I want to go over just some of the major programs that we initiated in the first four years 
and will continue to expand in the coming term of office and terms beyond that. 
 
We were one of the first, but not the first, to establish a full scale Department of the Environment in 
1972 and gave it the job of managing our province’s land, air and water resources. And in approaching 
environmental protection we put our money where our mouth was. In 1972-73 the initial budget of the 
department was $2.1 million. The current year 1975-76 it is $5.6 million allocated for the job. 
 
What are some of the problems that we have tended to address ourselves to? We know that potential 
pollution from new livestock operations is now under control by means of a system of permits. While 
granted by the Department of Agriculture these must first be investigated and approved by a number of 
environmental protection specialists. In some cases assistance for relocation of those intensive livestock 
operations is available as part of the Qu’Appelle Implementation Project. The Department of Agriculture 
specialists here have conducted a detailed survey of all the existing intensive livestock operations in the 
Qu’Appelle Basin and this survey shows that all of them contribute to water pollution and corrective 
measures will be required. 
 
Thirdly, all major new industrial developments are now evaluated for their effects on the ecology before 
the introduction. Many major new development proposals in Saskatchewan during recent years, have 
been put forward by public agencies. And it is government policy that environmental impact studies 
must be made in advance and that the cost of environmental protection or restoration must be included 
in the total cost of any such projects. These public agencies have co-operated with us in finding out just 
what is needed in such studies. 
 
The time has now come to set standards which other public agencies in the private sector can clearly 
understand and can be reasonably expected to follow. So we are currently establishing a new branch in 
the Environment Department and its sole job will be to set guidelines for necessary environmental 
impact studies for any new public or private project that could have environmental effects. And its 
second job will be to review and make judgments upon such assessment studies. 
 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
185 

 

We feel that developers, both public and private, are entitled to know exactly what is required by way of 
environment assessment when they are making their own calculations. Our department must have its 
own experts acting as stern watchdogs of the public interests. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, we have greatly expanded our monitoring systems to measure and to report 
changes in environmental conditions and to provide early warnings of potential problems in air, water 
and soil pollution. 
 
Air pollution inventories have been completed for all Saskatchewan cities. Working in co-operation with 
the federal authority monitors for measuring suspended particulate matter are now in operation in all 
cities except Lloydminster. Monitors for detecting carbon monoxide and other potentially dangerous 
gases are being installed as well. 
 
Now securing proper background levels against which we can measure changes in water pollution is, of 
course, a far different matter. Before we can measure change or pollution in the way which will permit 
legally enforceable corrective action we must know all we can about the present quality of our water. 
During 1973-74 we took about 47,000 analyses and these were conducted by provincial agencies on 
some 2,450 samples of water. This is a 56 per cent increase in the number of samples measured and 
because they were measured for more information it is really an 88 per cent increase in the scope and the 
depth of our information. 
 
In the area of water pollution we know that the main source of the nutrient material that causes algae 
growth is inadequately treated effluent sewage that is delivered into our water systems mainly from our 
larger urban centres. 
 
Other potential pollutant sources include industrial operations, poorly located feeding operations. We 
can claim, Mr. Speaker, with some satisfaction that wherever there is a community water system we 
now have facilities for at least the primary treatment of sewage. But that is not enough. In addition to the 
expense of additional treatment facility to remove about 95 per cent of the nutrient material in Regina 
sewage we are developing, in co-operation with communities, plans for the use of effluent for direct 
irrigation. One of these projects is at Swift Current. In our plans for the use of effluent for direct 
irrigation and we are experimenting with devices such as the injection of liquid alum into sewage 
lagoons of smaller communities. 
 
One of the major changes, and we made this in the fall of 1975, was in the area of air pollution. We have 
established a discharge permit system that will apply to all new operations and which can be extended, if 
necessary, to existing operations. We believe that this will enable us to safeguard our air in advance and 
provide a more effective procedure for policing existing problem areas. 
 
We have developed a model noise bylaw to deal with the problem of what is an acceptable community 
noise level. This bylaw is now prepared and officials from my department are discussing this bylaw with 
municipal officials. Cities like Saskatoon and Regina have already expressed an interest in adopting and 
using such a bylaw. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
186 

 

Sixth, we have banned the non-returnable bottles and cans for soft drinks and despite all the concerns 
expressed in advance, we think that this has been a clear-cut success. Surveys show a major decline in 
pop and beer bottles in our roadside litter. 
 
One of our seventh commitments was for a pledge that calls for an educational campaign dealing with 
pollution. We have made a major effort to educate people about pollution and what can be done about it. 
We certainly met little difficulty in honoring this pledge. Our only problem is meeting the demand. 
 
Starting a few months after we set up a public education information branch we got a trickle of letters 
requesting information about the environment and environment problems and that trickle has mounted 
so we are now averaging well over 300 requests a month. I may say, Mr. Speaker, that we get requests 
from school students and others, not only in this province, but we got a good number of requests from 
people in other jurisdictions, a good number from Alberta. 
 
In the summer of 1974 we sponsored some 16 meetings in various Saskatchewan communities to 
encourage citizen participation in environmental resource conservation policy as a follow-up to the 
resources program. Working in co-operation with the Department of Education our department has been 
responding to a growing demand for special teaching material, particularly for increased use of outdoor 
education concepts and for direct requests from students. 
 
Another program well underway is the continuing monitoring program at the sites of all our major 
industries. Potash is one example. The results of such monitoring to date showed two things. 
 
1.  That the industry is generally keeping within the bounds of present provincial standards. 
 
2.  That we are detecting evidence that indicates that our standards may not be strict enough. 
 
I referred earlier to the establishment of the Independent Environment Advisory Council. It is one of 
these independent advisory councils established by this Government to assist and advise the Minister on 
an independent basis. Our council now has its own funds and its own staff. It is composed of interested 
and capable citizens representatives of all walks of life in Saskatchewan. I am very pleased that Dr. 
Evelyn Jonescu is prepared to accept the chairmanship in the past year to succeed Dr. Stan Rowe, who 
served very ably since the inception of the Council, because Dr. Rowe was accepting other 
responsibilities and found that he could not continue the workload this year. 
 
This council deals directly with me as Minister, has its own funds, has its own research capabilities and 
it has shown some resolve to set its own priorities, to question without fear and to prod when it feels 
prodding is necessary. 
 
In addition to that we built up a new central planning agency of government which will, as a continuing 
function, assess the long-term environmental effects of all government programs. This overall 
government policy decision results in an increased awareness of environmental safeguards in all 
government 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
187 

 

departments and agencies and Crown corporations. 
 
Let me just bring to the attention of the House, Mr. Speaker, four additional points that we stressed in 
the 1975 election and to which we will be turning our attention in this term of office. 
 
First of all we pledged to publicize acceptable standards of noise and pollution levels, water, soil and air, 
to require that all current and future developments adhere to these standards. Now we have published air 
improved purity standards and as reported earlier we have machinery for enforcement in operation. We 
have set and published water quality criteria which are now being used as guidelines in our continuing 
supervision of waterworks and sewage works and in our monitoring of industrial effluent. Setting soil 
criteria is a bit more complex. We now have approval power over the location of intensive agricultural 
processes and the location of garbage disposal areas. We are keeping in close touch with researchers in 
other departments, who have the authority to licence the use of biocides and pesticides and who are 
charged with the duty of measuring the effective fallout from things such as potash, salt, etc. 
 
Secondly, when it comes to recycling, here again, we are involved in shared responsibility. Operation 
Recycle, under the Department of Industry and Commerce is well known. Highways is working on the 
use of shredded tire rubber. To date experiments in recycling paper have not been too successful due to 
the quantities available and the cost of separation and the cost of transport. We think that our bottle 
return program has made a major contribution in the recycling of glass. We are keeping a very careful 
eye on current experiments in the use of organic matter for fertilizer and power. 
 
In the area of cleanup for litter we have sponsored the establishment in Saskatchewan of Outdoors on 
Litter. This was a non-profit organization that has already made an impact on cleanup in British 
Columbia and Alberta. And we feel that this program was very worthwhile and are considering it again. 
 
With respect to protected areas, we know that we have in this province a number of areas that, I believe, 
the International Biological Program has identified as areas that could be set aside as protected areas or 
ecological reserves. We made a commitment in 1975 to enter this field. We are now looking at this 
program and will be giving it serious consideration in this term of office. 
 
Well, those are some of the programs that we have underway, Mr. Speaker. There are many others. With 
respect to environment I want to turn to some of the other areas of environment that may interest, I am 
sure, our Members of this Assembly. 
 
The past few years were characterized by very serious flooding of agricultural lands in the province and 
the associated problem as a result of the demand for drainage works and as a result of organized and 
unauthorized ditching, the Government has held meetings with concerned farm organizations and local 
governments on the matter. Government departments have been working on activities aimed at trying to 
make more clear the role or the position of each department of the Government and to prepare an overall 
government approach to resolving the problem, is now being developed for consideration by the various 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
188 

 

organizations concerned. This is how we plan to approach this problem. 
 
First, the approach will involve the setting up of a Ministers’ Committee involving the Minister of the 
Environment, Municipal Affairs, Agriculture and Tourism and Renewable Resources, who will oversee 
a study of the total water control program in the province, but focussing on drainage and flooding 
problems. Under the Ministers’ Committee there will be an interdepartmental working committee of 
officials from these four departments. This working committee will be chaired by a co-ordinator to be 
hired by the Department of the Environment. This committee will review the problems, the policies, the 
ongoing problems and legislation, after consulting with groups such as the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipal 
Association, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the C and D Association and other affected parties to 
report and make recommendations on the total provincial program. The schedule for this task will call 
for the review to be completed in October of 1976, for recommendations and an outline of legislative 
requirements hopefully for the session a year from now. We’re considering holding public meetings this 
summer and with a view to getting a new program implemented at the earliest possible date. 
 
I want to say a word about the Souris River study, Mr. Speaker. All Members of this House I am sure 
are aware of the Qu’Appelle Valley study which was one of the first major water studies in this province 
that developed and proposed a development plan for the citizens and the communities in the Qu’Appelle 
Valley. We are now in our third year of implementing the recommendations of the Qu’Appelle Report. 
 
A year ago we authorized a start on the Souris River study. To Members I draw attention, particularly to 
the Hon. Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that in the 1974 budget, the Province of Saskatchewan had 
funds earmarked for a start on the Souris River study, before we had reached an agreement with Ottawa 
and Manitoba to participate in that study. In October of 1974 we finally concluded an agreement with 
the Federal Government, with Manitoba, joint federal-provincial study, which is really similar to the 
Qu’Appelle study to prepare a development plan for the Souris River. That study will look at a number 
of areas. It is going to look at such questions as where can channel improvements be undertaken to avert 
the kind of flooding that can occur with unexpected and heavy rainfalls. It will deal with the question of 
how to improve the water supply for municipal water systems and industry and commercial purposes. It 
will hopefully identify areas where recreation facilities can be improved and expanded. It will look at 
the possibilities for irrigation. In all there are eight or nine segments to this study. 
 
This study will cost in the order of $1 million. It was take until 1977 to complete. I know there have 
been criticisms of this study, some of them valid, some of them not so valid. I want to say that the 
people who are doing the study for the most part are public servants in the Federal Government, many of 
them in the PFRA organization. Others are government employees from Manitoba. Many others are our 
own public servants in various departments of government. They have for the most part full time jobs 
and they are doing the Souris Study Development Plan as part, as one of their many tasks as public 
servants. It is, therefore, 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
189 

 

not possible to complete the study earlier than by the end of 1977 and for financial reasons because we 
are in a three party agreement. Another reason is that many of the areas that are being examined, which 
are the effects on fish spawning grounds and things of that nature simply cannot be examined in a one or 
two year period. 
 
I want to say that the detailed study program has been formulated in accordance with the objectives of 
the study agreement and the majority of tasks within the program have been assigned. I would be quite 
glad to provide to the Member of Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) because the Souris River basin 
takes in the three constituencies that are served by Conservative Members in this Chamber, 
Souris-Cannington, Estevan and Moosomin. The majority of the tasks have been assigned and I would 
be more than happy to provide you with information as to how this study is being organized. The 
responsibilities that PFRA are going to undertake and that Manitoba will undertake and our people will 
undertake have been laid out. 
 
As I pointed out the majority of tasks within the program then have been assigned. Secondly, the actual 
tasks will be undertaken by government agencies and only in a few cases by private consultants so the 
people who are doing this study are also the people who are doing the flood forecasting and they are 
working at many, many tasks. 
 
The studies are pretty well on schedule. They are within the budget allowed and we feel that satisfactory 
progress is being made. The study board has held three public meetings in the basin, one at Estevan, one 
at Weyburn and one at Melita, Manitoba. A fourth public meeting is planned for next week in Souris, 
Manitoba. 
 
At these meetings the program has been outlined and briefs and public concerns have been heard and 
discussed by the board regarding water related problems in the Souris River basin. Information 
brochures about the study program are being prepared and they will be distributed soon. As the studies 
get further along and solutions to the problem are being developed and are being assessed, there will be 
further regular meetings and involvement of the public to ensure that the overall development plan 
arising from the study will be acceptable to the people living in the basin. 
 
Water studies are not easy and I’m sure that the Hon. Members for Lumsden and Lakeview will testify 
to this. That when you ask a group of consultants or a group of engineers to tackle a very large water 
management problem over a large area and recommendations are formulated, we then prefer to go 
through the process of taking the proposals one by one and referring them to local groups and local 
governments to see if there is agreement. This is not an easy process. It is very time consuming and it 
takes a long time and urban governments and provincial governments have to fit the developments, the 
programs that are being undertaken into their spending plans for any given year. I think the word that I 
would want to pass on is that they do take time, but if we are dealing with a problem that has been here 
for 60 or 70 years, I know that if we are faced with floods that sometimes people may become impatient 
and cry for immediate action. But is important, I think, that the overall development plan be worked out, 
that it be discussed thoroughly with the citizens who are going to have to live with it, 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
190 

 

in order that we can come up with a plan that is going to be satisfactory in the long run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a good many issues that could be discussed in this Throne Speech Debate. I want 
to assure you that I would like to discuss other things, but I understand there are other Members who 
want to speak and deal with telephones and other matters at a later time. I will be supporting the Motion 
on the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise and speak in this 
Throne Speech debate on behalf of the people of the Yorkton constituency. I too, should like to 
congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Banda and Mr. Thompson 
for the very fine job they did. Their constituents can be justly proud of their work here. 
 
I should also like to congratulate the Blakeney Government for the fine job that they have done in 
directing the recovery of this province, the economic recovery of this province since 1971. True there 
has been an influx of money due to the upturn of the agricultural economy, but I believe our Premier and 
his Government have been and are responsible for the great deal of prosperity of our province. 
 
I look at SEDCO under the able leadership of the Hon. Member for Tisdale (Mr. Messer). The Hon. 
Members opposite of both stripes and the stripes look all pretty much the same from here, wish to cast 
aspersions on the SEDCO officials and the people who work there. They try hard to sow seeds of 
suspicion to blacken the names of the officials and the Government. But let’s just look at a few of the 
statistics for the year 1974. In that year 2,410 jobs were directly created by SEDCO activities. Then after 
that approximately another 7,000 people who were needed to serve the people in those jobs directly 
created and you can see that SEDCO is having a great beneficial effect on the lives of the people of this 
province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation set aside $740,189 for losses in 1974, but only 
$43,670 was written off in losses in that year. $43,670 when the total assets of SEDCO are $94 million. 
That represents a loss of .003 per cent on the assets. There may be greater or lesser losses in different 
years, but it remains for us to decide, it remains for the people of this province to decide whether we 
want to continue to see that 8,000 to 9,000 jobs are created in one year. We on this side see that we 
believe that the operations of SEDCO should be continued to assist in the maintenance and the growth 
of small businesses in this province. 
 
Let us compare the NDP policy such as illustrated in SEDCO with the former Saskatchewan Liberal 
Government and its industrial policies. First, I would like to have you consider the Athabasca pulp mill. 
The present Leader of the Opposition signed a binding agreement that would establish that pulp mill in 
the dying weeks of the 1971 election campaign. Even when the present Member stated that his party was 
unalterably opposed to it. Let us look at some parts of that agreement. 
 
The province was to put up 70 per cent of the cost of that 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
191 

 

mill and yet was to receive in return only 30 per cent of the mill ownership. That’s what I call a good 
business deal, especially for the private company that was to build the mill. There was a road grant of $3 
million to the company to build roads. The province was to put up, to build a natural gas line for the 
proposed pulp mill. The company that was to operate the mill was to receive the contract to construct the 
mill and thus they could use the construction profits to pay for their equity in that mill. The company 
was to be allowed to cut down trees and would be charged only half the regular stumpage charge that 
was to be levied at the time. Fantastic cutting rights were given to that company. They received the sole 
cutting rights in an area the size of the Province of New Brunswick. Cutting rights were given to that 
company for 30 years and moreover they had the option of keeping those rights for another 20 years. 
Talk about a waste and the squandering of public funds. Talk about a monopoly. Fifty years of virtual 
complete control over an area of this province the size of New Brunswick. 
 
What rights were given to the small businessman, the small logging operators? They had none. All rights 
were turned over to a large, foreign, multinational corporation. With such a squandering of the tax 
dollars of Saskatchewan, with such giveaways of the effective control of the Saskatchewan land to a 
foreign based company, it is small wonder that Saskatchewan voters turned out en masse to oust the 
perpetrators of such infamous acts in 1971. 
 
There have been difficulties and failures, but the failures are the fault of the economic system in which 
we work. In this economic system we are taught to act in a dog eat dog and a devil take the hindmost 
way, and many companies fail. Companies that have no connection with SEDCO by the way. Every 
time a private company fails or goes bankrupt, you and I, the citizens of this province pay. We pay 
because the banks involved with the bankruptcy, after all they have quite often loaned money to the 
operations, pass the losses on to the next customer and business operators and hence on to you and me. 
So the loss is passed on to virtually everyone in the province. We pay unemployment insurance benefits 
for the people thrown out of work. Often in many cases, we’ll pay social welfare. We pay plenty for all 
those failures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let us turn for a moment to education. Once again as a teacher I should like to congratulate the 
Blakeney Government and the past and present Minister of Education in this Government for the 
excellent work they have done and are doing in improving the education system of this province. 
 
I listened with some amazement to the points raised by the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. 
Bailey) and I’m very sorry to see that he’s not in his seat, and some of the points he raised yesterday. Let 
me present a few points for his benefit and maybe, Mr. Speaker, some of his colleagues can convey 
them to him. 
 
Let me repeat for the benefit of that Hon. Member what I had to say in the Throne Speech debate last 
fall, since he quoted me. 
 

Our Government (I said at that time) is willing to make change, but only after consultation with 
teachers and trustees. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
192 

 

And this, of course, gives the lie to the arrogance charge of the other Hon. Member. 
 

Let us look at just a few of the changes that have been made from the inflexible days of the 
previous government. 

 
Gone is the pupil-teacher ratio as a means of determining school grants. (I did not say that there was 
no pupil-teacher ratio.) Gone is the pupil-teacher ratio as a means of determining school grants, (I 
continued). By the noises made in the benches opposite one would think that Liberals would be 
willing to put teachers in the classroom with no students at all and still pay them increased salaries. 
Teachers are willing to teach students, that is their job. No matter how low the number in class, 
there would always be a pupil-teacher ratio. I don’t say that everything in education is rosy, I just 
say that there have been impressive improvements. 

 
The old pupil-teacher ratio didn’t harm the teachers. They simply adapted to the load and were able 
to do less for the student. It was the student who suffered. There are still Hon. Members on the 
benches opposite who were a part of the Government that so rigidly applied the old 25 to 1 ratio. As 
a result I had classes that ran as high as 45. Today, I teach classes with enrolments as low as 16. 

 
Let me continue now with a few more points for the edification of the Hon. Member for Eston-Elrose 
and any other teacher Members opposite too, if they choose. 
 
Perhaps the Hon. Member for Nipawin was right when he said his colleague didn’t know of the March 
31 deadline for the school boards to submit mill rates. He doesn’t seem to remember what was going on 
in the education field in the late 1960s. In the fall of 1969 it was announced that the pupil-teacher ratio 
would be increased to 25 to 1. It would be in effect in the fall of 1970 for the 1970-71 school year. 
 
Dave Steuart claimed the 25 to 1 ratio meant placing two more pupils in each classroom. He said an 
increase of two would mean a saving of $68 million. In fact the increase was not a simple matter of two 
more pupils in each room. On the basis of average it would be at least three. When the method of 
calculation is examined it becomes obvious that in fact a ratio of closer to 35 to 1 was the result. In 
determining the ratio of students to teachers, the number of teachers was considered as not only in 
classroom academic teachers, but also those whose duties keep them from what is normally thought as 
teaching administrators, band teachers, physical education teachers, and others in supporting roles, 
guidance counsellors, psychologists. Thus there are 25 pupils for every principal whose office work kept 
him from the classroom. Twenty-five pupils for every band teacher, guidance counsellor, whose work 
was not lecturing. All of those pupils had to be shared among those teachers whose work was in class. 
This meant that the actual ratio was substantially higher than it appeared at first glance. Because there 
were more students in each class, individuals received less attention. With the teacher unable to assist 
those with problems as much as before which in itself was often too little, the quality of 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
193 

 

of education declined. This decline was especially hard on those with difficulties, slow learners, the 
partially deaf, children with problems at home or emotional barriers. To implement the new ratio, the 
grants were paid on the basis of recognized teachers. Every unit or board of education which wished to 
retain a larger staff than that recognized by the government must pay for extra teachers from local 
property taxes. The old shift-the-tax-from-the-people-with-the-money-to-the-people-on-lower-incomes 
trick. 
 
Most school jurisdictions were under heavy pressure to ease the burden of education costs on property 
tax, therefore, the alternative of raising taxes to retain teaching staff was very unattractive indeed. The 
result was that teachers were fired and ones not hired to replace the ones retiring. It was estimated that 
between 600 and 1,500 teaching positions disappeared in one year. Find the statistics to prove otherwise. 
Most of the newly graduated teachers from the university were not able to find teaching positions in 
Saskatchewan as a result. With teachers being laid off and no replacements for those retiring, duties in 
the school had to be shuffled around among the staff that was left. Classes with low enrolments were 
eliminated. Some classes were transferred between schools. Programs such as guidance, music, physical 
education, art courses, computer science were cut back or in some cases classes were done away with. 
Less time was allotted for administration which meant that work wasn’t done there either. Or the teacher 
had to work longer hours to keep up. 
 
One of the ironies of the pupil-teacher ratio is that it was applied at the same time the comprehensive 
schools were making their impact felt. Because of the cutbacks forced by their ratio, many new course 
offerings in the comprehensive schools disappeared. I teach in a comprehensive school, I saw them 
disappear. 
 
In smaller communities the schools were closed so that classes would be combined with others in larger 
centres to meet the ratio. Thus, this policy added to the pressures of the small communities. Virtually 
every organization connected or associated with education protested the use of the pupil-teacher ratio. 
The then, Saskatchewan Teachers Federation president, Harry Walker stated, "The slavish 
implementation of the ratio would result in wholesale closing of schools, cutting school programs, and 
serious reduction of the teaching force." That is what Harry said. 
 
The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association said, "In effect, there will be no saving in the total 
expenditures. The burden will be merely shifted from the provincial tax base to the local tax base. In 
larger centres this meant fewer options and only partial utilization of the multi-million dollar complexes. 
In rural areas we feel that there will be reversion to the single academic offering for students, a practice 
which is contrary to present acceptable developments in education." 
 
All manner of other groups have voiced concern over the effects of the ratio. From students in Saskatoon 
who held a demonstration, to local school boards and teachers, both as individuals and as associations. 
 
Let me remind teachers opposite of the low morale in the teaching force in those days. Not only were 
they faced with 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
194 

 

the iniquitous pupil-teacher ratio they faced considerable trouble in salary negotiations. For example, in 
1969-70, the average teacher’s salary was $7,764; in 1970-71 school year, the average salary was 
$7,963. An increase of 2.56 per cent at a time when the cost of living was going up at a rate of five and 
six per cent. Teachers enjoyed those years. 
 
The Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) the now defender of the teacher, complains about 
the slowness of the teacher salary negotiations. Yet he says nothing about the fact that many union 
groups have negotiated a contract in the private sector for over a year before it was settled. He says 
nothing about the fact that one union group negotiating in Toronto found that they did not have a job 
after a year of struggle to raise their wages above the starvation level. In fact he would probably cheer 
for the company which dismissed the workers. 
 
I should like to comment now on the changes that were made under the past Minister of Education. First 
of all, the grant was changed so that the pupil-teacher ratio was no longer in effect for grant purposes. It 
was based on the number of students in the school, with no mention of teachers, it was simply the 
number of students. The new grant was based on the simple formula, the grant is equal to A minus B. A 
being the board’s recognized costs, B being the board’s recognized revenues. The result was a grant 
increase that meant that 75 per cent of the education cost was borne — and also increases in the property 
improvement grants that meant that 75 per cent of the education costs were borne by the province. 
 
The province then has substantially increased its share of the local costs for education. We have long 
heard that the cry for property taxes were too high. Our Government has responded to that need. 
 
I am also pleased that our Government saw fit to leave negotiations for local concerns in the hands of 
local people, which gives the lie to the fact that things are taken out of the hands of local people. Those 
negotiations did not go well at first, but they now are proceeding in a much more satisfactory manner. 
 
May I say, Mr. Speaker, that those are just a few examples of progress and improvement. Surely the 
Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose is willing to admit that it is an improvement to reduce the maximum 
class size from 45 to 27 and the largest class I now teach at the last term semester is 27. 
 
May I further say that at the time that I had the class of 45 students in French in high school, I also 
taught a class in conversational French to federal civil servants and other adults. It may be of interest to 
know that the federal Liberal Government would not make payments to assist civil servants taking this 
conversational French class if the class were to have over 15 people. The provincial Liberals said it was 
fine to have 45 in a high school class, while the federal Liberal Government said I must not have more 
than 15 adults. I used the same course for both classes. 
 
Now the Hon. Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) may say that it doesn’t matter a pinch of potash 
what the federal Liberals do or for that matter what the past Liberal governments 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
195 

 

did. Well, I may say that he either goes along with those government’s major undertakings or it amounts 
to a public repudiation of those governments. The Member for Rosetown-Elrose indicated he is ready to 
re-introduce that gem of a Private Member’s bill that he dug up last fall. That Bill requested and I quote: 
 

The principals appointed to the community college that were previously (a) former NDP MLAs or 
MPs, (b) defeated NDP candidates, federal or provincial, (c) candidates who contested a 
nomination for the NDP, provincial or federal, (d) known campaign workers for the NDP, 
provincial or federal. 

 
Gosh, that might have even included the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek at one time. 
 
The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Snyder) brought to the attention of this House, the fact 
that it was invading the human rights of those individuals to present to the public the political beliefs of 
people who work for any agency. I believe it was none other than the Right Hon. John G. Diefenbaker, 
who piloted the Canadian Bill of Rights through the Canadian Parliament. That Canadian Bill of Rights 
guarantees freedom of conscience. Does the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose now wish to take the 
first steps to destroy freedom in this land? I submit that it is the Member for Rosetown-Elrose who is out 
to do the very thing that he accuses others of doing, grabbing for power. Trying to control others by 
denying them rights to their beliefs. 
 
But the Members opposite may talk of political patronage. I wonder if some of the Members opposite 
are not trying to put on a show, particularly the Conservative Members opposite are trying to put on a 
show of purity, a show of being above the political battles of this province. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order! I wonder if the Hon. Member for Yorkton would permit the 
Hon. Member for Regina Victoria (Mr. Baker) to make an announcement. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 
Speaker’s Gallery we have a number of fine guests who have come a long way across Canada from 
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. They are members of a senior high school band known as the 
Colonel Gray Band from that community. They are chaperoned by Gerrard Retin and Mrs. Galant. Mr. 
Herb Powell of Regina is escorting them around the city of Regina. 
 
We are very pleased to welcome this group from the eastern part of Canada. We hope they will have a 
pleasant stay in our city and visit many of the sights. We are pleased that they have come here to watch 
the lawmakers of the Province of Saskatchewan. Again a warm welcome to you all. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
196 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, as a son of two Prince Edward 
Islander’s my mother and father, I am wondering if there are any MacDonalds or Driscos or McIsaacs 
up there. I did have the pleasure of going to Prince Edward Island a couple of years ago for your 
Centennial celebrations and had the good fortune to be there for MacDonald Day. I certainly want to 
express my welcome from the Members on this side of the House. I certainly hope that you enjoy your 
visit to Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The interrupted debate continues. 
 
MR. NELSON: — As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel that the Progressive Conservatives 
opposite are trying to present themselves as being purer than pure, whiter than white, the real nice guys, 
99.44 1/100 per cent virgin pure. 
 
I ask the Hon. seven Members of the Progressive Conservative caucus if they repudiate the Right Hon. 
John G. Diefenbaker? You do not? You approve of all of his appointments? Let’s try a couple for size. 
 
February 3, 1958, Frank Bastedo was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
The appointment was made by the Right Hon. John G. Diefenbaker, then Prime Minister of Canada. It 
just happens that Mr. Bastedo, before his appointment was president of the Regina Federal Progressive 
Conservative Constituency Association. I assume that Mr. Bastedo was a Conservative, that is none of 
my business really. 
 
MR. MALONE: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. I believe the rule of this House is not to refer to 
the Queen’s representative in any way, whether it is a present representative or a past representative. 
And particularly in a derogatory manner. I am not sure that the Member has said anything in a 
derogatory manner, but I suspect he is leading up to something along those lines and I take exception to 
it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I might remind the Member who raised the Point of Order that there is a rule about 
anticipation as well. I am not sure of the context in which the Member raised the name of the former 
Lieutenant-Governor and I feel I couldn’t comment at this time. I will examine the record later and if 
there is any comment to be made I will make it at that time. 
 
MR. NELSON: — It is only with the greatest of respect for the Queen’s representative that I am raising 
this point. I am raising it simply to show that political appointments were made. If I may leave that 
particular point then, Mr. Speaker. The same Mr. Diefenbaker made 37 appointments to the Senate, the 
Canadian Senate where we see political patronage at the extreme being practised. The Senate of Canada, 
that very green pasture where old party hacks of both Liberal and Conservative stripes are given more 
than $29,000 per year. "How green is my pasture!" they sigh as they relax in their comfortable chairs, 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
197 

 

never again to be forced to do a day’s work, rewarded for their political toils by the party they served. 
But that is a debate in itself. Suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Diefenbaker’s first appointment to 
the Senate was George White a former Progressive Conservative Member of Parliament. Mr. 
Diefenbaker’s last Senate appointment, as were all his other Senate appointments, was a Progressive 
Conservative Member of Parliament, Orval Phillips, who was sent directly to the Senate from the House 
of Commons. 
 
MR. LANE: — Be careful, they’ll be campaigning for your seat! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Good. Let me continue. Ontario. Now there are some stories there. John Robarts, 
former Progressive Conservative Premier appointed the head of the Royal Commission to study Metro 
Toronto. I have more, many more from Toronto. If the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose wishes to 
bring this resolution in again I shall be glad to continue. But if the Hon. member brings that resolution in 
on community college principals, this action by the implications he makes in presenting that Bill will be 
repudiation of all Conservative governments, from the one of that famous Sir John A. MacDonald who 
was involved in the Pacific Railway scandal to the present governments in Ontario and Alberta. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, mud slinging is not the purpose of this House. The purpose of this House is to debate 
with honor and courage the real issues of this province. To honorably and courageously debate those 
issues without resorting to childish acts of running out of the House every time those conditions aren’t 
exactly to their liking. But if the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose would pry into the private lives of 
the people in this province, if he wants to sling mud at the Government and at civil servants, there is 
plenty of mud to be slung back. 
 
Now we have heard cries of foul from the Conservative benches opposite. Let us be honest, they got into 
the kitchen, they began to play around with the stove before they knew how it worked, before they 
realized the implications of their actions they touched the wrong part of the stove and they got burned. 
They blew a fuse. 
 
They have by their irresponsible actions obstructed the workings of this House; they have been 
scorched. Now that they are in the kitchen they have found the action a bit hot, too hot for their comfort. 
But there is an old saying, "If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen." I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s what the Conservative caucus did yesterday; they couldn’t stand the heat, so they got out of 
the kitchen. They are back today I see. Let’s hope that they can get accustomed to the heat, so that they 
can properly represent their constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too find this Throne Speech more important for what it doesn’t say than for what it does 
say. For example, I find 37 government bills introduced here, an impressive load of legislation to 
warrant my support. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support this Government for its past actions and I am 
proud to support it for the directions and the actions touched upon in the Throne Speech. I shall be 
supporting the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
198 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I am one of the Members of this Assembly who feels 
that we are wasting our time this week. I agree with the Member for Morse in his remarks yesterday that 
those who caused this fiasco that we are going through this week deserve to be soundly criticized and 
should have been soundly criticized in the press. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — . . . did you speak . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — I’ll let you ask me a question later when I get wound up a little. I know that your caucus 
had a meeting on your comments in the House and how they would wish you to refrain from making 
any, because it makes us look twice as good as we really are. 
 
I am a little surprised at the Conservatives I might add, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about stopping 
heckling why they would want the Member for Moose Jaw North to stop heckling, he makes everybody 
else look good when he heckles when they are speaking. 
 
We have had several remarks from the Members opposite, including the last speaker, referring to the 
Throne Speech and what a great document and the 35 pieces of legislation that have been tabled in this 
Assembly by the Government opposite. The 35 pieces of legislation were rushed into this House 
yesterday or the day before, merely to give an impression that something was being done by the 
Government opposite. I think a perusal of the Throne Speech as read by the Lieutenant-Governor 
indicates and makes it quite clear that this Throne Speech was a document that was merely to place 
something in the record, that it was to be debated on and the Throne Speech debate to be ended on the 
particular day of reading the Throne Speech. Then the Legislature and this Assembly could get on with 
the work at hand of dealing with the Estimates and the Budget of the Government opposite. 
 
Members opposite keep referring to the 35 pieces of legislation. I think there are only four of those bills 
that have more than one page to them, indicating temporary house amendments. That’s all the whole 
package is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . be adjourning them! 
 
MR. LANE: — No, don’t worry. I am going to refer to the Throne Speech to show what an absolute 
waste of time this is and perhaps the Hon. Member who just spoke did not read the legislation. I am 
sorry he is leaving, because I am going to refer to some of this legislation that he is so proud of, the 35 
bills that he spoke so highly of. I am going to refer to some of them that are set out in the Throne Speech 
as read by the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
First of all we had the earth shaking new social bill, the amendments to The Fire Prevention Act, Bill 
No. 16. Now I suppose that if the Government opposite is pretty proud of that particular Bill, it does 
bring some major new social changes to the people of this province, it does allow for the training 
courses in fire fighting and fire prevention. I suppose that is well and good. It does allow and this again, 
is earth 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
199 

 

shaking, I am a little surprised at the Member for Regina Rosemont not taking all this in because I know 
when he speaks he is going to give some pretty in-depth speeches about some of these bills. This one 
goes so far and this is a great new approach, it allows for the first time in the history of this great 
province, local assistant fire fighters and fire commissioners. Now that’s been long overdue, and I know 
the Members opposite are very, very proud of this major piece of legislation, not only talked about in 
one of the salient 35 and also referred to in the Throne Speech. 
 
We also had some major changes to The Dairy Products Act. This is referred to in the Throne Speech, 
which the Members opposite take great pride in. This gives something new to the dairy industry, 
something that they have long been demanding of the Government, they have rallies, and picketing, 
because they wanted the Minister of Agriculture to have the power to issue to owners or managers of 
dairy manufacturing plants licences to operate the plants. I think that’s long overdue and that’s the type 
of legislation that has been introduced by the Government. It also puts a termination date to the licences. 
Is that the great social legislation and the record that you are so proud of? We get the same type of 
amendments in The Agricultural Products Market Development Fund Act, No. 25 in the printed Bill. I 
could go on because the Hon. Member who spoke last was very, very proud of this particular piece of 
legislation. It allows the Minister to make regulations and allows the establishment of a committee for 
expenditures for the administration of this Act. An oversight that was left out that was vital, that was so 
vital to the administration of this particular Act. It allows the Minister to make regulations to allow the 
committee to set up to make loans, grants and supply goods or services considered necessary by and for 
the promotion of markets for agricultural products. 
 
Now seemingly we had all been under the obviously mistaken assumption that this was in the original 
bill which was set out and do exactly what this amendment does. But that’s one of the 35 bills that was 
introduced and it was referred to in the Throne Speech. 
 
I can also refer to Bill No. 12. I was so happy to get Bill No. 12 because this one amended the rural 
telephone systems. Again it is one of the great new planks in the social platform of the Government 
opposite. It allows the Government to charge reconstruction costs as a surcharge in a construction levy. I 
am sure that the people were crying and demanding the Government that that great social change and 
that new social program be implemented. Similar types of amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act. 
 
We had a biggy, and it was referred to in the Throne Speech, it is an amendment to The Forest Act. 
Again I think that all the talk of the Members opposite and the speeches they have given over the years 
about forests and raping trees or saving the trees, or whatever they were doing at any particular given 
time, that it is very, very nice to see tabled in this Assembly a bill to amend The Forest Act that changes 
the boundaries in most provincial forests in some cases by adding as much as a half a section to the area. 
I think the list of legal descriptions that takes approximately four pages is something again that the 
public have been awaiting with bated breath. I think the Government opposite knows full well that it is 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
200 

 

fooling no one with 35 bills that were introduced in most cases in all but one, they were housekeeping 
amendments that were rushed through. I have no doubt that there will be many changes, house 
amendments coming to these bills because of the speed with which they were printed and tabled before 
this Assembly. They were tabled and they were done as a group of 35 only to try and mislead the public 
and the press that something in fact was happening in this Assembly. 
 
As I said at the outset, this particular debate is a waste of time, we are wasting the taxpayers’ money. I 
agree with the Member or Thunder Creek when he said that the public may be under the mistaken 
assumption that something constructive is being done. We are wasting our time, the Government knows 
it and the Conservative Party to my left knows it. 
 
I think we have to turn to a constructive and legitimate criticism of those individuals or parties who are 
the cause of this waste of money and waste of time. For the first three or four days of this Session, there 
was a cloud hanging over the Members, as allegations were made by parties, by the Government 
opposite and the Conservative Party to my left, as to why we got into this waste of time and into this 
economic waste that we are in today. 
 
We had allegations by the Premier and the Attorney General that there was an agreement between all 
parties. The agreement was, and I set it out in detail, there was unanimous consent to waive the 
Address-in-Reply debate. The debate we are now embarked upon. There was unanimous consent to 
establish a Committee of Finance, waive Private Members’ business to have the Budget debate 
immediately. And the third part of that agreement, a special motion giving a refund and deposit for those 
Private Members’ Bills which died in prorogation of the last session. 
 
Letters were tabled this afternoon by the Attorney General at the request of the Leader of the 
Opposition, setting out the terms of that agreement. The request from the Attorney General setting out 
those terms dated January 28, 1976, said in the last paragraph, "I would appreciate your confirmation of 
the above agreement at your earliest convenience." A note went back from Mr. D. G. Steuart, Leader of 
the Opposition to the office of the Attorney General, "Liberal caucus agrees to these three proposals," 
signed D. G. Steuart. 
 
The same letter went to the Conservative Party. A letter came back from the Whip, a note came back, a 
photocopy of which was tabled today, "Re your letter and the three clauses agreed upon, this is in line 
with our unanimous agreement." 
 
There is no doubt that the cause of this waste of the taxpayers’ money, and the waste of the time of each 
and every individual Member rests solely upon the shoulders of the Conservative Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — The same Conservative Party that when we in the Liberal Opposition attempted to stop 
and filibuster the potash nationalization legislation said we were wasting the taxpayers’ money, and 
wasting the time of this House. It is interesting 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
201 

 

to note the priorities that have been evidenced from the actions of the Conservative Party, that when it 
comes to demanding moneys for their own office research staff, they will stall and waste money of the 
people of this province but when it comes to a potash nationalization bill which could destroy the potash 
industry and which could cost the people of this province literally hundreds of millions of dollars, they 
sit in silence and say nothing. That’s a party that tries to convince the people of this province that they 
are entitled to govern, they have shown a callous disregard for the economic situation, the economic 
position of the people of this province. If there is ever any indication that they have shown no ability to 
govern, it’s their actions in the last few days and their actions in failing to fight with every resource at 
their command, the infamous potash nationalization legislation of the Government. 
 
The Conservative Leader said that arrangement is not binding because it doesn’t go before the full 
caucus. We know that that is a specious argument because every caucus Whip has, and has to have the 
right to make arrangements between parties, if he wants to make it subject to caucus approval he so 
makes those arrangements. The House couldn’t operate if any other rules applied. 
 
The disappointing thing, and I will be very interested to see what the press does about this, is the fact 
that the Leader of the Conservative Party attempted to destroy the reputation of his Party Whip by 
refuting the agreement and attempted to destroy the reputation of an honest man for his cheap political 
ends, and any man who would cast out another individual to wolves like the Leader of the Conservative 
Party has done to the Member for Estevan, certainly does not deserve any further consideration from the 
press and the people as to his ability to govern. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — I think too that the record of the Conservative Party to my left, we have had some 
actions from the Conservative Leader in the last few days which make one wonder to say the least. 
Rather childish and petty performance. I think though that the Leader of the Conservative Party was 
taking these actions because he knows full well that that type of action is the type that will get prominent 
press coverage in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s interesting that a situation has developed since last October that someone would get press when 
someone of the opposite side accuses them of saying that, "Well I didn’t really want to be in politics." 
To get press coverage for an allegation like that. Stronger ones have been made in this Assembly. Some 
allegations have been made over the years with some depth, that never got press coverage, but a stupid 
little comment like that allowed and gave the Leader of the Conservative Party access to the 
communications media of this province, something that should frankly not have been allowed to happen. 
Someone who could get press by saying they are not going to speak on potash and then get press by 
saying that they are going to speak on potash; someone who gets press by saying that they are going to 
hold up the Budget, after complaining earlier about the Liberal filibuster. I think that the press would be 
well advised to start looking at the in-depth record of the Conservative Party to my left, and so far, in 
spite of potash 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
202 

 

nationalization and rent controls, the only positive proposal that has come out of the party to my left is a 
minor technical amendment to the rent control legislation, and that’s all that they have produced since 
last October and that is all that they have produced. I think with all respect that a situation has developed 
where simple petty, childish and simple-minded efforts can attain or obtain dramatic press coverage for 
the Leader of the Conservative Party, indicates that someone is catering to the lowest common 
denominator of the intelligence of the people of this province and seemingly no effort is being made to 
appeal to the true intellectual capabilities of the people of this province. 
 
I think that the people of this province would be well advised, through the press, to start to look at the 
true record of performance of the Conservative Party and they will find that their record consists of one 
complaint about decorum, one walkout, and a failure to participate as a constructive Opposition party in 
the activities of this Assembly. And that is all that the Conservative Party has done since the election of 
last June. The failure by the people to be informed of the efforts made of the Liberal Party constructively 
in the potash nationalization legislation and the rent control legislation, I think is also to be condemned. 
If it is the intention of the communications people of this province to cater to the lowest common 
denominator of the intelligence of these people, I will guarantee the election of the Conservative Leader 
in the next election, because that’s what he is catering to. But if it is the duty of a responsible press 
gallery to treat fairly constructive opposition, then the Conservative Party will be right back where it 
was in the last 20 or 30 years in politics in this province. 
 
There is no doubt that we are wasting our time, nothing is being accomplished. We hear speeches that 
we have all heard before, except for these 35 bills, and I think every Member will admit that they are 
housekeeping amendments. And that’s what we are here debating. At about $70 per day, per Member, 
not counting the Cabinet Ministers who are taken away from their other duties. I think it’s a pretty sad 
and sorry state of affairs. I think that the Government opposite should quit its attempt to slap down the 
Conservative Party and let’s get on with the business and let’s introduce the Budget. If a few people 
don’t show up and don’t get their invitations, there will be another year and I am sure the Liberal Party 
would be prepared to give up a few spaces next year to people whom you want to invite, if that’s the 
whole thing that you are afraid of missing somebody not getting their invitation to the Budget Speech, 
we are quite prepared to co-operate and make sure that they can come next year. I’m sure too, that what 
will be in the Budget will be amply and well covered and that they will know what is going on. For the 
sake of a little party, for a few party supporters, I don’t think that what we are going through is 
beneficial to anyone. 
 
To the Conservative Party that is responsible to some extent for the mess that we are in, the situation that 
we are in, you are already being condemned by the people of this province, and rest assured that you 
will continue to be condemned for the activities you have taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was nothing in the Throne Speech. I have referred to some of the legislation proposed 
as being merely housekeeping. These are the Bills that were referred to 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
203 

 

in the Throne Speech itself. I think they are proof positive that it’s a nothing Throne Speech, it wasn’t 
intended to be an in-depth discussion of policy, and for that reason I simply can’t support the Throne 
Speech as introduced last Friday. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, the Throne Speech 
debate to this point has left much to be desired. It has, in my opinion, been nothing more than an 
opportunity for the Government and official Opposition to open old wounds and to create a few new 
ones. The Throne Speech, although it was short and shallow in nature, was, I am sure, the best effort that 
could be put forth. With that in mind I should like to make favorable comment where I can, as well as 
some constructive criticisms. 
 
Under ‘Economy’ and ‘Inflation’ there is a distinct comparison between the Canadian economy and 
provincial economy. Hardly a fair comparison for any number of reasons. First stroke the Canadian 
economy has against it is the unbearable burden of Liberal administration, along with the fact it serves in 
excess of 20 times as many people. In contrast, the provincial economy serves less than one million 
people and has been blessed with abundant resource in agricultural products, harvests and sales. This has 
accounted for the $6 billion gross provincial product record. I would say we are being modest to suggest 
a more moderate pace for 1976, if inflation is left unchecked. Yet, I commend the Government for 
recognizing inflation as what could be our most serious problem. I don’t feel, however, that the 
increases in Crown corporation rates, SPC for example, is much proof of the Government’s intention to 
check inflation. Rent controls were a step in the right direction, but problems since its effective date will 
have to be dealt with before its full value is realized. 
 
I look forward to the Budget Speech in anticipation that government, as well as public expenditures, are 
restrained. 
 
As far as legislation to be re-introduced is concerned, I can only say they are worthy amendments and 
hope that our suggestions will be taken into full account and given due consideration before the 
respective Bills are passed. 
 
I thought it rather hard to believe agriculture only got two lines consisting of just over 20 words when it 
is the province’s greatest generator of wealth and employment, linked with the fact it has many varied 
problems yet to be reckoned with. 
 
I commend the Government and the Hon. Member for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy) for 
reconsidering the amendment to The Snowmobile Act, 1973, and hopefully for relieving private land 
owners from bearing all the responsibility for the risks of owners, operators and machines under the Act. 
 
With regard to health, it would seem the province is in a healthy state of mind and body. I feel in a 
department as large as Health the Government would have seen fit to elaborate on some of the many 
problems under the Health Department. The administrative costs of the Drug Plan and shortage of 
Levels III and IV beds, just to name a couple. 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
204 

 

Housing starts are said to have set a new record in 1975 and still the demand exceeds the supply. The 
Government is prepared to raise the borrowing limits of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. I 
should like to see a program to also assist the private sector in its attempts to decrease the 
accommodation shortages throughout the province. 
 
Now unless I go on in some detail over the Olympics or Brier, I would have to conclude my remarks on 
the Throne Speech. There is no doubt the pressing issues of the province were brought down in the 
Throne Speech. I look forward to the Budget Speech. Surely it can’t be anything but an improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the content of this Throne Speech leaves too much to be desired and for these reasons I 
cannot support it. 
 
MR. G. McNEILL (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to again rise in this House 
and speak on the Throne Speech debate. I think it was a good one. I think a lot of bills have been put 
before this House. 
 
Before I go any further, Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate my colleagues, both the mover and 
the seconder of the Throne Speech for the good job they did. 
 
I should like to comment on a few remarks on the attitude and the position the Conservatives have taken 
in this House, Mr. Speaker, I only hope that some of the Conservatives, when they met with the rural 
municipalities, I am sure that their faces were pretty red because I am sure my RM group that I had 
introduced in here, that was a new one, the last one in Saskatchewan, is certainly having its time trying 
to make up its budget, due solely to the actions of the Conservatives and their Leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard comments from both the Opposition parties that our backbenchers have no 
say in the decisions of this House. I want to assure them that we do. And if our Leader would have done 
what the Leader of the Conservatives had done I am sure that he wouldn’t be back in our caucus again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Mr. Speaker, the Opposition have done it again, we sat here we listened to the same 
thing from them defending the big people and the money people, multinationals, Intercon, good deals. 
Mr. Speaker, not once have they commented on their records that they have in the North, — in 
Saskatchewan, what they have done, because they have done nothing. They have no credibility in the 
people of Saskatchewan any more. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Mr. Speaker, the development in the North just alone shows what this Government 
has done for the people in Saskatchewan. Not only have they gone into the North and built roads, built 
some houses for the people, they have also created employment, which was never there before. Once 
again I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has the people of Saskatchewan at heart and that they are 
prepared to look after them. 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
205 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Mr. Speaker, some of the great involvements of the Liberals, some of their great 
Crown corporations that they have set up, one of them was the Athabasca Pulp Mill. Another one was a 
mine in the North, great things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should like to talk a little bit about the roads in my constituency. Already a contract has been let for 
eight miles of blacktop on No. 4 Highway for which I am glad and which we are in need of. I understand 
that the tender is out for another eight miles. This is more than we ever had while we had an 11 year 
Liberal Member in that constituency. 
 
One thing we had, Mr. Speaker, we had the unfortunate thing of the wood industry closing. I am 
informed today and guaranteed that the wood workers will receive their pay by the 31st of this month, 
due to the fact that SEDCO took a hand in and agreed to loan the money. That’s another move of this 
Government to help the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
While we are dealing on roads, I wonder if the Liberals on the other side remember the great ‘primrose 
path’ starting at nowhere, ending at nowhere, and that seems to be the career of most Liberals. You 
know, we have an old saying in the northern part of Saskatchewan, that old Liberals never fade away, 
they just take off up the primrose path. And I am wondering, Mr. Speaker, if some of the Conservatives 
aren’t going to take off after them. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Three million bucks! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Yep! Three million bucks is right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have many things — just imagine what would have happened if we had taken that three 
million bucks and banked it and saved it. Maybe I could have had my bridge at the meridian, that’s 
needed, and it’s needed and the federal Liberals don’t take their obligation to build it. And they have an 
obligation to cost share in these things. These are the things which we are lacking. These are the things 
that we hope we will have sooner or later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on telecommunications, I would just like to speak a little bit on this, on the great 
advancement we have had on this. Can I tell you a little story that happened in the early ‘60s? 
 
Well, the Saskatchewan Government was trying to negotiate with the great Conservative Government in 
Ottawa to hold and use one of the finest microwave systems in the world, our microwave system in 
northern Saskatchewan. That could have been developed into one of the finest communication systems 
and everybody would have had television in the ‘60s in the North, but what did the Conservative 
Government do? They went into each one of those sites, they had to get a helicopter and fly in, cut the 
guide wires on the towers and pushed them over into the bush. That is the attitude of the Conservatives 
towards the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
206 

 

MR. McNEILL: — That is what happened and I was in the North at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we are on roads and stuff like that, some of my colleagues, the Minister and the 
Mayor for Regina (Mr. Baker), we made a trip up to Uranium City. We drove up in a few hours. Just 
before we left there I had been reading an article by some of the reporters from Saskatoon. And I don’t 
know what road they went on because I understand there is only one in the North, and it certainly didn’t 
even compare to what they talked about, because the road up there was perfectly good — it had a few 
dips — you couldn’t make a lot of speed, you certainly didn’t have to drive around rocks and over the 
top of rocks. I don’t know where they got that from. Probably they started from Prince Albert and not 
from Meadow Lake where they should have started from. 
 
I don’t know where, and lately I read another report from the Leader-Post, I think they went up the same 
roads because they talked about the same people we met along there. But this type of sensational 
reporting isn’t really the best. Because we got a road and if any of you want to go up there we are 
willing to take you up there, I’ll guide you up there if you’re scared to go. And I think the Liberals are 
scared to go because two of the caucus, two of the caucus were in La Loche the day we were there and 
when we came they took off for the South. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — They didn’t stop at all, they just took off. I don’t know if they were heading for the 
primrose path or not but they didn’t make it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You tell them, Gordon. 
 
MR. McNEILL: — We certainly will. Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had too much to say on this Throne 
Speech debate because I really wasn’t prepared and I just wanted to talk a little bit about what’s 
happening, what’s going on and I am prepared to support the Throne Speech. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t propose frankly, to comment 
on a Throne Speech which was prepared through an accident. And I don’t propose to add to the obvious 
comments that have been made by various Members of the Opposition that this is a nothing Throne 
Speech. I took an hour to read the Bills and I’m sure that if we take three hours we can dispose of 
virtually all of the Bills. I don’t think there is any doubt about the reason that we are here and the reason 
that we’ve come to be involved in this waste of the taxpayers’ money, be involved in this Throne Speech 
debate. 
 
What I do want to do, Mr. Speaker, is address myself through you to the Attorney General. Because I 
am alarmed at the comments that have been made by the Leader of the Conservative Party. I’m alarmed 
at the impressions that were left and frankly as I sat and listened to the allegations that were made by the 
Leader of the Conservative Party, I thought that within a day or two days we would hear from the Hon. 
Attorney General to 



 
March 18, 1976 

 

 
207 

 

refute those allegations. Then today we asked certain questions of the Hon. Attorney General. I don’t 
think that it was to the satisfaction of this House, I don’t think that the allegations were put to rest to the 
satisfaction of this House. 
 
Now, what has the Member for Nipawin suggested? Certainly he suggests from my hearing that 
arrangements were made that private arrangements were made and that’s not denied and I am alarmed. 
Certainly it is being suggested that some kind of a deal was made that this House knows nothing about. I 
listened, indeed, to the Leader of the Conservative Party saying the same thing again in the corridors just 
an hour or so ago to some member of the press. Now I am not suggesting that I believe him, indeed I 
was predetermined not to believe him. My tendency as I listened to him was not to believe. But, I must 
say I’m surprised to have sat here for some days and not yet heard the Hon. Attorney General answer the 
allegations that were made by him. 
 
Don’t have to look very far to see that the allegations that were made, very serious allegations about a 
Member. Erskine May talks about that kind of arrangement suggests a falsehood, that a Member has 
been guilty of a falsehood. Or failing to carry out some representation that that Member has made is a 
very serious allegation. We’ll change the rules that we more commonly follow. I say that an accusation 
of misrepresentation is very serious. Charges of uttering deliberate falsehood is very serious. All these 
books do is make obvious what any Member would know. And that has been the justification that the 
Conservative Leader has given to this House. 
 
I don’t take the cause of the Conservative Leader. I think if anything the Member for Nipawin has made 
an absolute fool of himself for the last ten days. He’s made obvious what many of us have suspected for 
some months. He made that obvious in this House. But I have to believe that there was something 
behind the very curious course of conduct that he has taken in these past three or four weeks to five 
weeks. In what he says is that there was some arrangement. Makes that allegation. He suggests to the 
House that the Hon. Attorney General has failed to keep an arrangement and the Attorney General sits 
silent. I’m surprised first we were told that the Attorney General would be speaking, he’d be speaking 
within a day or so. Then perhaps on another day. Indeed, Members opposite will have noted as we have 
that the Attorney General is a little low these days. Now, indeed, what he has been doing is that he 
hasn’t been his sort of jovial, fine argumentative self. And that makes us surprised somewhat. What 
would cause the Conservative Leader to back out on a commitment signed and written in handwriting by 
Bob Larter that says: 
 

Re your letter and (such bad handwriting that it’s hard to read) that this is in line with unanimous 
agreement. 

 
What would cause the Conservative Leader to pull the rug out from under the six Members of caucus 
that he left here while he was away from the House that week? What would cause him to abandon his 
House Leader and to abandon his Whip? 
 
Now, it may well be that he is inexperienced, he doesn’t know how to handle people, he doesn’t know 
how to handle this House. It may well be that he is a man without principle. And 



 
March 18, 1976 
 

 
208 

 

that’s the way that we’ve had this situation described to us. Indeed, at first blush, that’s the impression 
that I have. 
 
But now I am starting to ask this House to examine this matter a little more closely. It’s curious that 
even from the Member for Nipawin that he continues to stick to his story and that story goes on 
undenied. Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that where I began with the assumption that the Conservatives had 
done a very improper thing in this House I’m suspicious now of what the Leader of the Conservatives 
has said to us. Really he said, "Why are you so prepared to believe them and not me?" Let me only say 
that my suspicions are raised and I’m very surprised that the Hon. Attorney General would sit in his 
place these many days and not take any part in this debate. Not a part in the 35 meaningless bills that 
they propose, not take part to answer some of the charges that have been made by the Member for 
Nipawin. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said I have little to say about the merits of the Throne Speech debate. I thought 
well of the comments by the Member Mr. Birkbeck who said that the Throne Speech was so inadequate 
that he chose to oppose it. I’m almost to the position of saying the Throne Speech was so inadequate that 
it doesn’t merit either opposition or support and will be voting against the Motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have further thoughts to make and further comments to make to this House and ask leave 
of the House to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:26 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


