
























































Hansard: April 07, 1976


 
921 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

19th Day 
 

Wednesday, April 7, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. J. BROCKELBANK: (Saskatoon Westmount) — I have here an introduction that I should like 
to make to the House of some very important people who have arrived from the constituency of 
Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
They are from Bishop Roborecki School and they are located in the Speaker’s Gallery. I understand 
there are 32 Grade Seven and Eight students. They are accompanied by three of their teachers, Mr. 
Exner, Mrs. Fielden and Mrs. Serhyenko. I look forward to the opportunity to meet the students a little 
later on outside the Chamber and answer any questions that they may have. I know all Members will 
join with me in welcoming these students from Saskatoon Westmount constituency to the Legislature 
and wish them a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY: (Saskatoon Centre) — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to this 
House another group of 39 equally important students and adults from Sion School, located in Saskatoon 
Centre Constituency in Saskatoon. They are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery. I understand they visited 
the RCMP Barracks this morning and also the Museum of Natural History, and I gather they enjoyed 
themselves there. I certainly hope they find their little stay in the House here rewarding, and, I might 
add, that at times it gets a little hot in here. I should like to say I hope today will be exciting for you. I 
hope you have a pleasant stay in Regina, in whatever you do. I certainly will be meeting with them later 
on. I should like to wish them a safe and a pleasant journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. H. ROLFES: (Saskatoon Buena Vista) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you a group of students from Prince Philip School, 56 in number, in Grade Five. They are 
seated in the west gallery. I had the opportunity to visit with them for an hour last Monday to discuss 
with them the procedures in the House and the parliamentary system. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Walter Unrau, and Jim Holtslander. I believe they are also chaperoned by Mrs. Cross, Mrs. 
Hill, and I am not sure of the last pronunciation, I think it is Mrs. Wilyke. I would welcome the students 
here and hope that they have an enjoyable and a worthwhile afternoon. I will be meeting with them at 
3:30. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
922 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I have another school to introduce, I don’t believe they are here 
just yet. They may be entering. But as a supplement to Sion School, I should like to mention they are 
accompanied by certain of their teachers Bill Rawlyk, Barry Sawchuk, Angie Murdock, Ken Lenhart 
and Lorraine Dubé. As for the other school that will be coming here, that group is from Bishop Murray 
School located in one of the better constituencies in the province, Saskatoon Centre constituency, 41 in 
number and they will be accompanied by one of their teachers, Mr. Dick Nieman. I understand they, too, 
are visiting various places in Regina, and I certainly will be meeting with them. I hope that they will 
have a pleasant day in Regina and a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

STC RATE INCREASES 
 
MR. S. CAMERON: (Regina South) — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, may I direct a 
question to the Deputy Premier. The Deputy Premier will remember I was directing some questions to 
the Premier about the Saskatchewan Transportation Company rate increases which we understand have 
been made but not yet announced. The Premier indicated that he would take under advisement the 
question of whether or not he would advise Members of the Legislature of the position on those rate 
increases. May I therefore, now ask the Deputy Premier whether a decision has been made and whether 
those rates will now be given to us? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that I can’t add much more to 
what the Premier said a few days ago to the Member for Regina South. My information is that within the 
next few days, hopefully, within the next few days and before the week is out an announcement can be 
made and of course will be made here in the Legislature. There are a number of bodies by which this 
matter is now being presently considered and I think the only thing I can do is repeat in substance what 
the Premier said a few days ago. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that the Premier didn’t say anything in 
substance. That is what generates my additional questions. The question now is: why are you not 
disclosing to the Members of the House what rate increases were approved by the Board of Directors of 
the Saskatchewan Transportation Company? What is holding back advising the House of these rates? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the important fact for the Member for Regina South and 
for the Members of the House, indeed the public of Saskatchewan, is an announcement of the rates as 
ultimately approved. It is no use, to make an “announcement” if they are not yet finally processed 
completely. I am advised that that is the case with the STC. The important thing for the Opposition and 
for the Legislature I would submit with respect, is the announcement of the final decision. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
923 

 

MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that these rate increases 
originated five months ago and still have not been announced and in view of the fact that they have gone 
through the Highway Traffic Board and presumably now are submitted to the Anti-inflation Board, is it 
the position of the Government that Members of the Legislature will not be advised of public sector 
increases until after those increases have been submitted to the Anti-inflation Board? Is that your policy? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say that that is policy. I mean by that answer that there is no 
policy as enunciated in the fact that the Member for Regina South enunciates it. I am only saying what is 
of public importance, the announcement of the authorized rates, which I am advised the Government is 
not in a position to do so. Because of the consideration of the various elements in this matter, the answer 
is No, there is no general policy in this area at this stage. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — One last supplementary then, Mr. Speaker, Is it or is it not a fact that substantial 
rate increases for STC have been approved both by the Board of Directors of the STC and by the 
Highway Traffic Board? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, my only answer is that to a large extent that is a very subjective 
and debating point because the Member says is it, or is it not a fact that a substantial increase has been 
decided by these bodies? That is a matter of opinion which I can’t agree or disagree with at this stage. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — One last supplementary then. Let me excise the word ‘substantial’ and simply ask 
the Deputy Premier is it a fact or is it not a fact that increases for STC have been approved by both the 
Board of Directors of STC and by the Highway Traffic Board? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, I believe that is true. 
 

SGEA EMPLOYEES PUNISHED RE STRIKE 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT: (Regina Wascana) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Finance. The press reports will be familiar to the Minister regarding the SGEA strike and the 
500 employees who are now being punished or censured by SGEA, because the Government agree — I 
am sure that they do — that it was an illegal strike and will the Government intervene on behalf of the 
500 employees who legally went back to work notwithstanding the illegal strike and who are now being 
punished by their union for failing to adhere and take part in an illegal strike? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I think unfortunately the Member’s question takes the form of a statement 
which might lead to debate and I think if the Minister wants to answer the question he may answer it 
factually and discard the parts of the question that are debatable. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
924 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect I think that it was the Government’s position 
that it was an illegal strike so that, presumably, is not a debatable point. My question then is, the 
employees crossed the picket lines of what the Government described as an illegal strike and are now 
being punished for so crossing the picket lines. Will the Government take steps to protect the employees 
who crossed those illegal picket lines in that illegal strike? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member will acknowledge that that’s not the only word he used that was of a 
descriptive nature that may have led to a debate, the illegal strike. There were a couple of other words in 
there and I think the record will show it. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Finance) — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with any illegal strike 
that has taken place by the SGEA members. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — You’re not familiar with any legal or illegal strikes? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Illegal. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, then I’m sure the minister is aware that a sympathy strike was 
carried on for some days last fall basically and now the SGEA has announced that they will take 
measures against approximately 500 employees who refused to take part in that sympathy strike, if I 
may describe it as such. My question is whether the Government will do anything to assist those 
employees in their dealings with the SGEA? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the union has not advised me, I suppose they don’t have to 
advise me of any action they propose to take, whether it is by way of any assessment or by any other 
action. And until it comes to our attention I think it is a hypothetical question because we have not had 
to deal with the matter so far. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — By way of supplementary a policy question of the Minister, Mr. Speaker. If the 
SGEA asks the Government to check off fines in connection with crossing those picket lines will the 
Government check off those fines? And, if I might steal a supplementary and ask two questions at the 
same time, the SGEA have a union security clause but not a union hiring clause, will the Government 
fire employees if requested to do so by SGEA notwithstanding the fact their contract is only a union 
security contract? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the question is a hypothetical one. We have not had any formal 
request from the union. During the strike there have been certain statements made and we have indicated 
that we are prepared to collect the union dues where they are uniform in accordance with the collective 
bargaining agreement and The Trade Union Act. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — May I ask one last question then of the Minister. The Minister has indicated . . . 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
925 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I am not going to allow any further pursuit of that because I really haven’t 
been impressed with the urgency of it at this time. The Member for Moosomin. 
 

SEDCO LOANS OUTSTANDING — SNOASIS 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK: (Moosomin) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 
responsible for SEDCO. Is the Minister aware that substantial loans were made by SEDCO in 1974 and 
are still substantially outstanding to a company called Snoasis Properties Ltd.? Even though one of the 
shareholders is the Deputy Attorney General for the Province of Saskatchewan and another shareholder 
is the Manager of the Saskatchewan Development Fund and a defeated NDP candidate. 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER: (Minister of Industry and Commerce) — Mr. Speaker, I am aware that Snoasis 
is a client of SEDCO. I am not aware of the substantial arrears that the Member makes reference to. If in 
fact there are arrears I don’t believe that this is the time to undertake to debate those arrears. There may 
be a legitimate reason for them but I can take the Member’s observations as notice and inform myself as 
to what the exact circumstances are between Snoasis and SEDCO. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister not aware that this very type of 
issue is being raised by Mr. Nystrom, NDP Member for Yorkton, as it relates to the Federal Government 
and senior civil servant involvement in private business dealings . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think the Member is in fact getting into a debate by offering information 
in a debateful manner. I would ask for the next question. 
 

TEACHERS’ SALARY AGREEMENT 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Indian Head-Wolseley) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question 
to the Minister of Education. I should like to ask the Minister if he would confirm that the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation and the Government Trustee Negotiation Committee have come to an agreement 
late last night, which gave an increase to the teachers of the Province of Saskatchewan of 19.9 per cent 
in the grid, plus increments which is approximately 5 or 5 1/2 per cent? Would he also indicate whether 
or not administrators on top of that have been given 20 per cent and would he also indicate whether or 
not the $2,400 maximum has been broken by this agreement? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would ask the Members to ask one question at a time if they could. I am 
sure the Member recognizes that he has asked about three or four questions there, and in a manner which 
you are giving information as well as seeking information. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
926 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI: (Minister of Education) — Mr. Speaker, I will have no difficulty with 
that as I will treat it as one question. Negotiations have not been completed, the negotiations are 
continuing tomorrow and when they have been concluded the appropriate announcement will be made 
by the members at the negotiating table and that is the chairman of the two negotiating committees. 
Until that is done I have no comment to make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA: (Maple Creek) — A supplementary to the Minister of Education. Has not 
agreement in principle been reached on the grid and other sections regarding the administrative 
allowances? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I don’t know that at this time, therefore, I have no comment to that 
question. 
 

SEDCO LOANS OUTSTANDING — SNOASIS 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER: (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives) — Mr. Speaker, a question to the 
Minister of Industry. Is the Minister further aware that many of the sub-trades have not been paid by 
Snoasis Properties Ltd., even though considerable time has elapsed since the work was completed and is 
the reason that SEDCO, a 12 per cent shareholder, in Snoasis Properties Ltd., has not taken action to 
make sure that these sub-trades are paid in full, and that the president of the company and a shareholder 
is a prominent Regina Liberal lawyer, one of the major . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Member is giving information primarily. He is not primarily asking a 
question seeking information. And I am not going to give the Member the opportunity to rephrase the 
question. Next question. 
 

SEDCO LOANS — CATTLE COMPANY 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY: (Rosetown-Elrose) — Mr. Speaker, I will ask one question at a time and I hope I 
get one answer at a time. I direct this question to the Minister in charge of SEDCO. Is the Minister 
aware that the SEDCO sponsored Queen Creek Cattle Company of North Battleford is now in 
bankruptcy or in receivership? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, I am not, Mr. Speaker. 
 

RESIGNATION OF MR. DOWDELL 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview) — I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Finance. I think I gave him notice that I would be asking him today to give us the details on the Dowdell 
situation on which I asked a question last week. I wonder if the Minister is prepared to give us those 
details? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, on March 30th I gave an undertaking to the House to give particulars 
in response to the question by the Hon. Member for Lakeview to determine the nature of 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
927 

 

discussions which my officials had engaged in concerning the resignation of Mr. Robert Dowdell as 
member and chairman of the Public Service Commission, and to advise this House of those discussions. 
 
With respect to the separation of Mr. Dowdell from the Public Service I can now say that the 
recommendation has been made to me which I am considering that an ex gratia payment be made to Mr. 
Dowdell in respect of his separation from the Saskatchewan Public Service. The amount of this payment 
has not been fully determined, therefore, it would not be appropriate to discuss it at this time. 
 
My officials have been having discussions with a solicitor for Mr. Dowdell concerning the various 
expenses incurred by Mr. Dowdell in connection with his coming to Saskatchewan in 1973 under the 
Federal Government Senior Executive Exchange Program. As I said, Mr. Dowdell came to our public 
service from the Government of Canada under the Federal Government Executive Exchange Program. I 
am considering an ex gratia payment to Mr. Dowdell to defray certain of his expenses incurred by his 
participation in this program. The amount, nor any appropriate documentation has not been finalized if 
such is necessary. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. is it the policy of the Government to make 
payments ex gratia, or otherwise to civil servants who voluntarily leave the employ of the Government 
to return to other jobs or go to other jobs? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, there are at times particular circumstances that are considered, there 
is no overall policy. Each case is judged on its own merit, in this case as I have indicated, no decision 
has been made, no amount has been agreed to. There are discussions in this case because of the Federal 
Executive Exchange Program that I am giving it consideration. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. May I suggest to the Minister that the reason for Mr. 
Dowdell’s leaving was as a result of a disagreement between Mr. Dowdell and either the Minister or the 
Government and that the Government felt duty bound to pay money to Mr. Dowdell because of this. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s not correct. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe we are duty bound. I don’t believe there is any legal 
obligation on our part based on the resignation that we have received but we are considering whether, 
because of the exchange program, there were expenses that were incurred by the particular person and 
perhaps he was inconvenienced, which might justify some ex gratia payment. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. How can you justify paying money to this employee 
for “inconvenience” when according to you, the information that you have given us in this House, that 
Mr. Dowdell quit and left on his own? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t indicate whether he has incurred expenses and that is which 
otherwise he would not have 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
928 

 

incurred had he not come in on the exchange program. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I’m going to go on to the next question. I feel that we are getting into a 
discussion about the severance policy of the Government. I’m not immediately aware of the urgency of 
the matter. The Member for Nipawin. 
 

GOVERNMENT POLICY ON LENDING AGENCIES 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry. Is it the 
policy of the Government of Saskatchewan through its agencies or Crown corporations that are lending 
agencies such as SEDCO to loan money to organizations in which senior civil servants are shareholders? 
 
MR. MESSER: — I think the answer to that is, Yes. I don’t know the circumstances of all of the 
corporations or all of the companies that SEDCO may be lending to. It may well be that in some 
instances a member of that corporation or members of that corporation is in a minority or perhaps in a 
majority sense a part of the corporation, part of the company that is seeking application for loan from 
SEDCO. I don’t believe that there is any conflict of interest or should there be any assumption that 
conflict of interest would take place because SEDCO is in fact a Crown Corporation of the Government. 
Civil servants, be they in a major executive capacity or a minor executive capacity have no influence or 
no relation to that corporation. I feel that it is conjecture and assumption to allude to perhaps some 
wrong doing if there is a member and I reiterate, if there are members of our employees of the 
government involved in some of the corporations that may be getting funding from the Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. If this is the policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, is the Minister aware of the kinds of conflict of interest situations that could develop in 
the senior civil servants who are doing business with the Government and surely the Minister will agree 
that borrowing money from the Government is doing business with the Government, may they possibly 
use their positions to influence the organization to make loans, perhaps to extend the loans, to better 
class terms, to perhaps extend a greater loan than is normal, and, is the Minister not aware of that? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
I would want to impress upon all Members the importance of not making a speech when asking a 
question. I see a number of examples of it today and some other days. I would encourage the Ministers 
to be brief in their answers to the questions which I hope will be brief as well. 
 

MISTAKES IN LICENCE PLATE INSURANCE RATES 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I wonder if I might direct a question to the Minister in charge of SGIO — I 
gave him notice yesterday that I would be enquiring about this matter. There were a number of problems 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
929 

 

which arose five or six in number, Plymouth Fury was one, Nova, Ventura, where under the new rate 
structure mistakes were made in the amount of money that is being charged in licence plate insurance. 
Does the Government have any intentions through Order in Council to correct these mistakes 
notwithstanding the fact that they have been gazetted or will the people who own those cars have to pay 
the higher rate which is an improper rate? 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN: (Government Insurance Office) — In answer to the Hon. Member’s question, 
as all Members know the rate structure was changed this year and because of discrepancies for instance, 
the Rolls-Royce and the Chevelle were paying exactly the same rate before; they had the same wheel 
base while the Rolls Royce is a very valuable car, the Chevelle was approximately $4,000 or something 
like that in value. In putting together the 12 categories, somewhere along the line some errors did occur, 
for instance, the Nova and the Ventura are almost the same car if they’re not identical, and the Cricket 
and the Colt are identical and yet they’re in different categories. This was a human error and I 
understand that numerous calls were made about these particular instances and there will be an Order in 
Council correcting them as soon as possible. 
 

NURSING HOME STUDY 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD: (Wilkie) — A question to the Minister of Social Services. Last session I asked 
that a study be done into increased costs of the nursing homes and your department agreed and a 
committee was set up to look into this. You initially said that there would be a preliminary study that 
you hoped would be out by the end of March, now although we find some conflict of interest of the 
committee you chose, could you tell us where this preliminary study will be done or if there has been 
anything done and where we could find out what the results are. 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES: (Minister of Social Services) — Mr. Speaker, my indication to the House was 
that I expected the committee to report to me by an Interim Report. I’m not aware that I said that the 
report would be made public. Certainly I would hope that the final report which I expect to have in my 
office by the end of April, once I examine it with my department officials, will be made public. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Supplementary, I would just like to ask the Minister, is he aware that in the 
beginning of this Session there were substantial increases in many areas and that it is, indeed, a matter of 
urgency and that we had hoped that it would be in the House in as short as possible time? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I am aware that there have been some increases but the 
particular report has nothing to do with the increases that have occurred in the past. The report will have 
no effect on the present fees due to the cost of inflation. Certainly I think it will lend itself to future 
costs, operating costs and construction costs. So whether the report comes in today or next week or a 
month from now, it will have no bearing on the costs incurred by special care homes from the past. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
930 

 

MISS CLIFFORD: — Are you saying then, Mr. Minister that there will be no proposals that will help 
alleviate some of the problems that were in the past and perhaps ease the burden to the senior citizen of 
Saskatchewan? Are none of these proposals going to try to offer some solution so that something can be 
done about the high rent of rooms at this time or are you just going to work from this point on and 
hopefully not let them increase any more? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the report will have any major impact on the fees that 
are presently in effect. Certainly the report as indicated when I set up the committee was to have a look 
at the escalating costs of construction and operation. Hopefully the report will give us some indication as 
to how we can stop or decrease the escalating costs to senior citizens in special care homes. It may 
inadvertently give us some indication as to what has transpired in the past that has caused the increase in 
costs. Maybe by this we can slow down the increase but I say again, it’s more for the future than for the 
past. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The matter was raised yesterday by the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver), on 
which I want to make a brief comment with regard to the substance of supplementary questions. 
 
I may say that I believe an examining of the record of the question period yesterday shows that the 
Member for Nipawin and myself were on parallel courses about how supplementary questions should be 
raised. Examination of the Interim Report dealing with that section makes that the obvious conclusion if 
you read the statements of the Member for Nipawin and my statements as well. It’s interesting to note 
that on examining the record the Member for Nipawin was correct in one point. In fact, a supplementary 
question was an original question when it was called a supplementary question. I brought that to the 
Member’s attention who asked the question. 
 
The examination of the record also shows that a series of questions begun by the Member for Souris 
Cannington, about grid roads was expanded to the extent that we were talking about the policy of the 
MRAA with regard to flood control which I view as being an expansion of the question, by 
supplementary, which gets very close to the point where it might be called out of order because it 
certainly is on a different subject. I want to thank the Member for bringing that to my attention. I caution 
all Members to be sure that their supplementaries pertain to seeking more information on the substance 
of the question that was asked or a clarification of the answer that was given. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would raise a Point of Order on 
today’s question period. 
 
As we understand it a question and its supplementaries take precedence, in accordance with a previous 
ruling of yours, over a new question. In supplementary questions I would 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
931 

 

suggest to you Mr. Speaker, pertaining to the first question should take precedence over supplementary 
questions to the second, third, fourth or fifth question. The supplementary question today that I was 
asking of the Minister of Industry you ruled out of order and I think justifiably so. I believe you’re right, 
I did make a speech, however, you did not rule the question out of order and when I wanted to try to ask 
a further supplementary on that question you recognized a new question instead of my supplementary 
and I must say that we’re getting very confused as to which takes precedence, which comes first, the 
chicken or the egg, the supplementary for the first question, the supplementary from the second or third 
and so on. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I thank the Member for his comments. However, an examination of the record will 
show that there were two Members on their feet trying for a supplementary, I don’t know whether it will 
show on the record but in fact two Members were on their feet calling “supplementary” and it’s 
impossible for the Speaker to tell which supplementary comes first. It’s agreed that the supplementaries 
to the question should be asked when the questions are answered or thereabouts. It’s possible for a 
Member to come in later with a supplementary but I have asked Members at the beginning of this trial 
period to get their supplementaries in at the same time as the question. The Member for Nipawin 
obtained his supplementary one question later, which I don’t think is out of joint with the times. 
Meanwhile the supplementary that was being put forward by another Member dealt with a question that 
was immediately before us at that time. The fact that the supplementary question by the Member for 
Nipawin dealt with the previous question doesn’t necessarily give him precedence over the question 
immediately before us. I’ll take the supplementary as soon as I can and I don’t think the Members 
should be offended if he loses one spot. I think this is a relatively minor matter and I don’t intend to 
entertain any more comments on it at this time. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — On a Point of Order and with all due respect to the Member. What you really 
should do and perhaps I should stress this to the Hon. House Leader, the routine proceedings should be 
changed after the oral question period you could put in a period of 15 minutes which would be devoted 
to the Member for Nipawin to whine about the fact that he didn’t do very well in the question period. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The 
Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1969. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I have introduced in general terms a couple of bills the other day respecting the 
reform of the Magistrate’s Courts administratively primarily as well as the Justices of the Peace. I now 
am going to introduce the remaining two bills with respect to that package. The remarks that I made on 
Monday last in introducing the Magistrates’ Courts 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
932 

 

Act amendments and speaking to the Provincial Magistrates’ Courts amendments in general are 
applicable in this particular case today. However, I will make just two or three brief remarks respecting 
each bill and this Bill that we have before us is Bill No. 7, The Summary Offences Procedure Act. 
 
I would ask that the Members keep the comments that I will hereafter make in context with those that I 
made on Monday last about the general thrust of the package of amendments. Now, Mr. Speaker, there 
are several amendments being proposed to The Summary Offences Procedure Act. One of the 
amendments is basically and simply a housekeeping change. Some amendments deal with the improved 
procedures of the processing voluntary payment offences while others are related to the proposed 
amendments to the Justices of the Peace Act. 
 
The housekeeping amendment to this Act is the amendment to Section 6 (8) wherein certain words are 
being added to clarify the meaning of that clause. Apparently these words were left out when the clause 
was incorporated into this Act from The Vehicles Act. 
 
Several changes in wording are proposed for Section 6B in order that a revised system can be 
implemented for processing cases wherein a fine may be paid without the court appearance. The revised 
system will basically provide for centralized processing for all voluntary penalty cases. Consequently it 
will be necessary to direct payment of fines for voluntary penalty cases to a central office rather than to 
individual court offices and it will also be necessary to stipulate a due date for payment which is set for 
some time before the date set for court appearance in order that payments can be processed and the 
appropriate court offices can be notified of all convictions and non-payments before the case is to be 
docketed. 
 
The rationale behind the proposal to centralize the processing of cases involving voluntary payment 
without court appearance is directly related to the current situation in court offices wherein the work 
load is mounting almost on a monthly or yearly basis and in some cases is even too great for the support 
staff. We hope that this reform which is part of the CJMIS system that I discussed in general terms the 
other day, will result in centralized processing of voluntary payments and should serve to reduce the 
work loads further. It should provide significant economies of scale in this aspect of administrative 
operations of the Magistrates Courts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, an amendment to Section 6 (5) of the Act will facilitate the implementation of this 
new system by providing for different tickets prescribed under the Act to be used in different areas of 
the Province. Consequently it will be possible to implement a new system which involves a revised form 
of ticket; this will be done on a day to day basis as will the entire scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, it is proposed that court costs should be eliminated in summary 
conviction proceedings. I think the reasons that have been advanced in this area have been clearly done 
so by earlier comments so I will simply state now that this part of the package and repeat the general 
view that in my opinion there no longer exists any rationale for the imposition of court costs. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
933 

 

The proposed amendment to Section 6B of this Act removes any reference to court costs as they relate to 
cases of voluntary payments of fines without court appearance. The deletion of Section 7 of the Act 
takes away the specific authority for imposing court costs on summary conviction proceedings pursuant 
to provincial or municipal offences. It is intended that an Order in Council will be made pursuant to 
Section 772(2) of the Criminal Code of Canada specifying that no court costs shall be taken in summary 
conviction proceedings pursuant to federal offences. 
 
The last amendment to this Act involves the deletion of Section 8 and 9 which presently provide a 
mechanism whereby JPs can be paid for their services even if they do not recover their fees from court 
costs. As I discussed the other day, it’s proposed that our JPs be remunerated on a fee for service basis 
for their services in the administration of justice. Consequently there no longer exists any need for these 
two sections which I might add are basically administratively cumbersome to apply in regard to 
remunerating JPs and once this system is fully set up, will no longer be relevant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that fairly well outlines the basic thrust of the amendments to this Bill and I 
move second reading of Bill No. 7, an Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1969. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The 
Justices of the Peace Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill relates to the Justices of the Peace Act and again all that I have said in the 
previous remarks in the general application apply here because this Bill must be viewed as part of the 
package as I have described it. 
 
I will say a few brief remarks about this Act. The first objective of the proposed amendments to the JPs 
Act, like those that I have talked about earlier, is to implement or help us implement the CJMIS and to 
improve the administrative operations for the JPs. Like the amendments of the other Bills primarily the 
Magistrates’ Courts, the Provincial Magistrates’ Court Bills, this Act deletes the present section which 
statutorily set out the administrative requirements of JPs and replaces them with another section which 
allows for changes to be made administratively for the recording of case dispositions, fine receipts and 
services provided by a JP, as well as, of course, the disposition of other claimed moneys held by a JP. 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, by incorporating administrative requirements in this Bill in this manner we 
will be able expediently to make changes and improvements to the administrative operations of our JPs 
as required and as we are able to do so. 
 
The second objective of this Bill is to provide for a guaranteed remuneration of JPs for their services 
rendered in the administration of justice. The amendment will provide for regulations setting out a 
schedule of fees payable to the JPs for their services as well for regulations respecting the manner in 
which the JPs should bill the government for those services, if I may put it in those terms. Although the 
schedule will essentially be at the level now provided with some changes, this amendment will provide a 
workable mechanism to guarantee that the fees will indeed be paid. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
934 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that these amendments should be welcomed by the Members of the House and that 
this will be an improvement in the role of JPs. I would simply close by commending the role that our JPs 
have played in the past in the administration of justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 8, an Act to amend the Justices of the Peace Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 33 — An 
Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act, 1973. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act are for the 
most part housekeeping amendments. The most important amendment of the Bill incorporates changes 
that will greatly increase the benefits available to rural municipal secretary treasurers. Most significantly 
this Bill guarantees that the monthly pension payable to rural municipal secretary treasurers will be no 
less than $8 for every year of service up to 35 years. This means that a rural municipal secretary 
treasurer who retired after a full career of 35 years is guaranteed no less than $280 per month. 
Previously the most that any superannuated secretary treasurer could be certain of was $110 per month 
and that applied only in cases where the superannuate reached the maximum years of service, so that 
$280 per month will be an increase of 155 per cent for those with a maximum service of 35 years and an 
even greater percentage increase for those with less than the maximum years of service. For example, a 
secretary treasurer, Mr. Speaker, who retired in 1967 with 33 years of service will up to now have been 
receiving $104 per month. Under the new amendments the superannuate will now receive $264 per 
month, an increase of $160 per month or 150 per cent. A person who retired in 1971 with 34 years will 
at present be receiving $145 and with this amendment will be increased to $272 per month or an 
increase of $127 per month. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly these increases will make a great difference to those who have been 
struggling to keep up with inflation on low fixed incomes. The new minimum will be of special value to 
those municipal secretaries who retired on small pensions because their salaries were low during the 
contributory years of service. 
 
This $280 minimum will apply to provide increases to those already receiving pensions as well as those 
who retire in the future. 
 
I have some experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this minimum approach, experiences the same as 
with the teachers pension plan negotiated as part of the 1974-75 teacher collective bargaining agreement 
is that it has meant a great deal to superannuated teachers of Saskatchewan, has provided extra dollars 
where they were really needed and were very much appreciated and I know and I think all Members will 
agree that the same would be true of our rural municipal secretary treasurers. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
935 

 

This major change to the Municipal Employees Superannuation Act arises directly out of representation 
by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. At their convention in Saskatoon in April 
1975 a motion was passed proposing the $8 per month per year of service level of pension and 
proposing that that plan be financed on a 50-50 basis by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and by the Provincial Government. It was proposed that each municipality be assessed an 
annual amount for contributions to the plan. We were happy to have accepted this proposal by the 
SARM. It not only brings the pensions of secretary treasurers retiring now and in the future up to that of 
teachers’, but it also puts Saskatchewan ahead of any other province in its superannuation benefits for 
retiring rural municipal secretaries. 
 
A pension plan for rural secretary treasurers was first established, Mr. Speaker, in 1930. In 1951 a plan 
was established for school units and school district employees as well as some urban employees. The 
two plans were blocked together in 1956 and in 1959 when The Municipal Employees Superannuation 
Act was passed. In 1973 the former Act was repealed and a new one was passed providing pensions 
based on the six highest years of service rather than the amount paid into the plan, as had been the case 
under the 1959 Act. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities has traditionally had a special reserve fund to 
supplement the pensions provided under the Act for rural secretary treasurers. Under this fund each 
municipality agreed to pay up to $150 per year with the Government contributing $15,000 per year to 
ensure that every retiring secretary treasurer received at least $45 per month. This fund grew to the point 
where by 1970 it was able to support a minimum guaranteed level of $110 per month for retiring rural 
secretary treasurers. 
 
It should be noted that the fund applied only to rural secretary treasurers and not to all municipal 
employees. The SARM proposal for a minimum number of dollars per month, per year of service is an 
outgrowth of these earlier special funds for rural secretary treasurers. The new benefits will mean a loss 
to each municipality of a little over $100 for a total cost to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities of about $30,000 and a cost of about $30,000 to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are pleased, Mr. Speaker, to co-operate in this joint plan with the municipalities. I am convinced that 
the benefits to the rural superannuates will be well worth the cost. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
provides amendments which will permit voluntary contributions for those who are part of the previous 
plan, but who are not allowed by the 1973 Act to make additional contributions. 
 
On the housekeeping side, it ensures that any benefits for which an municipal employee might have 
been eligible under the previous Act, are transferred to the new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
MR. G. LANE: (Qu’Appelle) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to respond to the remarks of the Minister. 
No doubt this is an improvement. I think, 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
936 

 

however, that we are falling back into a trap when the Government insists on patting itself on the back. 
We are going to be before this Assembly in another four or five years to bring in further amendments. 
The same thing will apply to retired teachers and certain other retired groups of people. 
 
There has been a demand from these groups and from the municipal employees that we consider such 
tactics as indexing their pensions. And this is not done in this case as it is done for the senior citizens old 
age pension. I think that an absolute minimum in these times of inflation that any superannuation bill 
being brought forward by the Government opposite should be indexed to take into account inflation. 
 
I know that certainly the Minister opposite and the Cabinet would endorse that because I believe that to 
be the position of the federal counterparts of the New Democratic Party. 
 
I think that some time in the not too distant future the Government opposite is going to have to come to 
grips with the problem of pensions; it is going to have to come to grips with the problems of 
superannuates who are affected by government pensions, so that we can present to the people of the 
province a comprehensive program, which will ensure freedom from economic hardship and will ensure 
once and for all an adequate pension without the necessity of a regular or irregular review of their 
pensions every four or five years. They must come begging to the Assembly, to the Members of the 
Assembly, to get an increase in pension, an increase which is much needed. I urge upon the Minister to 
start to look beyond the immediate solution to try and find some, if there is one, comprehensive solution 
to the status of superannuates who are affected by government pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am waiting further comments from the Municipal Employees affected and beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 34 — An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act, 1973. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are of a housekeeping nature, made 
necessary by the increased activity of the Government in the field of housing. They are amendments to 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act, 1973. 
 
The amendment to Section 18 of the Act will implement a new streamlined procedure for the 
incorporation of the administration of public housing authorities. 
 
Essentially the amendment provides that the public housing authorities can be now incorporated and the 
substitution of new members can take place by ministerial order, rather than by order in Council, which 
is not only somewhat awkward, but in many, many cases it is at times very time consuming. 
 
Public rental housing is a joint federal/provincial municipal program cost shared 75-25 respectively for 
both capital expenditures and for ongoing operating costs. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
937 

 

Completed projects are administered by the Local Housing Authority whose members are chosen from 
among the local community upon the recommendation of a nominating committee made up of local 
federal-provincial and municipal representatives. 
 
Housing Authorities are responsible for the maintenance of public housing projects in their respective 
communities as well as making sure that all units are occupied by those persons most in need of rent 
geared to income housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for a streamlined procedure for the appointment of members to each Housing 
Authority arises from the fact that this Government’s commitment is to supply public rental 
accommodation and supplied by a significant increase when it took office. When we came to power 
there were 1,372 public housing units in the province. Since then there have been 2,435 starts; 3,133 are 
completed and occupied and some 1,280 starts are expected to be approved in the year 1976. Senior 
Citizens’ rental accommodation accounts for 58 per cent of the rent year to income accommodation in 
the province. There was a time prior to this Government taking office when only 7 per cent of the units 
were being built for senior citizens, people, we feel most in need of decent affordable accommodation. 
All of this simply points to the fact that the administration of public housing projects has increased and 
increased significantly and Housing Authorities must be kept as efficient as possible to cope with the 
expanding duties that they are being charged with. 
 
We feel that the present system of appointments by Order in Council has been, in cases, time 
consuming, has meant that sometimes lengthy vacancies have hindered the effectiveness of the Housing 
Authorities. 
 
So, therefore, Mr. Speaker, with this amendment we can assure that appointments of members to 
Housing Authorities are not delayed and as a result will allow for more efficient management of our 
public housing projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government is committed to doing everything that it can to lessen the shortage of 
housing accommodation and more important, to provide reasonably priced serviced land for residential 
development. The amendment to Section 41 of The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act will 
facilitate a long-term planning in the area of capital borrowing for housing and land programs, rather 
than substituting yearly amendments to the Act to accommodate this Government’s priority in the field 
of housing. 
 
This is not to be taken that The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be committing $200 million in 
this fiscal year, rather the amendment is proposed in order to take into account future demand on this 
Government for its capital expenditure programs for housing. The capital expenditures of the Housing 
Corporation for 1976-77 will increase significantly, increase significantly to accommodate the demand 
for municipalities for assistance in land assembly and developing serviced residential land for land 
banking for future development, to affect the supply of rental accommodation, other than public 
housing, by way of mortgage financing. 
 
As mentioned earlier we are committed to increasing the supply of public rental accommodation for our 
senior citizens and for our lower income families. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
938 

 

In order to improve the existing housing conditions there is a residential rehabilitation program which 
offers low interest loans for repairs and renovations. The demand for housing by our native people has 
increased and this must be met. A co-operative building program has been expanded from 74 houses to 
hopefully 500 houses in this fiscal year. A target of 375 units, under the rural housing program, has been 
set for 1976 in line with our commitment to achieve 2,000 units over the next four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments that are proposed in this Bill are simple and straightforward, but they 
offer more efficient administration to the local level for public housing and within the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation for an increased capital expenditure program. 
 
I am, therefore, very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA: (Maple Creek) — Mr. Speaker, in viewing the Bill it would seem to me that 
it is a matter of a housekeeping nature and will expedite procedures in the future and probably will take 
cut some of the delays that might otherwise occur. 
 
I should like to make a couple of comments about the housing programs before I sit down. 
 
First of all, it seems to me upon reviewing most housing programs there is a weakness that I detect. It 
seems that there is aid and help for the person who is in the low income bracket and there is also the 
fellow on the other end of the bracket, who has his own money to purchase a house. But it would seem 
to me that there is a group that is in the middle, the group who may make themselves anywhere from 
$12,000 to $15,000. If you look through the Estimates of the various departments, even Government 
Services, there are a lot of people who fall into this particular bracket. It would seem that here we have a 
group of people who will have to pay a very extensive amount of their own income for housing 
payments. In fact it is almost prohibitive when you have to start thinking about paying $500 a month out 
of your net cheque in order to make and pay a housing mortgage. 
 
It would seem to me that when we are thinking about these programs, that we should also be thinking 
about this particular group of people. Here we have a group who are unable to purchase houses, or if 
they do they have to make extreme financial sacrifices in regard to the proportion of their net pay that 
must go towards housing. 
 
The second thing is that I noticed that a great deal of money is being devoted towards the co-operative 
programs. Fine, I have no criticisms about the co-operative programs. But I think the Minister is also 
aware that in some of the rural areas of Saskatchewan it is difficult to be able to find a number of people 
who are going to be building new houses in order to form the co-operative. Many of our towns and 
communities, particularly the villages, just don’t have that many people who are going to be building 
new houses in any year and can’t take advantage of the particular program. So I while I realize there is 
one particular program to help rural homes or rural Saskatchewan, one has something to do with income, 
limiting the people who are making more than $9,000. I think here we 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
939 

 

definitely have an area, a group of people for whom housing is getting too costly. We are going to have 
to have some programs to help these groups of people, the middle income group, who are people who 
make more than $10,000 per year. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 47 — An Act to 
amend The Local Government Board Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Local Government Board was established in 1914. It goes back a long time in 
the history of Saskatchewan. Its job was to protect the holders of local government bond issues. The 
Board has continued, to the present day, its role shifting over the years to the guardian of good financial 
management on the part of local governments in Saskatchewan. 
 
Cities, towns, villages, rural municipalities, school districts unit boards, union hospital districts come 
under the purview of the Local Government Board. Any capital works expenditures which involves 
borrowed funds over a period of more than one year, must be approved by the Local Government Board. 
As a semi-judicial body the Board is independent from government and its members are appointed for a 
ten-year term and can only be dismissed by the Legislature. There is no appeal to any Minister or to 
Cabinet, of rules made on applications and decisions made by the Local Government Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during its 62 years of operation, the Board has maintained a high standard of financial 
stability in Saskatchewan communities. I don’t think there is any question but that it is true that 
Saskatchewan local governments have on the whole, higher credit ratings than those of local 
governments in other provinces. 
 
The role of the Board, therefore, has been a very important one. The function of financial management is 
as important today as it ever was. We look forward to the Board continuing its independent service; we 
look forward to the Board continuing to provide its service. Over the years, however, the financial world 
has changed and we need now to introduce changes to The Local Government Board Act, as I indicated 
it’s an Act that was introduced in 1914. We need to look at changes which will allow it to assist local 
government more effectively in managing their financial resources in the circumstances of the 1970s and 
the 1980s. 
 
One of the difficulties which has emerged in the operation of the board over the years is that local 
municipalities only learn of the difficulties when they apply to the Local Government Board to 
undertake a certain expenditure and are turned down. The answer has been over the period of years, Yes 
or No, as the case may be. There’s no opportunity for the Local Government Board to sit down with the 
applying municipality to discuss how things might be changed in order to improve the situation. For this 
reason, one of the reasons we’re introducing amendments which will require the Local Government 
Board to provide written reasons for its decision. This will give the respective local government much 
greater opportunity to understand their financial situation as it is seen in the eyes 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
940 

 

of the Local Government Board. To provide an opportunity for the respective local governments to sit 
with the Local Government Board to discuss possible ways to improve their financial situation over a 
longer period of time. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, the Local Government Board will have an opportunity to assist local governments in 
real and positive ways on their long term financial planning, rather than acting as an arbitrary watchdog 
who sits in judgment, but who does nothing to provide advice or assistance. 
 
In addition if on any particular application a local government has reviewed the written reasons 
provided, has discussed the situation with the Local Government Board and still does not believe that 
they have been given a fair decision by the Board, there is provision through these amendments for an 
appeal. This appeal will consist of a re-hearing by the board to give the local government an opportunity 
to bring to light any factors that it thinks the board has not considered sufficiently. Upon a hearing and 
reconsideration of the case by the Board, the second decision of the Board with respect to that particular 
application will be final. 
 
These amendments we’re introducing also clarify for local governments the criteria in which their 
applications will be judged. Under the new amendments the Local Government Board will focus its 
consideration of the application on financial matters. The Board will consider as it does now, the impact 
of a proposed expenditure on the total financial position of the local authority. In doing so it will 
consider the economic bases on which the loan can be supported and the economic conditions that can 
be reasonably anticipated, during the life of the expenditure. It will consider the effect on revenue, on 
taxation levels, the lifetime of the work on any financial assistance that may be available from the 
province or from other sources, it will consider the long-term actuarial soundness of present municipal 
commitments, such as pension schemes, and any other factors that relate to the local authority’s ability 
to assume the proposed loan. 
 
The written decision from the Local Government Board on the bases of these factors will automatically 
give the local authority assessment of his present and his future financial wants. If there are problems 
they can be brought to light in these decisions and local governments will be in a much better position 
than they have formerly been to take steps to correct the situation before it might well become serious. 
The written decisions of the Board, the more active involvement of the Board with the local government, 
in planning future financial matters will put a heavier workload on the Local Government Board. 
Because of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have made provisions if it becomes necessary to increase the 
membership of the board from a maximum of five to a maximum of seven members. Provisions in the 
Act will be left as an option to be acted upon as circumstances dictate once we have some more 
experience with the amendments proposed in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments to the Local Government Board Act will give the Local 
Government Board a great deal more scope to assist local governments with financial planning. It will 
bring the operations of the Board up to date. I’m sure that local governments at all levels will welcome 
the objective of the financial criteria. They’ll welcome the written decisions, they’ll welcome the 
opportunity for discussion, they’ll welcome the opportunity for appeal if they feel it’s necessary. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
941 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will be assured of the continued high credit ratings of their 
communities through the actions of the Local Government Board. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to move this Bill. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE: (Qu’Appelle) — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have been awaiting the proposals of the 
Government since the SARM convention earlier this year. I think a few comments are in order. There is 
little doubt that the previous board was running into a great deal of criticism for its rulings. I think on 
balance that the Board did comply with the mandate that the Board has had over the last several years. It 
guaranteed the financial responsibility of the various communities. I think it was influential in keeping 
the record of the name of the province a good one in the international bond markets and I don’t think 
anyone will refute that particular statement. 
 
The Board was doing its job. What happened over the last few months, though, was I think a bad 
practice, all of a sudden the Cabinet Ministers, some of the Cabinet Ministers of the Government 
opposite, proceeded to publicly criticize members of the Board and the Local Government Board itself. 
Something that hadn’t happened before and the Premier is one who’s probably as guilty with his attacks 
on the Local Government Board, his attacks in a public statement in the city of Yorkton. 
 
Now I think it was proper for the Government to bring to this Assembly, proposed changes in the 
operation of the Board, to take into account the legitimate concerns of local governments. But for the 
Government opposite to politically attack the Board and in particular its chairman, I think started and set 
a bad precedent. And, I think, an unnecessary precedent and I think, an unfair precedent. I think the 
second step that the Government took, was frankly petty, that is, pulling the rug out from under the 
former chairman of the Board. Again, if it was the intention of the Government to establish objective 
criteria under which the Board must operate or bring in changes such as written reasons, then it could 
have easily have done so without publicly attempting to discredit an individual who had given many 
years of fine service to the people of this province. I think it was unfortunate tactically for the 
Government opposite. There was no scapegoat and there shouldn’t have been any scapegoat in the 
operation of local government. Objective criteria as set out here could have been done under the 
chairmanship of Mr. McMillan. I think it, again, unfair and an unfortunate practice that the Government 
entered upon. 
 
I think that’s its interesting that there was a great call among the rural municipalities for objective 
criteria. And yet when we go through the criteria as set out in the proposed amendment we note that the 
Government still had to give a broad subjective power to the Board. I’m referring to subclause (h) 
Section 26 wherein it says: 
 

such other matters as in the opinion of the Board relate to the local authority’s ability to assume 
the liability of the proposed law. 

 
That is as broad a power as you can possibly give, and in fact, is no different than the situation that 
existed prior to the amendment. Certainly all that the Local Government Board will have to do now is 
take into account specific things and still 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
942 

 

come out and say we don’t feel that this particular municipality is capable of managing the debt load that 
is the subject matter in the application. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there was no way around the problem, of not allowing the 
Local Government Board to have some pretty broad powers. We certainly didn’t have to publicly 
discredit Mr. McMillan to put the criteria in the Bill. We didn’t have to discredit Mr. McMillan to 
recognize the need for some objective or broad decision-making powers in the Local Government 
Board. Again I think it was unfortunate I think frankly it was unfair and I think it was unnecessary. 
 
The Minister talks about the increase in the number of board members to seven. Interesting thing is, of 
course, is that we have had three and we have had the power to have five and we’ve never put in five 
and now we are going to seven when we have not had the maximum number that was allowed under the 
previous legislation. 
 
I agree with the need for written decisions. I find it strange that the right of appeal is back to the Board 
itself which made the original decision and that was the situation which existed in the past. I’m informed 
that it was common for local governments to ask for a rehearing and to go back before the Board again. 
Now they are formally allowed to do it. I have some fairly strong reservations whether the Board itself 
that made the original decision is the proper board to be holding the appeal but I don’t have any concrete 
suggestions as to who would be better able to do it within this particular case. I think that the activities 
of the Cabinet office, in particular the Premier, publicly criticizing the Board, did more to discredit the 
Board than anything else could have done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll have more comments to make in the particular matter and beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 26 — An Act to 
amend The Dairy Products Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in Bill No. 26 we are proposing some rather minor amendments to further update 
the Act to accommodate some new procedures. 
 
The original Act was passed many years ago to provide for the orderly development of the milk 
processing industry and to provide for rules and regulations under which milk processing plants must 
operate to ensure high quality sanitary products to the consumer. It provides for licensing of plants to 
ensure that these requirements were met. And, also, provided for licensing of milk producers to ensure 
that their production facilities met certain minimum standards as outlined in the regulations. As the 
industry modernized some further amendments were made to the Act in 1967, 1968 and again in 1974. 
 
As a result of these amendments some ambiguities have shown up in Sections 27, 28, 29 and 34, which 
deal with the licensing of dairy manufacturing plants and their patrons. The amendments 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
943 

 

proposed here do not in any way change the wording of those sections but simply rearranges the sections 
so that they are more readable and consistent. Section 5 of the amendment provides for new procedures 
for testing milk at manufacturing plants. Until recently all butterfat test on milk were performed by a 
Babcock Tester; now more accurate and faster electronic methods have replaced the Babcock Tester. 
Mr. Speaker, the dairy industry in this province is experiencing a period of rapid change and expansion 
brought about mainly by the development of industrial milk production during the last three years. Some 
400 new producers are now supplying milk to two new industrial manufacturing plants, one located at 
Saskatoon and the other at Yorkton. 
 
New producers and farmer cream shippers from practically all areas of the province are developing dairy 
enterprises to stabilize their farming income. Milk delivered to these plants is processed into butter, 
cheese and milk powder. Production of industrial milk will approach approximately one hundred million 
pounds. Products such as cheese and milk powder which were previously imported into the province are 
now being manufactured here for domestic consumption. Nearly five million pounds of milk powder 
and over 1.8 million pounds of cheddar and specialty cheese will be manufactured in Saskatchewan this 
year. The additional returns to producers from manufacturing milk, together with fluid production has 
assisted greatly in stabilizing the farm economy of this province. 
 
A fluid milk purchasing pool was introduced in Saskatchewan by the Milk Control Board on December 
1, 1974. All fluid milk to be processed in the province is purchased by the pool and is then sold to the 
processors. Fluid milk pricing under the pool provides for uniform price on all milk produce. 
 
There are two major advantages to this system. First, the returns to producers have been increased, and 
second, adequate supplies of milk in all parts of the province are assured. If shortages of fluid milk occur 
in any one area of the province the pool enables milk to be moved from areas where there are adequate 
supplies. It provides industrial producers with an opportunity to enter the fluid trade if the required 
volumes cannot be met by the existing fluid shippers. 
 
Regulations under The Dairy Products Act set minimum standards for both milk quality and facilities. 
Consumers are ensured that new fluid shippers must meet these higher standards before they are 
permitted to ship milk to the fluid pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased therefore, to move second reading of Bill No. 26. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK: (Moosomin) — I had rather initially thought I might speak to the amendment 
which is before us. I fail to see how the Minister’s remarks on the amendment to The Dairy Products Act 
related directly to those changes in the Act. You expounded on a bit of the history in the province in the 
dairy industry, of where it’s at and where it’s going. And I might do the same. 
 
You look at the amendment and you say that you are only rearranging the wording. And in effect that is 
true. That is all you are doing. I wish you had rearranged the wording so 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
944 

 

that the whole thing might have read differently, instead of continuing in the same trend that you have 
been. 
 
The section to allow for more accurate testing of equipment is good. And it is the only good thing I see 
in the amendment to The Dairy Products Act. Quite frankly, I don’t have any bone to pick with the 
amendment because, as you said yourself you would only rearrange the wording. But it is that bad 
wording that I am concerned with. 
 
The dairy industry right now in the province of Saskatchewan is looking at a lot of problems. You talk 
about what is being done in the province for the dairy producers. I say it has been done much too late. It 
should have been going ten or fifteen years ago in terms of manufacturing plants for cheese. When I first 
started shipping what we know today as industrial milk or manufacturing milk, I had to start shipping to 
Manitoba because there was no place to ship industrial milk to in Saskatchewan. I might add I started at 
a price of $3.40 a hundred. It is hard to believe, but do you know I made more money then, than the 
industrial milk shipper is making today in Saskatchewan at present prices. My figures which I have in 
my records can substantiate that statement. 
 
Having said that, there is no way that I can agree that the dairy industry is flourishing and everything is 
roses because it just simply is not. We are looking at a number of major problems. You are looking at an 
industrial milk industry which is subject to very rigid regulations in building requirements — not nearly 
as rigid as those required by the fluid trade. But nevertheless a lot more rigid than those of the cream 
shipping era. And I will agree that in that era they weren’t rigid enough. 
 
You have moved in the right direction in providing an outlet for different classes of milk. But due to the 
fact that these dairy producers feel that milk is milk and it should all be the same price. We are running 
into some very difficult problems; that being the price differences between industrial milk and fluid 
milk. You must always have that difference in price if you are going to have a difference in the 
regulations. 
 
I might just at this time relate to a question that I had asked you and your answer. Your answer indicated 
to me and this is a matter of fact that only those fluid milk shippers in the province are required to 
license. And that those industrial milk shippers may ship to a plant if they have a quota. A law is a law. I 
take an Act in these statutes to be a form of law. If a speeding ticket can be passed out to a person for 65 
miles per hour and you are going over, okay. That isn’t just for those with big cars or those with sports 
cars or what have you. If you look at this Act, it says ‘patrons’, that is the word. I think if we just take a 
moment and look at the Act of ‘68, Section 27, amended Section 5, part 2: 
 

No patron shall supply milk to a dairy manufacturing plant unless he is the holder of a licence 
issued to him under authority of this Act. 

 
Now then, I don’t want to have the industrial milk shippers licensed, I want to have the licence necessity 
removed from the fluid industry. Or at least, let us be consistent. That was the reason for my line of 
questioning in the oral question 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
945 

 

period to you, Mr. Minister, with regard to licensing of dairy producers. 
 
I just don’t know where you are going in this. If you go back in the statutes it would seem to me that due 
to changes in the dairy industry moving out of cream into industrial milk and fluid milk and different 
modes of transportation and this type of thing, even going back into the 1965 statutes, it says something 
to the effect that anyone that causes milk to be put into a bulk milk truck should be subject to licence. I 
am no lawyer but I could require a dairy farmer to be licensed under that. So definitely, I don’t blame 
you for rewording it. Because it hasn’t been clear over the years. I don’t think it is clear right now 
because of the fact that you are not requiring all patrons of milk to be licensed. 
 
Furthermore in the dairy industry we are looking at a whole range of problems dealing with the cost of 
feed being so high, the unavailability of replacement stock, bad cattle prices at the auctions which reflect 
on the price of our dairy cattle, which are down now compared to what they were a year or two ago. We 
may be looking at road restrictions that are going to require these bulk milk trucks to make more 
frequent pickups, haul less milk at a time and not getting this milk into the Regina shed in time. We have 
faced a lot of problems in that area when a whole range of dairy farmers got an extremely high bacteria 
count and it was traced back and proved that it wasn’t the dairy farmers at all. The dairy producers have 
admitted this. Mr. Art George has agreed to this. He said this has happened on a number of occasions. 
Not to say that there aren’t some legitimate high loop counts in the dairy producers and that they 
shouldn’t be watched and governed as well. 
 
I think we have to realize that licensing is really not necessary to maintain a very high quality of milk 
coming off dairy farms and through your dairy processing plants. I don’t really feel that is necessary. I 
am looking at the magnitude of the laws which you have in The Dairy Products Act. You mentioned 
again to me in the House that I maybe had misunderstood and thought that the dairy farmers were 
licensed under The Natural Products Marketing Act. I am fully aware that they are not licensed under 
that Act, they are licensed under The Dairy Products Act. 
 
With any form of licensing where a government has control over the dairy farmers or of any farmers 
over their production, or where they can ship or how much, is something that I don’t personally agree 
with and neither does our Progressive Conservative caucus. These controls are unnecessary to maintain 
these high levels. 
 
There is a lot more I have to say on this. What I want to try to do — I have said what I disagree with in 
your amendment, as it is only a continuation from about 20 years ago. It is not moving in the right 
direction. The only thing that is good about it is that it is clarifying what we already have which is bad. 
And that you have made some allowances for this new testing equipment to be used, which is good. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
946 

 

MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill 45 — An Act to amend The 
Agricultural Implements Act, 1968. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Agricultural Implements Act, 1968 as proposed in Bill 45 
are in the main amendments designed to standardize the terminology of farm machinery legislation in 
the three provinces. 
 
The Saskatchewan Agricultural Implements Board since it was established in 1974 has been working 
closely with the Boards of Manitoba and Alberta in an effort to improve the services of the agricultural 
implement industry to the farmer users. It has become evident that a greater degree of standardization of 
the rules will assist industry in improving the service to farmers which is the prime purpose of the 
Board. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will also define farmers’ rights respecting the purchase of farm 
machinery and repairs and will more clearly define the assistance available to them through the 
Agricultural Implements Board. I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that the greater the degree of 
standardization the greater will be the effort expended by the industry to improve their service to 
farmers. 
 
These amendments will enable implement dealers to improve economies in items such as printing of 
sales contracts which can be uniform for all three provinces under these amendments. 
 
Industry itself has indicated that economies and improved services can be expected through 
standardization merely because it would be much easier for management to instruct and supervise staff 
in respect to legislative requirements. 
 
These amendments also establish definite procedures for farmers to follow in securing emergency repair 
parts. The specified procedure provided for in the amendments will assist in overcoming a considerable 
number of the problems encountered by farmers such as delays in their farming operations resulting 
from a lack of repair parts. 
 
Another new section contained in the amendments is Section 16A of the amendments. This section 
pertains to warranties on new agricultural implements, Mr. Speaker. The Agricultural Implements Act as 
it presently reads does not directly specify the warranties required. The warranty is a portion of the 
conditional sales contract. The proposed amendments will make the warranty a specific section of the 
Act as well as being part of the sales contract. 
 
Again, I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that all amendments proposed in this Bill have been 
directed towards the basic end which is to obtain standardization with Manitoba and Alberta and will 
result in improved conditions in the field of agricultural implement supply and service for farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a few comments relative to the work carried out by the Agricultural 
Implements Board would be pertinent. The Board was established in April 1974 with an administrative 
staff of nine. The Board itself consists of seven members representing all the interests relative to 
agricultural implements. The Board operates on two broad programs which can best be termed 
preventive and remedial. Its object, 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
947 

 

Mr. Speaker, is to be 100 per cent efficient in preventing problems which would result in remedial 
programs not being required. In the preventive field the Board is responsible for 
1. Ensuring that a distributor is established in the province as a responsible representative of any 
manufacturer who wishes to market agricultural implements in Saskatchewan. There are presently 281 
manufacturers represented by 124 distributors who provide farmers with a source of repair parts and 
service in the province. 
 
2. Licensing of dealers selling agricultural implements in the province. This licensing procedure is 
directed to upgrading the dealer organization from the standpoint of parts and services available to 
farmers. There are 1,444 licensed dealers in Saskatchewan. 
 
3. These are ongoing programs with inspectors in the field carrying out inspections both of new dealers 
and distributors and re-inspection of the established dealers and distributors. The objective is to inspect 
each dealer and distributor once each year. 
 
In the remedial field, Mr. Speaker, the Board carries on three basic programs. I might add that I have 
received a good number of written and verbal complimentary statements of the work carried on by the 
Board in this field. As a result of the licensing requirements the Board maintains a working relationship 
with management of implement companies, and has been very successful in expediting the supply of 
repair parts. I might add, that it has been found that in a large majority of cases of farmers being held up 
for lack of repair parts, the problem has not been one of supply but merely a breakdown in 
communications. Non-supply of repair parts can result in disputes and the Board has been quite 
successful in mediating these disputes. Again it has been found that disputes frequently develop or are 
not resolved prior to Board action, simply because of a breakdown in communications. 
 
The third and final step is one of compensation. The Board has authority to receive, judge and award 
compensation to farmers who have suffered a loss or damages due to non-fulfilment of warranty or 
non-supply of repair parts. In the fiscal year 1974-75, the Board received and dealt with 611 complaints. 
Some of these necessitated expediting repair parts, while others required field investigations and were 
resolved by mediation. It is unfortunate that all problems cannot be resolved by mediation. 
 
The Board has been required to consider applications for compensation. From the inception of the 
program in April of 1974 to March 1, 1976, the Board has received 50 applications for compensation. Of 
these, 11 have been resolved between the parties without Board decision; seven have been rejected by 
the Board as the cost of the claimed loss was not due to failure to fulfil warranty or to parts supply and is 
therefore not within the jurisdiction of the Board. Two applications were denied by the Board. Sixteen 
awards were made for a sum of $6,661. The balance of 14 applications are being processed with 
investigative work completed on nine of which five are scheduled for Board hearings shortly. 
 
Although the foregoing are the main functions of the Board, related problems too, are having a bearing 
on the farm implement industry and have been investigated by the Board. One 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
948 

 

such example is the matter of transportation. The Board has attempted to achieve rapid and assured 
transportation of emergency repair parts. The Board has been working with the transportation industry 
and the Manufacturers Association and have recently been advised that a new system of identifying 
emergency repair parts shipments has been developed on an international basis and will be put into 
operation immediately. The Board has been actively involved in problems related to safety in the 
agricultural implement field. And also in the organization of the Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Board should be commended for carrying out its functions as successfully as 
it has and I am pleased to recommend the amendments to The Agricultural Implements Act as contained 
in Bill 45 to assist the Board in furthering its success. Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON: (Souris-Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with the Minister that 
this Bill will standardize Saskatchewan with similar Acts across the prairies. It would seem to me that 
the implications of this Act will have far-reaching effects on both implement dealers and farmers. I am 
sure that my colleague the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) will have some words to say on this very 
topic. Since he is out stopping a flood today, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister 
of Labour) that Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Printer’s Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: (Rosthern) — Mr. Speaker, I stood this Bill the other day because I wanted to 
talk to the first clause where we moved the borrowing power from $400,000 to $1,250,000. I think this 
is grossly inflationary and during the Committee of the Whole I will be moving an amendment to that 
figure. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Mr. Kramer 
(Minister of Highways) that Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Highways Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER: (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives) — Once again in this particular 
piece of legislation the Government is asking for a dramatic increase in the amount that it has in its 
advance account for highway equipment. In the Minister’s brief to the Members of the Assembly the 
Minister has stated that at the very most what he will require in the advance account, at the very top, this 
year is $40 million. The Act 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
949 

 

now reads $25 million and yet we are asked, Mr. Speaker, to raise the limit or the ante in this advance 
account to $50 million, $10 million more than the Minister needs. Now in this period of inflation we 
think that these limits to borrowing and limits to the amount available to government organizations and 
its agencies for the purchase of new equipment is in effect advances or borrowing, whoever wants to 
look at it that way. And we believe that is inflationary. Certainly if the Minister needs the $40 million 
and he seems to have justified it as far as we are concerned, he has only justified $35 million of it, but he 
says he needs or could need this coming year $40 million to do the job and we believe very, very 
strongly that the Legislature should set the borrowing limit at the limit of the amount that the Ministers 
of the Treasury Benches asked for. We certainly don’t think in an inflationary period we should go 25 
per cent more than the Ministers themselves ask for. For that reason we are opposed to this particular 
Bill, we think it is inflationary and we think it does not exhibit restraint on the part of the Government. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 35 
 
Pepper Kaeding Thompson 
Thibault  Kwasnica Banda 
Bowerman  McNeill Steuart 
Smishek  MacAuley Malone 
Romanow  Feschuk MacDonald 
Baker  Shillington Penner 
Lange  Rolfes  Nelson (Assin.- 
Faris  Skoberg               Gravelbourg) 
Kowalchuk  Vickar  Clifford 
MacMurchy  Nelson (Yorkton) Anderson 
Mostoway  Koskie  Merchant 
Whelan  Johnson  McMillan 

 
NAYS — 6 

 
Collver  Berntson Katzman 
Bailey  Ham  Birkbeck 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend 
The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, when I presented the Budget on March 24th, I announced an increase in tax on 
cigarettes. In a few moments I will be moving second reading to this Bill. What the Bill proposes to do 
is that the tax rate on cigarettes be increased from nine twenty-fifths of a cent per cigarette to three-fifths 
of a cent per cigarette. This means that the tax on a package of 25 cigarettes will increase from the 
current nine cents to 15 cents per pack of 25. 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
950 

 

As a smoker, Mr. Speaker, I make no apologies for introducing this tax increase. On the contrary I really 
invite all the Members in the House to join me in supporting this tax measure. The introduction of many 
and new innovative health, social education and economic programs means that the Government must 
seek additional sources of revenue in order to defray the additional costs. Mr. Speaker, cigarettes really 
are not a necessity nor are they really a luxury. Cigarettes are really a hazard. It has been demonstrated 
that cigarette smokers utilize health services and facilities to a much greater degree than does the 
population at large and particularly the non-smokers. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Why don’t . . . 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — I’m going to try. 
 
Not only do smokers endanger their own health they also impose a significant higher cost to health on 
our health system. 
 
In the coming Estimates you will have noticed that it is estimated that tobacco and cigarettes will yield a 
total of $12.8 million. The increase from nine cents to 15 cents will provide an increase in the revenue of 
$4.8 million. Now it may be argued that the increase in the rate of tax will make people smoke less and 
that our projected revenue for tobacco tax is too high. I hope that I am right, I hope that our revenue 
from tobacco tax does drop and drop dramatically because if they do this means that our program to 
reduce cigarette consumption will be successful. It will also mean that the cost of providing health 
services and health care to the people will reduce. 
 
If anyone has had an opportunity to take a look at the cost of the cancer program in the one component 
in the cancer program, it costs $4.8 million but that does not include the cost of hospital services nor 
does that include the cost of health care provided by private physicians in respect of cancer care. Mr. 
Speaker, recent Department of Health federal and provincial programs, have been encouraging citizens 
of this province to kick the habit. Let us also provide encouragement to our young people to kick the 
habit as well and hopefully not get started. 
 
I am not sure whether the price increase will prove to be a deterrent. I hope it will, but if it doesn’t it will 
at least provide additional money for the increasing costs in the health services. Mr. Speaker, the 
Province of Saskatchewan isn’t the only one, in recent budgets that is increasing the cigarette tax. You 
may have noticed that the Province of British Columbia last week in introducing their budget introduced 
a sizeable increase in their cigarette tax. Yesterday the Province of Ontario introduced their budget and I 
notice that the Minister of Finance introduced an increase in the cigarette tax. We will not be the highest 
province in the cigarette tax, maybe we should have increased it even higher. Our tax will be 15 cents 
for a pack of 25 but there are provinces now, for example, Newfoundland has got a tax of 25 cents for a 
pack of 25. 
 
Hon. Members may be interested in knowing that the Federal Sales and Excise Tax at the present time is 
32 cents for a pack of 25. Our tax will be 15 cents. 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
951 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do encourage all Members of the Assembly to join with me in giving unanimous 
approval to this measure. 
 
I, therefore, move that this Bill be read a second time. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD: (Indian Head-Wolseley) — Mr. Speaker, I am only going to make a few 
remarks on this, but first of all I am going to tell the Minister that I am going to oppose this Bill. I am 
going to tell him why, for two very specific reasons. 
 
First of all, if the Minister could tell me that he was going to use the increased revenue from the 
cigarettes to advertise and educate young people and old people about the evils of smoking, I would be 
very happy to support it. But it is like alcohol, it is another tax they collect — millions and millions on 
alcohol, and less than nothing on education and rehabilitation in the Province of Saskatchewan. And 
similarly with tobacco tax. 
 
All this is is another source of revenue for the Government to go on in its wild spending spree in a 
period of inflation. So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister could stand up and tell me what he 
was going to use this specifically for, an education program to present the evils of smoking to young 
people and to old people in Saskatchewan, the dangers of it and to an education in the classroom, 
education on television and radio, then I could see some justification at this time for doing it. 
 
But it is like the alcohol tax, every time a working man goes to the liquor store there is another increase 
in the price of liquor and what is it used for? It is used by the Government to hire more civil servants, to 
build more roads, to do whatever they so desire with and there is very little if any of it, just a small 
amount, goes towards education and rehabilitation in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
For that reason I cannot support the tobacco tax. And one of the major reasons that I am not going to 
support it, is to try to bring to the attention of the Government the fact that when they use these kinds of 
taxes, to increase revenues, they have a very grave responsibility to utilize the increased funds for 
education and rehabilitation to try to prevent and stop smokers from the beginning. That is the first 
reason why I am not going to support it. 
 
The second reason, and of course, what is going to happen is that under normal circumstances I might 
support it any other year but this one, an increase in taxes on usage. Because I suppose, if there is any 
tax that should be increased in the Province of Saskatchewan at this time, the usary tax is the one to use 
because they are not a necessity of life and people still have a choice, even though sometimes tobacco 
becomes an addiction and it is very difficult and a lot of people have tried to quit smoking, like I have, 
2,342 times without success. But nevertheless in some people it is very difficult to quit. But at this 
particular time, in an inflationary period, it is going to have only one result, it is going to increase the 
cost of living of an awful lot of people in the Province of Saskatchewan. And when you look back at all 
the taxes that this Government has increased this year, directly and indirectly, whether it is of the 
services they provide in Crown corporations, 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
952 

 

whether it is to the tobacco tax, the citizens of Saskatchewan are getting a tremendous bite out of 
whatever income they have to battle the problems of inflation and the problem of the rising cost of 
living. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, if this NDP keep it up, the poor old working man — if they keep 
increasing taxes on liquor and tobacco, we are going to have the cleanest working men in the Dominion 
of Canada and we are also going to have the poorest. 
 
All that I am going to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, is that for two reasons: 1. It is a period of inflation 
and it is the last year that we should ever increase any tax in the Province of Saskatchewan. 2. It is 
because of the failure of the Government to demonstrate that this specific tax will be used for education 
to prevent increased smoking in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER: (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives) — Mr. Speaker, I was enlightened 
by the views of my colleague for Indian Head-Wolseley about why they were going to oppose the 
taxation increase. 
 
Now it would be nice, it would be very nice as a matter of fact, for someone who has said, as I have, that 
the Budget of the Province of Saskatchewan was inappropriately calculated, and it would be very nice 
for someone who has said that government spending is too high and should be curtailed; it would be 
very nice politically for us to vote against any tax increase because politically it is a good deal for the 
Opposition to vote against tax increases of any kind. 
 
However, in this particular instance and I, probably smoke double what the Minister of Finance smokes 
and have tried to quit triple or three or four times as many times as the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, I must say that in this particular instance, the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley quite 
simply doesn’t seem to understand inflation. 
 
In a period of inflation it is incumbent upon the Government to reduce the amount of spendable money 
available in the hands of the people in such a way as to decrease the demand on certain products. And it 
seems to us that one of the products that might best be curtailed and the demand for this product might 
be tobacco and might be cigarettes, for these reasons. 
 
1. No tobacco is grown in the Province of Saskatchewan. We don’t produce tobacco here. 2. There are 
no cigarette manufacturing plants here, so there are no jobs that we are attempting to maintain in the 
tobacco industry. 3. The use of tobacco to all of us who use it and to those who don’t use it, is a drug 
and by increasing the price you are attempting to decrease the utilization of that drug that is not good for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I commend, as a matter of fact, in this particular narrow instance, the views of the Minister of Finance, 
for his comment that he hopes that the revenue from this particular source is decreased over the next 
year, decreased significantly. As a matter of fact I am certain that other than the Minister of Finance, the 
Member for Indian Head-Wolseley and myself, I am 



 
April 7, 1976 

 

 
953 

 

certain to see only that portion of the tax paid to the Government of Saskatchewan and all the rest go to 
nil so that these people can be healthier and feel better. 
 
I think that at this particular time it is not unreasonable for the Government of Saskatchewan to increase 
its tobacco tax from 9 to 15 cents. I think that it has been used across the country by all provincial 
governments to attempt to meet its budgetary needs and it is a means of diminishing the amount of 
consumption of this particular product. 
 
So for that reason we intend to support this particular 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the support of the Leader of the Conservative Party in this 
particular Bill, and in many ways regret the sort of position taken by the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, as he knows very well, whether it be in Saskatchewan or any other provincial or federal 
jurisdiction taxes are not levied and earmarked for a particular program. He was a Member in 
government, they didn’t increase the taxes and then earmark them for a specific purpose. So really he is 
blowing in the wind on this matter and do not propose to say much more. I think it would be a bad 
practice if taxes that were raised if they would have to be specifically earmarked for a particular 
purpose, say the gasoline tax, that somehow on a mandatory basis was specified for highways. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — . . .SGIO! 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — That is not the total tax only three cents is taken as the Hon. Member knows. 
Again, we would be happy to remove it, Mr. Speaker, if the accidents in Saskatchewan dropped down to 
zero. 
 
The Hon. Member talks about education programs. He said that he would be prepared to support it if all 
that money was designated for campaigns to stop smoking. I should like to refer the Hon. Member that 
in at least a couple of years under the Department of Health, and I know that the Department of 
Education funds for educational programs as well, are provided. The Health Promotion Branch, this year 
has $770,000 appropriated for public health education matters and health promotion matters; in Regional 
Health $5.6 million is provided. In the event that the Hon. Member is not aware, the Regional Health 
Services of the Department of Health have been very much involved in the anti-smoking campaigns. 
Perhaps the Hon. Member should find out what is going on in his community. Regional Health Boards 
are provided with money to designate programs. I know that the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose will 
concur with me that in their region there was a very effective campaign with the co-operation of schools, 
with the support of the Regional Health Board and with the support of the Department of Health, have 
one of the most outstanding campaigns, which has received nation-wide recognition. 
 
The Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley talks about lack of health education campaigns, I think that 
Saskatchewan has been doing as well, and perhaps more, in the health promotion area and anti-smoking 
campaign than other jurisdictions. The involvement of the Federal Government in the last couple of 
years of co-operating with the provinces is welcomed, and I can 



 
April 7, 1976 
 

 
954 

 

tell him that Saskatchewan was the province that advocated the need for national campaigns in this 
direction. 
 
He talks about the increase in cost of living. Well, in some respects the consumers have a choice. We 
know that cigarettes are the most hazardous to health based on scientific studies, that pipe tobacco, 
cigars, even roll your own cigarettes are not as hazardous as the tailor made cigarettes. Partly for that 
reason and partly because of limited revenues and the cost of administration, we chose to only increase 
the cost of tailor made cigarettes. When one looks at the cost of health services let me again remind him, 
cancer programs this year will cost $4.4 million, substantially more than last year; hospital care costs in 
treating cancer patients is about three times as much as the cancer program costs; in addition there is the 
cost of private physicians’ services in cancer care — I am not saying that all of it is the result of people 
smoking and that cancer cannot be just attributed to cigarette smoking only, but it has been identified as 
a major factor. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 30 
 
Pepper Kaeding Koskie 
Thibault  Kwasnica Johnson 
Smishek  McNeill Thompson 
Romanow  MacAuley Banda 
Baker  Feschuk Collver 
Lange  Shillington  Bailey 
Kowalchuk  Rolfes  Berntson 
MacMurchy  Skoberg  Ham 
Mostoway  Vickar  Katzman 
Whelan  Nelson (Yorkton) Birkbeck 
 

NAYS — 9 
 
Steuart Nelson (Assiniboia- Anderson 
Malone                 Gravelbourg) Merchant 
MacDonald  Clifford McMillan 
Penner   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:11 o’clock p.m. 
 


	RESIGNATION OF MR. DOWDELL

