


























































Hansard: November 22, 1976


 
 

37 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 
 

Monday, November 22, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

CRTC LICENCES 
 
MR. E.F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to 
the Premier in the absence of the Minister in charge of Cable Television. Is the Government aware that 
the Manitoba Government have now negotiated a settlement of their dispute with the Federal 
Government by which Portage La Prairie and Brandon will both have their CRTC licences of last 
Wednesday amended, along the lines of the Saskatchewan Government claims, and has such an offer 
been made to the Saskatchewan Government that if our government will give up any claims to 
jurisdiction over pay television, you would be given the right to maintain the head amps and drops in the 
provincial hands under Sask Tel? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware of newspaper reports to the effect that such an 
arrangement has been reached between the Government of Manitoba and the Department of 
Communications. I have no reason to doubt them. I’m simply not otherwise informed about them. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it not a fact that the Federal Government 
offered to your government exactly the same settlement and your government chose over pay television 
to demand continued control over pay television, notwithstanding the fact that that’s an illusory claim at 
best, and that you were not prepared to settle in such a way that cable could have been brought into this 
province quickly and you’ve continued the claim to jurisdiction over pay television at the loss of 
jurisdiction over cable? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, that’s a long and involved question. It is says that we have done anything 
which delays cable television coming to Saskatchewan, the answer is No. If it says a great many other 
things as I suspect it did, I didn’t fully understand the question and I’m not able, therefore, to respond to 
is. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Has the Saskatchewan Government not responded 
to the Federal Government and said that because you want to control pay television, you are not 
prepared to accept the Manitoba settlement, that you have rejected the Manitoba settlement because of 
your claim to control over pay television, notwithstanding the fact that Section 92(2) of the British North 
America (BNA) Act and the case law clearly says that you don’t have any constitutional rights over pay 
television? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member is obviously giving 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

38 
 

information rather than asking for it and accordingly, presumably I should respond by asking a question. 
My answer is that I am not aware that we have responded in that way to the Federal Government. 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier in the absence of his Minister, the former Minister of Consumer Affairs. The Premier has 
indicated the Government is in no way responsible for delaying cable television in this province. On 
many occasions the Government has stated as policy they would not make Sask Tel hardware and 
facilities available to any private group who may obtain a license from the CRTC. Is the Premier, 
therefore, in view of the fact he is not going to delay any longer should a Manitoba type agreement come 
into effect in Saskatchewan, prepared to make a statement today that in the light of certain events his 
government would allow private companies duly licensed by the CRTC to use any Sask Tel hardware? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, it has been the policy of our government to say that companies 
duly licensed by the CRTC or by any other person having lawful right to use the Sask Tel facilities may 
use them, but they may use them on the terms that you or I use Sask Tel facilities, that they rent them. If 
they want to own them, that is not part of the policy of Sask Tel, never has been, is not now. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier would indicate whether it 
is the intention of Sask Tel to give a long term contract on the amps and drops if the Manitoba 
settlement is arranged for Saskatchewan, so that the profitability for the co-ops and the companies won’t 
be completely taken from the co-ops and companies that now have the valid CRTC licences? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I’d ask the Hon. Member to put that long and complicated question on the Order 
Paper and I would be happy to ask the Minister in charge of Sask Tel to attempt to respond. 
 

DETERIORATION OF LIVESTOCK INDUSTRY 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding). Is the Minister aware of the continuing deterioration of the livestock industry in the province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think we are aware that there are some 
reductions in the numbers of livestock in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the situation that many cattle producers cannot wait for 
recommendations between Ottawa and Regina to come to fruitful conclusions, what specific proposals, 
if any, can the Minister offer to this Assembly today, to soothe the fears of the cattle producers that they 
are going to be forced out of business? 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

39 
 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member will know that we have provided a $32 
million program for livestock producers. And I think that goes a fair way . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING: — . . . in providing some support for the cattle industry. 
 

CRTC LICENCES 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 
question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister responsible. In light of the Sask Tel’s stated 
position on cable television equipment, is it the intention of Sask Tel to obtain the computers . . . (N.B. 
microphone break) . . . technology that they are presently engaged in constructing for the computer 
industry in the Province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not fully aware of the urgency of that one either and I think 
probably that could be dealt with by the normal process and I invite the Hon. Member to put it on the 
Order Paper. 
 

CABINET ADDITIONS 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Is the recent 
announcement of the addition of two Members to your Cabinet, which brings your Cabinet to 50 per 
cent of your caucus, and an obvious effort to control your caucus, in keeping with your Government’s 
policy of controlling all or part of everything in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, Order! I question the validity of that question. Next question. 
 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister in charge 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government announced over a year ago that it was their intention to acquire half to all 
of the potash industry in Saskatchewan, and I believe they set a deadline of six months to a year, 
although I may be somewhat wrong in those figures, but there was a deadline set. It is apparent, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Government has moved to acquire only one mine at this time and my question to the 
Minister is: — is this an indication that the Government is reconsidering its position, hopefully, and that 
you are not going to be taking over half to all of the industry as you previously announced? 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — No. 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

40 
 

MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. How many companies are you 
presently negotiating with and who are they? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is known to most Members of the Assembly and the public 
that we have done an evaluation of Sylvite. We are currently in negotiations with them and an evaluation 
of the Alwinsal potash mine is near completion. It was announced on Friday that we will be carrying 
out, starting in the next two or three weeks, an evaluation of Central Canada Potash. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is it your intention to use the funds that are 
presently in the Energy Resource Fund to purchase these mines until such time as those funds are 
exhausted? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — The source of the funds for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will be 
decided upon by the Cabinet on the advice of the Department of Finance. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. How many mines is it the present 
intention of the Government to acquire? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — The stated intention of the Government is to acquire approximately 50 per cent of 
the productive capacity in the province and, therefore, our objective is a number of mines that would 
meet that estimate. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Final supplementary for me, Mr. Speaker. Have you set any deadlines as to when 
that purchase is to be completed? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — As soon as possible. 
 

ENERGY FUND 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I should like to 
ask the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation, has any of the Energy Fund in the Province of 
Saskatchewan been used for new exploration or development since the closing of the last session? Or 
has the only money that’s been drawn out of the Energy Fund been used to purchase existing production 
and existing jobs that are already in the Province of Saskatchewan, or could you tell me what percentage 
has been used for new exploration, new development, which was the stated intention of the Energy Fund 
at its origin? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Energy Fund is not one of my responsibilities. I can’t answer that 
question. I would suggest the Member put a question on the Order Paper. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

41 
 

JUNK FOOD IN SCHOOLS 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski). Recently the announcement by his Department, both in the 
press and to school boards, the department intends to take immediate action to rid the schools of junk 
food, as the announcement came forth. Can the Minister tell this House as to who is going to determine 
“what is junk food and what isn’t?” 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Member has 
misinterpreted or has misread the communication that I have extended to school boards in co-operation 
with the SSTA and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, which essentially was urging that boards 
establish policies that would phase out the selling of junk foods in cafeterias in schools, something to 
which everyone mutually agreed. A package of information has been provided to all school 
superintendents indicating the kinds of things they might consider to be junk food. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. You are saying then, Mr. Minister, am I 
correct, that the onus is not falling on the Department of Education to make the decision, but you are 
encouraging a decision only at the local level? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — They are certainly very much in favor of these steps being taken, but we 
are urging that school boards, with their school principals, make those essential decisions at the local 
level. Yes, and I’m very confident that most of them, if not all of them will. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the department, about the guidelines given, to 
supply the dieticians, etc., to determine to the fine point what is considered as junk food? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I think we can, with co-operation of the Department of Health, provide any 
information of that kind that may be requested. 
 

COAXIAL CABLE 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to the Premier. Prairie Co-Ax 
have a licence to use the streets and lanes in Moose Jaw. Is it the expressed intention of your 
Government to go behind the authority of the city of Moose Jaw, and how do you rationalize that with 
your claim to allow local control and local authority to the towns and villages and municipalities of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Note, Mr. Speaker, the quality of that question, which asks one question and 
then assumes the answer one way and then follows with another question. 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

42 
 

I shall answer the first question which was whether we intended to go behind the authority of the city of 
Moose Jaw, as I recall being the question. The answer is: I don’t know what authority the city of Moose 
Jaw had; if it had authority - Prairie Co-Ax doesn’t have to worry about anything the Government of 
Saskatchewan does - if it doesn’t have authority then obviously it is not relying upon that authority and 
it should be concerned with what the Government of Saskatchewan does. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary. Is the Premier then saying that it is not within the ambit of 
authority of the city to allow the use of the streets and lanes in Moose Jaw as the city council in Moose 
Jaw have now allowed them to do? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am saying that that’s something for the courts to decide and I shall not state a 
point of view on that. If in fact the courts decide that the city has that power they have it, and if the 
courts decide the city doesn’t have that power they don’t have it and nothing I say or the Hon. Member 
for Wascana says will in any way affect it. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it the intention of the Premier to challenge that 
licensing by the city of Moose Jaw in the courts? Will the Attorney General be directed to challenge the 
licensing in the courts? If the challenge is upheld by the courts, or to put it the other way, if the city’s 
right is upheld, will you pass legislation to take away the right of the city to grant the use of the streets 
and lanes? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think a good number of those questions are hypothetical. If you 
are asking me whether or not we propose to commence any proceedings against the city of Moose Jaw 
the answer is No, no present plans to commence proceedings against the city of Moose Jaw. 
 

MAINTENANCE OF SUPER GRID ROADS 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, is it true the policy of the Department of Highways is 
to take over the maintenance of the super grid roads from their present municipal authorities? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — No, it is not the policy at the present time. 
The policy of the Government is to leave the grid system under the jurisdiction of the municipalities and 
not transfer into the Department of Highways, which has been a policy in the past, but has now been 
changed. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Will there be special funds available to the 
municipalities to look after these super grid roads and their maintenance. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — There is a special formula, Mr. Speaker, for both capital and maintenance of 
the super grid system, which has been proposed to the rural municipalities. And as a matter of fact, there 
has been some construction of super grid roads under that existing policy this past summer. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

43 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Does the 
Department of Municipal Affairs. Does the Department of Municipal Affairs have a standing agreement 
with the Department of Highways as to when a road, a joint venture, takes place between the rural 
municipality and the Department of Highways? Is there not at the present time a contractual 
arrangement whereby the department agrees to maintain that highway or that portion of the road for a 
given period of time? Can the Department of Highways renege on its responsibility at their own 
discretion? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the answer to the question in my mind. I would ask 
the Member to either give me time to respond or put the question on the Order Paper. 
 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and I wish we could get an easier title for you than that. Your answer to me earlier 
indicated that the Government was prepared to take only 50 per cent of the potash industry over. I 
suggest to the Minister that that is a change in your policy as announced by the Premier in his address to 
the Speech from the Throne last year, at that time he indicated it would be from half to all of the 
industry. My question to you now is: — have you advised those industries or those companies in 
Saskatchewan that you are not interested in purchasing or expropriating? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — No. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Do you intend to do so in the days ahead so that those mines and those industries 
will at least be in a position to be able to plan for the future? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, our objective remains the same as it was before. With respect to 
potash mines that we are not currently having discussions with, obviously one of the possibilities is that 
some of the discussions we are currently undertaking may not be fruitful and therefore we may, indeed, 
be talking to other potash companies in the future. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question. In connection with the mines that you are presently 
talking to at this time on a negotiation procedure, is it your intention to use the provisions of Bill 1 to 
expropriate those mines by issuing a vesting order if you are unable to make an agreement with them? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, that question is obviously hypothetical. In the event that we are not 
successful in negotiating a purchase we would have to make the appropriate decisions at that time. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question. Mr. Speaker, in light of what the Minister has said, is his 
department currently negotiating any loans on the international money market for the proposed 50 per 
cent takeover? 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

44 
 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, all the loans that might be negotiated with respect to the acquisition 
of potash mines would be borrowed in the usual way. That is, the Department of Finance would handle 
them, as we borrowed money recently for the Power Corporation and Sask Tel through the Department 
of Finance in the United States. I would assume that if we were going to borrow any money for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the United States or any other market, it would be done by the 
Department of Finance and the money subsequently advanced to the Potash Corporation. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. My question was, are there any current 
negotiations at the present time going on for the acquisitions of loans for the acquisition of the potash 
mines? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Not that I am aware of and I think I would be aware of them if Finance was doing 
it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary, I would like to redirect my original question to the Minister 
of Finance who is in charge of the Energy Fund. I think it is rather important that the people of 
Saskatchewan know whether any part or what part of the Energy Fund has been used for exploration or 
development of new energy resources in the Province of Saskatchewan or has the total been spent since 
the last session prorogued, for the purpose of existing jobs, mines and oil production in the Province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. W. A. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, there are several questions in the 
question of whether any money has been used for exploration. I am not sure whether that is in respect of 
potash or whether it is in respect of oil. Perhaps he might ask the question specifically of whether it is in 
respect of either. There has been money from the Energy and Development Fund that has been used for 
the acquisition of the potash mine. For the information of the Member the amount that has been used is 
$117,218,714.61. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — $117 million. Could the Minister tell me what amount approximately - he may 
not have it at his fingertips - what has been used for purchase of existing production in the oil industry 
and what percentage has been used or what amount in relation to $117 million for new exploration and 
development in either potash or in oil. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — I do not have that information available. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Has any of the fund been used? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — There has been some of the fund used for Saskoil in respect of drilling but I don’t 
know the exact amount. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

45 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — A final supplementary. Would you provide those figures for me tomorrow? I 
am sure it wouldn’t be very difficult with one set of books and I would like to know exactly how much 
has been spent for new exploration and development in the oil industry. 
 

CRTC LICENCES 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker . . . (N.B. Question inaudible - microphone break.) 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I do not know what the policy of Sask Tel is with respect to on-stream 
computers with respect to the ownership of hardware and accordingly I cannot respond to the question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I don’t consider the question in the first place to be legitimate in the sense 
that I don’t believe it is of urgent concern. I am sure that if the matter becomes or urgency he’ll view it 
differently than he does at this time. The Member for Regina South. 
 

COAXIAL CABLE 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I have a question to the Premier related to the general 
subject. In response to an earlier question the Premier indicated the Government intends to take no 
proceedings against the city of Moose Jaw. Can the Premier give us an assurance that the Government of 
Saskatchewan does not intend to take any proceedings of any variety to prevent the use of streets and 
lanes in Moose Jaw by Prairie Co-Ax. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I will not give that assurance. I certainly don’t know what rights Prairie Co-Ax 
has to use the streets and lanes of Moose Jaw, nor is it, with all deference, my job to know what the 
rights are. I will not preclude a proper exercise by the Attorney General or anyone else of his function, if 
in fact activities are taking place which are not lawfully authorized - activities by Prairie Co-Ax or 
anyone else - which are not lawfully authorized. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is aware I am sure that the city of Moose Jaw has given 
to Prairie Co-Ax the right to use the streets and lanes of Moose Jaw to lay cable. Let me ask you more 
specifically, are you contemplating in any branch of your government, including the Department of 
Highways, some action to prevent Prairie Co-Ax from now acting on the licence they have from the city 
of Moose Jaw? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer to that is, No, we are not contemplating it. But the 
longer answer is, if the city of Moose Jaw had the authority to give a licence to Prairie Co-Ax then 
Prairie Co-Ax can go ahead and have nothing to fear from the Province of Saskatchewan. If the city did 
not have that authority, then it clearly profits Prairie Co-Ax not at all to get authority from someone who 
did not have that authority to give. So nothing that the city of Moose Jaw did in any way 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

46 
 

affects the rights of Prairie Co-Ax to the extent, that if they are relying on the city of Moose Jaw and 
they are relying appropriately then they have nothing to fear from the Government of Saskatchewan. If 
they are relying inappropriately because the authority wasn’t there, obviously they have something to 
fear. They will make their choice, we will make our judgment in due course. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A final supplementary. Mr. Speaker, I asked the Premier if it is fair to treat a 
citizen of this province, which Prairie Co-Ax is, in that manner by indicating to them . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well, they are in fact citizens of the province. They are doing business in this 
province. They have a right to do it. The city of Moose Jaw has said to them, we will give you a licence 
to use our streets and lanes and you are sitting there saying you don’t know whether it is lawful or 
unlawful. My question to you is: — is there no obligation on your behalf to indicate to them whether 
you consider that the city has that power or doesn’t have it, so that they can govern their decisions 
accordingly? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It may be an obligation which we have and if they ask us we will consider their 
request. So far as I am aware we have had no request from them for a statement on this matter other than 
through their agents in this House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The next order of business is Ministerial Statements. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, may I rise on a Point of Order during the question period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No, that matter may be raised on Orders of the Day. 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
MR. D. H. Lange (Bengough-Milestone) moved, seconded by MR. W. J. G. Allen (Regina Rosemont): 
 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of the Province as 
follows: 
 
TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE GEORGE PORTEOUS 
 
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 
Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

47 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in beginning my speech to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 
Throne, I would like to introduce to the House a number of people seated in the gallery. These are 
members of my executive from Bengough-Milestone constituency. They are from communities such as 
Avonlea, Bengough, Lake Alma, Oungre, Minton, Big Beaver, Ceylon, Milestone, Radville, Lang, 
Ogema, Crane Valley, Parry, Trossachs, Pangman, Yellow Grass. They represent such interesting 
geographic regions in the constituency of Bengough-Milestone as the Missouri Coteau Hills south of 
Moose Jaw, the Regina Plains, the Big Muddy Valley next to the American border, the Souris River 
drainage basin. They also represent such diverse occupations as farmers, ranchers, teachers, nurses, 
small businessmen, retired senior citizens, students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — I am flattered that these people have come from these towns to the Chamber this 
afternoon so that I might share with them the honor of moving the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
The theme for opening night at the Session this year was to remember the Clerks who have served this 
Legislature. This is a most appropriate theme because it doesn’t matter whether you are a Dean of the 
House like Eiling Kramer or Art Thibault, or whether you are a newcomer; whether you are the Premier 
or the Leader of the Opposition, the Clerk and the Assistant Clerk are always there to help you. They are 
the people who are seen but seldom heard in the House and those most important for the smooth 
operation of the business of this House. 
 
In keeping with the theme of opening night, and on behalf of all the Members of this House, I should 
like to acknowledge the quiet presence and the conscientious work of the Clerk, Mr. Gordon Barnhart, 
the Assistant Clerk, Mrs. Gwen Ronyk and their staff, Mrs. Rose Zerr, Mrs. Vivian Doan and Mrs. Joyce 
Rublee. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — I am honored to be given the opportunity to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech 
from the Throne. Personally I thought it was a great Speech from the Throne, and one in which the 
people of Saskatchewan can take a great deal of pride. It is a speech which continues the major policy 
thrusts which this New Democratic Government has initiated over the past five years. 
 
As my remarks are being broadcast across Saskatchewan on several radio stations, it is interesting to 
think about the many people whom we are contacting by radio at this time. Perhaps you are a farmer 
listening to this broadcast while you drive along a grid road in your half-ton; perhaps you are a 
housewife, listening while you do your work at home; you may be a teacher; or a worker or a 
businessman in a local shop or garage; you may be a senior citizen, or a patient in a hospital, or a 
receptionist in a doctor’s office. But whatever you may be as you listen to my remarks, whatever you are 
doing, you may be thinking one thing in common with many others. You may be concerned and 
becoming confused about the changing role of government in society today. You may also be frustrated 
about 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

48 
 

what it means to be an independent person in a period of rapid change. You may be wondering what 
effective control you have over your own future. How can you maintain your individuality in such a 
complex society? How can your personal freedom be secured in a system comprised of large 
organizations? Today, I want to talk about how this Throne Speech and the Government that stands 
behind it can assist you in enhancing your life chances, in advancing your society and in securing your 
individual freedom. 
 
But first I should like to discuss that policial philosophy which is being advanced by Opposition Parties 
in this Legislature. Shortly put, the Liberals and Conservatives are saying that “that government is best 
which governs least.” They are saying that the New Democratic Government of Saskatchewan is too 
involved in the daily lives of its people. They are saying that government threatens individual freedom, 
destroys personal rights, limits incentive. The Opposition is saying that our government should not be 
directly involved in the economic development of our resources; that we should not get the best value 
today and a bonus for tomorrow for each and every one of our citizens. Despite the fact that the natural 
resources of uranium, potash, coal and oil are common property to us all as Saskatchewan citizens, the 
Opposition Parties are saying that only the private sector has the right to own, the ability to operate, the 
incentive to profit, from resources. Do we not have the collective intelligence and the individual 
initiative to develop our own economy and our own future? Can we not be masters in our own house? 
The Opposition is consistently, dogmatically, using the argument that government presence in any 
activity destroys individual incentive, restricts individual freedom and is inherently inefficient. In 
summary, they are saying, that government is best which governs least. 
 
Now this political philosophy, if we think about it for more than a moment, is both naïve and dangerous 
in the case of Saskatchewan. It is a strange maxim that finds no enduring place in the political history of 
our province. In actual fact, the common threat of our history has been to create and use instruments of 
collective power for the attainment of our social and economic goals. What are Sask Tel, Sask Power, 
the Canadian Wheat Board, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Federated Co-operatives, the system of rural 
Credit Unions, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and the Government of Saskatchewan, if 
they are not effective instruments of collective power? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — And where would we be as a society today if we had not taken collective action to 
protect and advance our own interests? If this is the lesson of the history of the people of Saskatchewan, 
then to whose interests is the banner of the Opposition being raised, when they say that the role of 
government should be restricted to that of referee? I believe that the people of this province, after some 
reflection, will come to reject this political view, “that government is best which governs least.” The 
New Democratic Party believes, as a growing number of people in this province and in this nation that, 
that government is best which most intelligently serves the interests of its people. 
 
What would this province have been like today if the CCF 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

49 
 

Government, which came to power in 1944, had not politically intervened on behalf of farmers to 
protect the home quarter from the jowls of the eastern financial institutions? What kind of dog-eat-dog 
society would we have today without medicare, and some measure of social and income security? 
 
Now within this tradition of Saskatchewan history, let us turn to the future of agriculture. The world’s 
food system is undergoing major changes in energy, inventory, finance, production, distribution and 
consumption. These changes are happening all at the same time. They are happening in magnitudes 
never before experienced. This situation creates greater risk for those Saskatchewan farmers, ranchers 
and rural businessmen participating in the food system. We as a society in Saskatchewan, we as a 
government, have to start thinking about policies to deal with this increased uncertainty. 
 
Because of an expanding world population and limited land resources upon which to produce food, food 
will become the political commodity of tomorrow. Those nations possessing enough land, water, energy 
and fertilizer to produce food for export will have the international policial power of tomorrow. 
Saskatchewan, with 43 per cent of Canada’s arable land is going to play a very important role in the 
production of food in Canada and in the world. Saskatchewan will see more emphasis on agriculture 
than ever before in history. If agricultural policies developed by government are favorable, we could 
also see more industry, stronger rural communities and more people involved in the production, 
processing and distribution of food here in Saskatchewan than we have ever imagined possible. 
 
From this point in history the future of Saskatchewan agriculture and rural communities can take one of 
two directions. We can see many people involved in farming, each managing his own operation in the 
tradition of Saskatchewan agriculture or we can have a new era of corporate serfdom with very few 
wealthy people involved. Multinational corporations are looking on Saskatchewan with lust. They have 
designs on Saskatchewan’s food production which do not include the full involvement of the 
Saskatchewan people or its communities. The seduction of Saskatchewan agriculture has begun and 
there may be no way of stopping the advances of the multinational corporations. 
 
Let us remember how fraught with problems the agricultural industry is, the farmer deals not only with 
the vagaries of weather, but also with the violent instabilities of the market place, which set the cost of 
his inputs and the price of his produce. 
 
The farmer’s number one worry right now is the price of wheat. According to the Canadian Wheat 
Board, prices have dropped badly in the last four and one-half months and there is no point in deluding 
ourselves that things are going to turn around soon. Early last July they were quoting No. 1 Red Wheat 
at $4.57½ in storage at Thunder Bay. Today that price has fallen to $3.12 3/8, a drop of over $1.45 a 
bushel in that time. Our wheat prices have, in fact, been running below the domestic minimum of $3.25 
per bushel for several weeks. This is the first time wheat prices have been so low since the present 
two-price policy was implemented in 1973. More recently, the farmer’s problems have been 
compounded by a higher cost of capital, a greater indebtedness and a subsequent need for greater 
uninterrupted cash flow. 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

50 
 

Now let us suppose that we have a depressed agricultural economy, and let us suppose that we have that 
inevitable slump in the grain industry, much like we see in the cattle market right now. Under these 
circumstances, how will the individual farmer fare? And, if he gets into trouble, who is going to help? 
Who is going to help preserve his individual freedom, protect his assets and keep him in business? Will 
Cargill market grain in the best interests of the Western Canadian farmer? Will Burns Meat Packing 
Company market red meats in the best interests of the livestock producer? Will John Deere and 
Massey-Ferguson provide him with the technological security he needs during seeding and harvesting 
time? Will EXXON oil corporation preserve and husband our limited petroleum resources to that future 
Saskatchewan farmers will be assured of a supply of fuel for their farm machines? Will the Canadian 
Pacific Railway provide us with reliable transportation service for the movement of goods and people? 
 
When giant corporations have control of the agricultural industry, how much freedom will the individual 
farmer have? Members of the Opposition say that the individual freedom of farmers is threatened 
because their provincial government has introduced a stabilization program to help hog producers stay in 
the industry. But just think about how much individual freedom and security Saskatchewan hog 
producers would have if they were substantially at the mercy of Canada Packers instead of being 
protected through the market power of the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission. 
 
The favourite allegation of the Opposition is that the Land Bank Commission somehow denies the right 
of ownership of farm property in Saskatchewan and compromises the individual freedom of 
Saskatchewan farmers. How so? The Land Bank program has helped over 1,500 younger farmers to be 
engaged in farming in rural Saskatchewan. It has created new opportunities and freedom for individual 
initiative for part of the younger generation of our province and has benefited small towns by 
maximizing the number of producers on the land. The Land Bank is a program designed intelligently 
and equitably to serve the needs of rural people and is an excellent example of government involvement 
for a social purpose - namely, the future of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — We need only think of the Family Farm Protection Act of 1971 to know how 
corporations would respect the individual freedom of the farmer in hard times. We need only think of 
the Farm Security Act of 1944 to know how banks would deal with farm mortgages during hard times. 
We need only think of what it must have been like before there was a Canadian Wheat Board or a 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to know how ruthless Cargill would be with the farmer during hard times. In 
the face of possible agricultural depression, in the face of corporate pressures to monopolize western 
Canadian agriculture, the only real friends that people in rural Saskatchewan have are those instruments 
of collective power which they control, such as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the United Grain 
Growers, the Credit Unions and the Saskatchewan Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

51 
 

MR. LANGE: — Yet, as multinational corporations move in to restrict even more the personal freedom 
of individuals in our society, the Opposition glibly suggests that government should act as a referee 
between those giant corporations and the individual. The Opposition naively asserts “that government is 
best which governs the problems of its people - that government is best which responds to its people - 
that government is best which most intelligently serves the needs of its people.” . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — . . . And by intelligent I mean people like Allan Blakeney, with legislation to keep oil 
profits in Saskatchewan; Gordon MacMurchy, with legislation to help to develop rural communities; 
Jack Messer with legislation to assist small businessmen; Elwood Cowley with potash legislation, and 
many others in Cabinet, in caucus, and in the civil service. And let me demonstrate how this government 
has, over the past five years, intelligently served the needs of the people of this province through 
specific programs which have responded to their problems. (Although my discussion will use rural 
examples, the Member for Rosemont will discuss after me, similar urban examples to show how this 
government has intelligently served the needs of the people of this province.) 
 
Farmstart, another government agricultural program has assisted 2,800 farmers in this province to 
expand their livestock production. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — The Hog Stabilization Program has, during the past three years given additional 
economic security to producers of hogs. 
 
In 1974 this government introduced a Calf Cash Advance Program, providing $35 million to 12,000 
producers. In 1975 the program was extended - 14,000 farmers borrowed $41 million. This year the cash 
advance has been extended and a further cash grant of $50 per cow has been made available to cow-calf 
producers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — These several government-sponsored livestock programs have assisted thousands of 
Saskatchewan producers to better withstand the recent cost-price squeeze in the livestock industry - 
clearly, examples of government intervention into people’s lives which has increased their economic 
freedom and security. Would farmers who had received benefits from these government programs agree 
with the Opposition that government is best which governs least? 
 
The former Thatcher administration was a government which governed least, and the farming 
community stated rather conclusively, its opinion of that government in the 1971 election . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

52 
 

MR. LANGE: — . . . it has no enduring place in the political history of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Operation Open Roads and Operation Main Street are government programs that have helped to increase 
all-weather road access to rural communities and regional parks. 
 
The New Democratic Government of Saskatchewan respects the autonomy of local government in 
Saskatchewan. We have provided $20 per capita a year in unconditional grants to local government - the 
largest unconditional grant program in Canada. We have provided community capital fund grants and 
these are spent wholly at the discretion of local government. We have initiated the Cultural and 
Recreational Facilities Capital Fund Program designed to create employment in Saskatchewan’s 
municipalities, while at the same time leaving a legacy of vastly improved cultural and recreational 
facilities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — The Property Improvement Grant has lifted the financial tax load for education 
purposes from the landowner and provided a more equitable tax system. At the same time, large 
unconditional grants have been provided so that local boards of education might improve the quality of 
education in their schools at their own discretion. 
 
This Provincial Government has provided large grants to many communities and municipalities within 
the province to compensate for flood damage. And only last week the government has agreed to pay for 
all flood damages above the cost of two mills for those several municipalities which have had extensive 
flood damage this last spring and summer and to which the Federal Government has refused help. 
 
Each and every one of these government programs has been designed to enhance the development of 
rural Saskatchewan and the living conditions of our people. Each and every one of these programs is one 
facet in an overall government policy designed to enrich the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan either 
through the development of rural communities or the development of the agricultural industry. The new 
provisions in this Throne Speech when woven together with existing program commitments of the 
Government of Saskatchewan will strengthen the economic, social and cultural fabric of our province 
tremendously. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — And each of these programs reflects a government which listens to its people, which 
responds to its people and which most intelligently serves the needs of its people. 
 
Now let’s contrast the performance of this Provincial New Democratic Government with that of the 
Liberal Government in Ottawa when it comes to rural development. What has the Federal Government 
done for rural Saskatchewan? Well rather than develop a program to help ensure that more industries, 
communities and people will be involved in agriculture in rural Saskatchewan in the future, the Federal 
Government has made it possible instead 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

53 
 

for rural Saskatchewan communities to have inland terminals. Now, why, all of a sudden do we have 
inland terminals in Saskatchewan? What do inland terminals symbolize? Does it not seem strange that 
terminals should be built at Rosetown and at Weyburn of all places where the elevator capacity is 
already efficient? Why do we need terminals at all? Has the rural elevator system not served the farmer 
well throughout the last 60 years? When has the rural elevator system ever failed the farmer? When in 
history can you cite the rural elevator system as being the bugbear in the total grain handling system 
from farm gate to tidewater? You can blame the markets, you can blame the weather, you can certainly 
blame the railroads, you can blame the port terminal facilities, you can blame a whole host of other 
things, but when can you blame the rural elevator system for failing to perform for the farmer? So, why 
do we need inland terminals to replace the rural elevator system? 
 
Now the Opposition will say that it is just a group of farmers who are promoting the terminal. And it’s 
true there are many farmers who have shares in the Weyburn terminal who are frustrated with the 
Federal Government’s ineptitude at dealing with the Canadian grain-handling and transportation system. 
But, remember, it was the Federal Government’s grains group under Otto Lang who first suggested that 
Canada needed inland terminals. It was the grains group, under Otto Land, who made the rural elevator 
system the scapegoat for Federal Government dereliction of duty in the grain-handling function. Now, 
why would the Federal Government and Otto Lang suggest that we duplicate a fully adequate rural 
elevator system with an inland terminal system? Well, perhaps we can appreciate the answer to this if 
we look at multi-national grain corporations. 
 
Now, if you were a multinational grain corporation and wished to speculate with grain on the 
international grain exchange you must be able to control supply, but you can’t control supply if the 
country’s grain is stored in a system of 1,500 rural elevators which is co-operatively owned and on the 
average seven miles from every farmer. But you can secure ownership of greater quantities of grain if 
you can dominate inland storage capacity through a system of say, 20 or more inland terminals. Then 
you know how much grain you have on hand, then you control supply and if you control supply you can 
speculate and manipulate on the international grain exchange. That’s why multinational corporations 
want inland terminals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers don’t need terminals, but multinational grain corporations can’t operate without 
them. Inland terminals will be the vehicle through which they will try their hardest to monopolize 
western Canadian agriculture. And the Federal Government and Otto Lang have greased the skids for 
the construction of inland terminals in Saskatchewan by the private grain trade. Were it not for Otto 
Lang taking feed grains out of the jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board the terminals would not be 
able to buy No. 1 Red Wheat as a feed grain and fill the terminal to capacity. Were it not for the Federal 
Government allowing farmers to be able to deliver grain to any elevator in the province, rather than just 
a local delivery point which protects the individual farmer, then the terminals would not be able to fill to 
capacity by drawing feed grains from all across the province. Were it not for the Federal Government 
promoting the abandonment of rural Saskatchewan rail lines and increase the trucking of grain on our 
provincial highways, the terminals would not be able to take advantage of the flexibility that trucking 
provides, at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

54 
 

and farmer. Were it not for the Federal Government and Otto Lang wanting desperately to eliminate the 
Crow’s Nest rates on our rails, the farmer might be able to sleep a little more easily at night and be less 
anxious about his future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Make no mistake about it, it is the Federal Government which facilitated the advance 
of inland terminals into Saskatchewan. Multinational grain corporations like Cargill will use inland 
terminals to constrict and monopolize the western Canadian grain economy. 
 
I want to talk for a minute about Cargill Grain Company, I could talk about Continental, Tenneco or 
Bunge or others, but since Cargill has come to Saskatchewan, I’ll talk about Cargill. Every time I see 
some aspect of Cargill, it conjures up in my mind an image of the Cookie Monster on Sesame Street. 
You know you can’t hide any cookies from the Cookie Monster because he can smell them a mile away. 
You can’t keep his hand out of the cookie jar either, because he is totally consumed by his unnatural 
desire for cookies of all descriptions. The multinational grain companies are all in the same game. They 
are the international cookie monsters of the grain trade. They want all the cookies and they will do 
everything in their power to get them. Remember the inland terminal at Weyburn is now an agent for 
Cargill and Cargill has a terminal at Rosetown, Saskatchewan and at Elm Creek, Manitoba. 
 
Ideally Cargill would like to see about another 40 or so in western Canada. So let’s see what happens 
when that inevitable slump comes in the agricultural economy and the Canadian Wheat Board is perhaps 
offering only a four or five bushel quota, because it cannot make sales. Cargill will go to the young 
farmer who is strapped for funds because of the high costs of input. And, Cargill will offer to buy his 
No. 1 Wheat as a feed grain on the open market. It will be necessary to truck that grain to the Weyburn 
or Rosetown terminal at the expense of tax subsidized roads and tax subsidized diesel fuel. But, when it 
gets to Weyburn or Rosetown, the CPR will load the grain into a unit train and take it into the American 
grain handling system of Cargill International. And what will Cargill do with the grain they have bought 
at rock bottom prices on the open market in Canada? Well, they can put it into one of their many feed 
processing plants that they have located in North and South America. Thus, our Canadian grain will take 
its place alongside fish meal from the fishing fleet which Cargill has off the West Coast of Peru; tailings 
from one of the many corn refineries that they have located in the United States; or perhaps some 
screenings from one of their flour mills. And when they have processed the feed, they can obtain the 
value added from cheap grain by selling that feed through one of their many retail outlets located across 
North America. Or, if they wish, they can feed that grain to their own cattle located in numerous feedlots 
located in North and South America. Or, if they do not wish to feed it, Cargill can simply store it in one 
of their 12 inland terminals and hedge the grain on the open market until they are ready to move it out in 
one of the largest trucking operations in the United States which Cargill also owns; or perhaps they can 
transport it over the American rail network through one of their 1,000 leased hopper cars. And then 
dump it into one of Cargill’s ocean-going ships which ply the international waters and distribute the 
grain across the world. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

55 
 

They will direct these world-wide operations by means of a $250 million computer facility located in 
Zurich, Switzerland, which monitors and controls their corporate activities in the world food system. 
And this is what people are talking about when they say “a little competition is good for the Wheat 
Pool.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Saskatchewan farmers can have the Wheat Pool and the United Grain Growers and 
the Canadian Wheat Board, or Saskatchewan farmers can have Cargill. But Saskatchewan farmers 
cannot have both Cargill and the Canadian Wheat Board and the wheat pools living harmoniously 
together. We can’t have both, they are by nature mutually exclusive. The philosophy of one can exist 
only at the expense of the other. So, next time, you, as a farmer, think about wearing a Cargill cap, 
remember what wearing that cap will do to your community, to the family farm, and to the 
grain-handling and transportation system as we know it. Do not underestimate the deleterious effect that 
inland terminals will have on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — The advent of inland terminals means the disappearance of rural Saskatchewan 
communities. The advent of inland terminals means the disappearance of rural Saskatchewan elevator 
systems. And the advent of inland terminals means the destruction of the monopoly power of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and the protection and freedom that provides for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
If we need to be reminded of the power of multinational corporations, remember that Cargill, 
Continental, Bunge, Cooke and Louis Drafos Company, five privately-owned multinational corporations 
control over 80 per cent of the free world’s grain traffic. The Dominion of Canada by contrast, controls 
and exports only 8 per cent. 
 
In today’s world, the alternative to the protection of the Canadian Wheat Board for Saskatchewan 
farmers is not some idealistic so-called free market system based on inland terminals, rather it is a 
system of grain marketing where a handful of multinational firms would control your destiny for their 
profit. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — The Liberal Government and Otto Lang are governing least. Are they your real 
friends? And who are their friends? When the farmer finds out what Otto Lang is doing to his 
grain-handling system, the farmer will not be happy. When the farmer finds out what Otto Lang is doing 
to the monopoly power of the Canadian Wheat Board, the farmer will not be happy. When the farmer 
finds out that Otto Lang is destroying the very basis for the development of rural Saskatchewan, the 
farmer will not be happy. And when the farmer is not happy, Otto Lang, will find out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Let’s try and relate our agricultural future to 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

56 
 

the future of Saskatchewan resources. Many people find the lifestyle of the farmer attractive. Why? 
Because the farmer operates his own business. He decides when and he decides how he will farm. By 
doing things for himself, he attains a certain degree of personal confidence. He possesses many personal 
skills. He must obviously know a great deal about plant and animal husbandry. A farmer is not only an 
agronomist, a mechanic and a financier, but also a weather expert, a chemical expert and a bit of a 
gambler. Not only does he possess a variety of knowledge and skills but he must also be able to combine 
these with energy, technology and materials to be a successful producer of food. 
 
The farmer is independent, he has a great deal of personal freedom. Nobody tells the farmer when to 
start work, how hard to work or when to quit. Nobody tells the farmer when to sow or harvest, except 
perhaps the Member for Saskatoon-Humboldt, Otto Lang, that Benedict Arnold of prairie Liberals when 
in 1970, under the LIFT program he told the farmer not to sow wheat at all. Now it would take a 
professor of law to draw a conclusion like that about farming, wouldn’t it? 
 
In the face of imminent world food shortages, the decision to limit the production of food could only be 
reached by a man who knows as much about farming as Otto Lang. Some farmers have only recently 
recovered from the colossal lack of judgment by the Ottawa jet set. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — But, we were talking about why it is good to be a farmer. The farmer has many basic 
skills. He is an entrepreneur. He has the individual freedom to employ his own skills his own labor, his 
own judgment, to his own business. As a result of doing things in his own way, in his own time, the 
farmer attains a certain degree of confidence. That personal confidence is healthy for the farmer; it is 
healthy for the farm family. Moreover that confidence is healthy for the community in which that farm 
family lives. By having as many people involved in the agricultural industry as possible, each one 
operating his own business with confidence, we attain a healthy agricultural society. But that personal 
freedom of the farmer would not exist were it not for positive government intervention in his life, by 
agencies like the Canadian Wheat Board. That individual initiative of the farmer could not be exercised 
if it were not for the co-operation that farmers demonstrate through organizations like the United Grain 
Growers or their local credit unions. 
 
The farmer, rancher and small businessman each form an effective team with their provincial 
government, so that their individual initiative may result in benefits to themselves, their families and 
communities, and the purchaser of their products and services. In this way, society gets full value from 
the agricultural industry. 
 
And so it is with the Saskatchewan potash industry. By having many people involved through their 
government in the potash industry, it will be healthy for Saskatchewan society. Nobody tells the 
Saskatchewan farmer how to farm, and nobody will tell the Saskatchewan people how we will mine our 
potash. By operating the potash industry ourselves, rather than having foreign multinationals do it for us, 
we as a society, will 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

57 
 

obtain a personal confidence. Much as Saskatchewan farmers attain confidence from operating their own 
business, so Saskatchewan people will attain confidence from operating our own potash industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — It is healthy to have many individual farmers operating the agricultural industry and it 
will be healthy for many Saskatchewan people to operate their own potash industry. This rugged 
collectivism, like that found in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the system of rural credit unions is the 
key to our future. But yet, the Conservative Opposition is suggesting that rather than buying potash 
mines, which will serve future generations of Saskatchewan people, that we should instead use that 
money to build more highways, more highways to inland terminals, more highways which serve 
multinational grain corporations. The Conservatives are suggesting that this government should govern 
least and that we should spend your money on provincial highways upon which multinational 
corporations will haul your grain, your potash and your profit out of your community, out of your 
province and out of your country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — The New Democratic Party believes that by purchasing 51 per cent of the potash 
industry, we are most intelligently serving the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — Do you remember the fuss that the Liberal Opposition made in 1972 about Bill 42 - 
the bill which taxed the oil profits? They said that it threatened individual freedom, it destroyed personal 
rights, it limited incentive. They said that only the private industries had the right to own, the ability to 
operate, the incentive to profit from resources. Well, since then the Energy and Resource Development 
Fund created by Bill 42 is a financial asset of great importance to our economic future. It is the key to a 
strong partnership in potash or uranium or agriculture. Were it not for the foresight of Allan Blakeney to 
capture the windfall profits from oil, we would have been in no position to allocate $100 million from 
that fund in an equity advance to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to pay cash for the Cory 
Mine, newly acquired from Duval. 
 
If one of the opposition parties had been in power at the time of Bill 42, we could not even contemplate 
a strong partnership in potash, uranium and agriculture. Instead they would have governed least. They 
would have been a referee instead of getting into the game to help Saskatchewan people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — I want to turn now to the larger scene of Canadian politics. Canada, evidently, is at a 
turning point. We have, as a diverse political nationality, reached a point of inflection in our public 
affairs. As a nation, we are moving to repatriate our constitution. As a province, we seek to repatriate 
ownership and control of a significant proportion of our resource economy. In Quebec, the former 
Premier has been defeated in his 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

58 
 

Montreal riding of Mercier. The Parti Quebecois government of Rene Levesque, which so far has every 
appearance of being a social democratic party, is committed to a system of public automobile insurance 
similar to that pioneered in Saskatchewan many years ago. Premier elect Levesque has promised 
significant new labor legislation similar to that in Saskatchewan; health initiatives like dentacare, 
housing and home renovation programs for those on lower income people. The people of Quebec in last 
Monday’s election have asked for a government that will listen to its people; that will respond to its 
people. That Levesque will govern his province in the best interests of both the Quebec people and 
Canadian federalism according to democratic principle, I have no doubt. 
 
In Ottawa, the policies and organization of the Liberal Party are in an advanced state of decline. 
Although all the evidence is by no means in, there are signs that Canada is moving toward a two-party 
system at the federal level of government. The reflection of this situation provincially in the Province of 
Quebec can be seen in the form of the Parti Quebecois and the Union Nationale. 
 
The character of Canadian federalism is changing, fundamentally. We must now begin to adjust our 
concept of federalism, of Canada to this new political reality. A country cannot hold together merely as 
an economic bargain among regions. There must be some common sense of nationality or social purpose 
as the ground for a new Canada. So, we should not talk of national unity but of national integrity and 
national purpose. 
 
What we need is a more communicative, a more flexible federalism, in which all regions of the country 
both give and take in a common national endeavor. 
 
The essence of federal-provincial conferences and relations in recent years has been one of 
confrontation, not accommodation. The constitutional policies of the Parti Quebecois may well engender 
a basic change in the practice of federalism. This could be a welcome change for the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our policies for the development of potash, uranium and the delivery of high quality television services 
to the greatest number of Saskatchewan citizens are all expressions of a general Saskatchewan desire for 
self-development, which should normally have received strong support and approval from our national 
government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — As a result of the Parti Quebecois election victory, we are hopeful that our efforts to 
obtain full service and value for Saskatchewan from technology and resources will find less resistance in 
the future than in the past. 
 
Now it is interesting and not surprising that the Liberal Opposition in Saskatchewan should be 
apprehensive about the Parti Quebecois victory in Quebec. The defeat of the disintegrating Bourassa 
Liberal government is indeed a low blow to Liberal governments across Canada. The results of the 
Quebec election do not augur well for the future of Liberal governments in Canada, much less 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Liberal Party will require strong leadership to maintain traditional 
Liberal policy in the face of the Parti Quebecois victory. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

59 
 

But getting back to cookie monster, Davey Steuart always likes to chide the Premier by telling him to 
get his hands out of the cookie jar when it comes to potash and oil. I think that it would be more to the 
point for Davey to see whose hand is in his cookie jar. The cookie monster has already gobbled up that 
sharp cookie from Qu’Appelle, and we hear that the cookie monster is now after the cookie from Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek. Colin cookie has been forewarned, if not forestalled. 
 
It’s clear in this monster-eat-cookie world that the Liberals need somebody in leadership to keep the lid 
on the jar. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — In commemoration of the Liberal leadership race, and the simultaneous growth of the 
Conservative caucus, albeit not the Tory Party, I have acquired - I have in the Chamber here, two cookie 
monsters which I understand are exact replicas of the real Cookie Monster of Sesame Street fame. For 
those listening on radio, I should like to describe these cookie monsters. Of course they have very large 
eyes, which can see cookies anywhere. They have exceeding large mouths which can gobble more and 
more cookies. Very large stomachs which can consume endless quantities of cookies and they are 
covered with a soft luring material. Although not Tory blue in color they are, nonetheless, a very 
attractive blue. Oh, and one other thing, both of these cookie monsters have an insatiable expression on 
their faces. 
 
I should like to ask one of the pages to present these mementoes, with my compliments, to the two 
Leaders opposite for their enjoyment and reflection. I would only ask that Mr. Steuart pass this symbol 
of strength on to the new leader of the Liberal Party according to the natural laws of succession. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — During this speech we have analyzed the role of government in contributing to 
individual freedom and preserving individual rights. We have observed that to preserve personal rights 
and freedom, government intervention in people’s lives is not only necessary, but desirable. We have 
refuted the allegation of the Opposition parties that government is best which governs least, by showing 
that it is not within the tradition of Saskatchewan history to have individual freedom without 
government involvement in people’s lives. We have shown how the policy thrust of the New 
Democratic Provincial Government has, during the past five years, been designed to develop rural 
Saskatchewan communities, within the context of personal initiative and individual freedom. We have 
shown how this government has consistently developed programs to enhance rural Saskatchewan and 
the agricultural industry. We have shown how the Federal Liberal Government has set the stage for the 
demise of rural Saskatchewan communities and the destruction of agriculture as a lifestyle embodying 
the use of instruments of collective power, such as the co-ops, the pools, and the credit unions. 
 
Although my speech has been about rural Saskatchewan and agriculture, my remarks will be 
complemented by the Member for Rosemont (Mr. Allen) when he speaks about urban life. 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

60 
 

During the next several days of debate on the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne my 
colleagues in this House will be demonstrating to the Saskatchewan public how this Speech from the 
Throne is designed to dovetail into the past five years of policy developed by this government. They will 
be demonstrating that government is best which most intelligently serves the needs of its people. And 
that in Saskatchewan, government, far from being an enemy of the people is, rather, your most profound 
friend. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANGE: — I therefore move this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W. J. G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great honor for me to second this 
Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. It’s an honor both for myself and the citizens whom I 
represent in Regina Rosemont. 
 
Before I begin my formal remarks, I’d like to congratulate my friend the Member for Arm River (Mr. 
Faris) and the Member for Melfort (Mr. Vickar) on their recent appointments to the Cabinet. Both of 
these gentlemen have earned the respect of all Members of this House for their intelligence, their 
thoughtfulness and their sensitive approaches to the issues facing our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this Throne Speech because I believe it is just one more example of the strong, 
stable, sensitive leadership being provided by the New Democratic Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — In every area of Saskatchewan life, people are ahead under this Blakeney 
Government. We are ahead in every area. But the area of which I am most proud is the health care 
enjoyed by the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — We enjoy in our province the highest standard of health care of any jurisdiction on the 
North American continent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — This standard is being enjoyed in spite of the efforts of the Federal Government and 
the criticism of our opponents to the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech expresses Saskatchewan’s profound concern with the Federal 
Government’s intention to cut back in their commitment to help finance medicare and hospital care. 
 
I believe that by so doing the Federal Government is shirking its responsibility to maintain national 
standards in the health care field. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

61 
 

It should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial governments of this country agreed to 
participate in the hospital and medicare programs because of the solemn assurance that the Federal 
Government would pay half the cost. If the federal share falls below 50 per cent it will mean drastic 
consequences for many of our poorer provinces. It will mean for the people of those provinces either 
serious reduction in their health service or very, very dramatic increases in taxes. 
 
For nearly a year the New Democratic Governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan and New 
Democrats in the House of Commons have pleaded with the Federal Liberal Government not to do this 
to the people of Canada. These pleas, Mr. Speaker, have fallen on deaf ears. An arrogant, insensitive 
Liberal Government has steamrollered their legislation to destroy medicare through the House of 
Commons . . . The Member laughs, the Member laughs at this very serious situation. 
 
The latest move by the Federal Government to destroy medicare in Canada occurred in June of this year. 
At a First Ministers’ Conference, the Prime Minister announced that his government would withdraw its 
commitment to pay 50 per cent of the cost of hospital care, diagnostic services and physicians’ fees. Mr. 
Trudeau proposed replacing this commitment by granting the provinces certain unidentified tax points 
and equalization grants. He says that this will gear health costs to the annual growth in the economy, 
which he considers a more realistic approach to health care financing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Prime Minister’s intention to tie health care to the gross national product us 
open to very, very serious question. There is no direct relationship between health care and GNP figures. 
The incidence of illness bears no relationship whatsoever to national productivity. Sick people have to 
be cared for and health services must be provided even in times of economic recession. Indeed this was 
one of the basic imperatives behind the development of health insurance in Canada in the first place. 
 
Another weakness in the Prime Minister’s proposal is that tax points will provide proportionately less 
revenue for the less affluent provinces. 
 
The Federal Government seems to be pushing the provinces into a position where they must resort to 
exorbitant health premiums, deterrent fees or other taxes on the sick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of all this, in spite of the actions of the Federal Government, I believe 
Saskatchewan, under the Blakeney Government has the finest health service in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — The Opposition with their barbarous banter has been critical of the quality of health 
care in our province. As in all other aspects of government, while being critical they have not advanced 
a single new idea that they would implement if either of their parties sat to your right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is neither one of them have had a new idea since Liberal Ross Thatcher introduced 
deterrent fees, and Conservative Dalton Camp suggested doing away with medicare altogether. Since we 
have no concrete proposals to judge them by, we can only look at what their record is in other provinces. 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

62 
 

In the Conservative Province of Alberta, the government has increased their spending this year by 11 per 
cent over 1975 levels, this compared to 24 per cent increase in the Province of Saskatchewan, less than 
half, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Despite Alberta’s wealth, the poor people there have to pay $153.60 a family for 
medicare premiums. This cost isn’t borne by residents in Saskatchewan or Manitoba where medicare 
premiums have been abolished. 
 
In addition, under the Conservative Government, Albertans have no universal drug plan, as we do in 
Saskatchewan. They have no dental care plan in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, we do in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, Albertans have no hearing aid plan, but we do in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I’ll tell you what they do have. The Member asks what do they have in the Province 
of Alberta? Well, they’ve got a $5 charge on admission to an acute care bed in the Province of Alberta. 
They’ve got a deterrent fee, Mr. Speaker, of $4 per day for every day over 120 days in a hospital. We 
have neither of these in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — There are other comparisons that I could use between Alberta and Saskatchewan, but 
my time is limited, and I wouldn’t want to leave out the granddaddy of all Conservative provinces, the 
government of the richest province in Canada, the big blue Tory machine of the Province of Ontario. 
 
In Ontario, a family of four must pay $384 per year medicare premium for levels of medical care 
significantly lower than we have here in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If anyone of any age in Saskatchewan requires prescription drugs, they automatically qualify under the 
prescription drug plan. The price at most is $2.25 per prescription. Ontario has no assistance for people 
needing prescription drugs until they reach the age of 65. 
 
Ontario has no universal plan to provide wheelchairs, crutches, artificial limbs or other aids to assist in 
overcoming a physical disability. 
 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living is yet another pioneering program that provides these 
essential services to the handicapped of Saskatchewan, without charge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

63 
 

MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, for the people most precious to us, our children, there is dental care for 
ages five to nine and by 1978 all of our children up to the age of 12 will be covered. Ontario parents 
either have to pay the full cost of the dentist’s bill or as is often the case for the majority of Ontario’s 
working people, neglect their children’s dental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our New Democratic Government also has chiropractic care available without cost 
regardless of how extensive the treatment is. In Ontario there is assistance too, but it stops at a miserly 
$100 per user per year and anything over and above that is the responsibility of the patient. 
 
Hearing aids may be purchased in Saskatchewan at cost. That cost is about $95 on average. There is no 
counterpart to the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Program in the Province of Ontario. Residents with 
hearing aid problems in Ontario are paying three or four times what our people are paying here and 
getting less satisfaction for their money. 
 
Somebody mentioned the hospital situation. Well, I’m delighted that they brought it up. What about the 
hospital situation in the Province of Ontario? The Davis Government last spring set as its target the 
closing of ten general hospitals and two psychiatric hospitals resulting in the closing down, Mr. Speaker, 
of 3,000 hospital beds in the Province of Ontario. 
 
The public outcry was, of course, loud and long. Citizens’ groups managed to get court action under 
way, were able to stop the closing down of four of those hospitals, but the Ontario Government’s budget 
slashing has done away with 1,237 beds at 37 hospitals, not including those hospitals that they closed 
down. There have been reductions at 69 hospitals in terms of staff. The ultimate result of cutbacks, it’s 
predicted that 4,500 hospital workers in the Province of Ontario will lose their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear, it’s clear from the facts that I’ve related to you that living in Saskatchewan 
means the saving of hundreds of dollars every year for Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — But even if completely healthy, a Saskatchewan resident has the peace of mind that 
comes from knowing he or she is free from financial worry if illness occurs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — The people of the Province of Ontario burdened with yet another Conservative 
Government have no such assurance. 
 
Well I’ve talked about the Conservative record. Most of you have been calling for the Liberal record and 
I’m delighted to give that to you as well. 
 
For this let’s turn to the Province of Quebec, until one week ago the only province of any size in Canada 
unfortunate enough to labour under a Liberal administration. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in 
Saskatchewan we’ve raised health 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

64 
 

expenditures 24 per cent this year over last year. In Quebec, in the period January 1 to March 31, 1976 
there was no increase. In the period April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977 the increase was a staggering 
seven-tenths of one per cent. Seven-tenths of one per cent! 
 
Needless to say these problems that have been created by an Ebenezer Scrooge approach to health care, 
these problems are enormous for the people of the Province of Quebec. 
 
The Montreal Star, September 25 carried a front page story entitled, “Ambulances Still Blocked” which 
began with the following sentence and I quote: 
 

Ambulance bans at major hospitals are still endangering the lives of Montrealers who cannot quickly 
get the care they need. Montreal ambulance drivers and attendants tell hair-raising stories of rushing 
acutely ill patients from hospital to hospital, looking for one that will accept new emergency cases. 
They tell of patients who died on the stretcher, or soon after long-delayed admissions to hospital. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You’re putting us on. 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I am quoting from the Montreal Star. These are not my words, undoubtedly a Liberal 
reporter wrote that. 
 
The newspaper story goes on to describe a situation where hospitals in the Montreal area lock the doors 
and turn off the lights in their emergency wards, because they simply cannot handle any more patients, 
even critically ill ones. The reason they cannot, as the Montreal Star explains, is there is a shortage of 
nurses and of hospital beds in the Province of Quebec. While graduate nurses in Canada are leaving, 
particularly in the Province of Quebec to work in the States, the Liberal Government in Quebec cut 
health spending off at such a level as to make enough nurses available impossible. And while finding 
lots of money, $1.2 billion dollars to underwrite the Olympic Games structures, they can’t even find 
enough money to keep their hospitals open and to provide care for critically ill patients. The Quebec 
Hospital Association protested. Said that the Minister was endangering the quality of care and even 
jeopardizing the whole health care system. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Did he get re-elected? 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I think not. Quebec in 1975 had already the dubious distinction of having the lowest 
number of occupied beds per 1,000 population in the country. Saskatchewan, as to be expected, at 5.6, 
provided the highest number of beds per 1,000 population. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — In Canada, as a whole, there were 4.1 beds per 1,000 population. 
 
The severe budgetary restrictions, the two levels of Liberal Government have inflicted upon those 
unlucky enough to need health care in Quebec, have meant hardship for many and horror stories for 
others. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

65 
 

The September 25th article goes on to describe the difficulty of heart patients with cardiac arrest at 
getting a bed. Another incident involved a 77-year old man, who after being sent home from a Montreal 
hospital recuperating from an operation, suffered complications. When he returned by ambulance to the 
same hospital and still wearing his hospital bracelet, he was turned away. There are other stories of sick 
people spending three or four hours in an ambulance before finally gaining admission to a hospital. 
Meanwhile, ambulance drivers have to ignore other emergency calls. 
 
The Montreal Star had another article on the 2nd of October, and looked at the practice of overcrowded 
hospitals closing their emergency wards. They had the following to say and I quote: 
 

This is a common occurrence in the Montreal area today. Patients who are in a coma, even those with 
heart attacks, may be rushed to as many as three hospitals before getting professional medical care. 
 
Hours can elapse from the time the private ambulance picks up a patient in his home to the time he is 
admitted to a hospital emergency department. What happens to patients who, because of ambulance 
bans and shortages of hospital beds, are refused immediate medical care at a time when they 
desperately need it? 

 
To answer their own question, what does happen to these patients, the newspaper interviewed two 
Montreal area women. One of the women was living with her chronically ill husband on a disability 
pension of $129 a week. Montreal hospitals refused him entry while he was in a diabetic coma. Her bill 
for the various ambulance trips was $110, and she was asked to pay in cash. 
 
The other woman interviewed told how her 47-year old father had collapsed and was rushed to a 
hospital to be similarly refused entry. The man, after over two hours of waiting to be admitted to 
emergency ward, died. One of the women at the end of the interview said: “The SPCA is better than 
those hospitals. When I called them to take some of my puppies I couldn’t look after, they came right 
away. Dogs get better treatment than us.” 
 
The Bourassa Liberal Government was quite prepared to allow the shortage of nurses and hospital beds, 
the overcrowded medical facilities, and the locked emergency wards. They were prepared to let that go 
on. The chief sufferers of course, are, as always, the old, the poor and the chronically ill. It isn’t likely 
that their suffering would ever move the federal Liberals, or it appears provincial Liberals either. Well, I 
will tell you something, Members of the Liberal Party. The Quebec voters have taken that decision out 
of the hands of the Liberal Party, and I am absolutely confident, I have all the confidence in the world, 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan will never, ever allow you people the opportunity of controlling our 
health care system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would expect the Liberals and Conservatives to criticize our 
health program. I challenge you to do two things when you make that criticism. When you get up 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

66 
 

on your feet to speak, I challenge you to: 
 

1. Tell us where in Canada, what province in Canada has a better health care system than in 
Saskatchewan? 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — 
 

2. Liberals and Conservatives - explain to me why your record is so abysmally poor in every other 
province in this country? 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, our government freely admits that there is room for improvement in the 
health field in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — We believe significant progress has been made and we will continue to work on 
improving the system. But, Mr. Speaker, this progress is predicated on the resource policies of this NDP 
Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — We have been able to maintain a high standard in health care only because we have 
had the courage to challenge the multinational resource companies and gain for our citizens their fair 
share from the resources that belong to them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Both the Liberals and Conservatives propose to do away with these policies. By so 
doing, they will do away with the revenues that accrue to the province because of these policies. The 
resulting effect, Mr. Speaker, will be complete disaster for the health care of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this Speech from the Throne. I believe that this Blakeney Government has 
provided strong, stable, sensitive leadership to this province. Strong leadership to deal with the serious 
problems we have had to face in the past, and will face in the future. In a world where it is becoming 
increasingly evident that things are out of control, and that governments can do nothing about it, this 
Saskatchewan Government is an island of stability in a sea of confusion. And this government has 
provided sensitive leadership - sensitive to the needs and aspirations of our citizens, humble in the 
knowledge that all of our problems have not been solved, but courageous in the determination to address 
the problems without reference to the pressures of special interest, only with reference to the good of 
Saskatchewan people. We are opposed in this, Mr. Speaker, by the spokesmen for the multinational 
corporate elite who sit to your left. While we have strong, stable, sensitive leadership in our party, 
supplied by our Premier, Allan Blakeney, they appear to have some crisis in their leadership. In the case 
of the Liberal Party, two men are involved in a titanic struggle to lead the Liberal Party into 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

67 
 

the political boneyard. The Liberals, it seems to me, have two choices in this: 
 

1. To go to their demise kicking and screaming under the leadership of the sometime Member for 
Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant); or 
 
2. To go to their demise with dignity under the leadership of the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. 
Malone). 

 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn’t really matter to the people of Saskatchewan how they go, just as 
long as they go! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — The Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, appear to have a different problem. I’m sure the 
Leader of the Conservative Party is leaving, because this part is addressed specifically to him. 
 
In light of recent events, Mr. Speaker, people are beginning to wonder if you can believe anything the 
Conservative Leader says. He portrayed himself, I understand, to his former employers as a competent 
businessman, and they believed him. He portrayed himself to this House as a competent businessman 
and we almost believed him. Now some will say that the Leader of the Conservative Party is dishonest. I 
will not say that. The courts will decide on the Member’s honesty or lack of it. I will say, however, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Leader of the Conservative Party is undoubtedly the most incompetent businessman in 
this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I had the opportunity a week or two ago to speak to a competitor of the Hon. Member 
in the hotel business in Saskatoon. He told me that they had never made more money than they have 
made in the last few years in the hotel business. He said to me, a guy would have to be really 
incompetent to lose money in the hotel business today. I said, yes, it appears that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he did lose money, lots of it. But more importantly, it was somebody else’s money. 
 
Now farmers, Mr. Speaker, have an expression, an expression I am sure all you farm Members have 
heard, “He can’t even run the farm, how can he run the country?” Well I say, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 
the Conservative Party can’t even run a hotel, how is he going to run this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this government has provided strong, stable, sensitive government to this 
province, because this Throne Speech continues in that tradition, I am honored to second the motion of 
the Hon. Member for Bengough-Milestone. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to congratulate the 
mover and the seconder. I tremble a little bit when I contemplate that it has been a bit of tradition to take 
eventually the mover and the seconder into the Cabinet, but then when I realize the 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

68 
 

size of the Cabinet, I know that given another year or two you will all be over in the Cabinet over there, 
so I really don’t have to worry. As a matter of fact, when you came in the other day I thought it was the 
first time in history that some of the Cabinet Ministers had to bow out in the alley way, they couldn’t all 
get in here. This is something new in parliamentary democracy. Exactly, if you include the Speaker, you 
have 39 Members, minus the Speaker is 38. Exactly half of your Members in Cabinet. I don’t know 
whether this was from fear by the Premier that there was going to be a little revolution in the back 
benches, whether the backbenchers were getting ugly. By the look of it I think that might have been the 
case, but there is one thing, you don’t have to worry because there is nothing the backbenchers can do 
now, they can’t outvote you. 
 
I wish to thank the mover of the Speech from the Throne. I am sure that someone will appreciate this 
doll. I can’t think of much else to say about the speech that he made except that I am not surprised that 
he is still playing with dolls. I should like to deal in a little more length with the hatchet man, the 
seconder, the Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen). I would point out to him that he dwelt for a 
great deal of time on the Province of Quebec. I don’t hold any brief for the former Government of 
Quebec, the Liberal Government. I never felt any particular kinship with them, and I wasn’t surprised 
when they were defeated. They, I think, deserved to be defeated. But you know it is an interesting thing 
in the history of the Province of Quebec, that no matter whom they have turned to, the Liberal Party that 
was defeated, the old Union Nationale went down in disgrace, and now the Parti Quebecois. Never did 
the people of Quebec sink so low that they turned to the NDP, nor I think ever will do that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the seconder of the Speech, the Member for Regina 
Rosemont, suggested that the people of Saskatchewan are ahead, ahead of everybody. Well, I wonder? 
There is one thing we are ahead of, the waiting lists of people waiting to get into our hospitals. I suppose 
per capita we probably have more people waiting to get into hospitals, not for serious illnesses, or 
emergencies I will admit, but for elective surgery and for other forms of illness that are just as serious or 
very serious to people they happen to. We probably have more people per thousand than any other 
province in Canada. 
 
He asked me to name, when we stood up, provinces that have a better basic health care than we have. I 
think you can name almost any other province in Canada and you would be ahead of the game. When 
you are talking about the basic health plan of hospitalization and medical care. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — When you talk about hospitalization and medical care, when you talk about people 
being able to get into the hospitals, when you talk about people being able to see the doctor, 
unfortunately Saskatchewan at one time led and now they trail the rest of Canada very, very badly. I 
think this is a disgrace because this has happened, not in the time of recession, or the time of depression, 
this hasn’t happened when that government 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

69 
 

over there has had more money available to them, far more money, double and triple the amount of 
money than any other government ever had in the history of this province. In spite of that they haven’t 
been able to maintain our two basic health plans and anything matching the quality that existed a few 
years ago. 
 
You know, when he was talking about Quebec, people waiting to get into the hospital, people being 
turned away, and then the Province of Quebec spending their money on the Olympics, I thought to 
myself he could substitute for the Province of Quebec the Province of Saskatchewan, and substitute for 
the Olympics the potash mines. Because if you people get out in the country and you really talked to the 
people - obviously you are not - you will find out that they are angry, they are mad, because they say, 
what is happening to our school taxes, what is happening to our municipal taxes, what is happening to 
our hospital services. Here is a government with hundreds of millions of dollars to throw away on a 
potash mine you didn’t need to buy and don’t know how to run, and yet they can’t even maintain the 
basic services for which we elected them. 
 
He asks who is ahead? Well I wonder how far people in our cow-calf operation feel we are ahead of the 
rest of Canada. I think thanks in part to the lack of action by the NDP Government, most of them are 
about one step ahead of the sheriff. 
 
He talks about who is ahead. How about the people waiting to get community cable television? Are we 
ahead of the rest of Canada? No, we are way behind the rest of Canada. while this government defies the 
law and refuses to go along, most of the rest of Canada has cable television. But we are not going to 
have it in this province, we are not going to have it until Mr. Blakeney and his NDP Government can 
control it. Why? Because they want a little black box in everybody’s home just like they have got that 
little machine in every news room so they can send out their government propaganda at the people’s 
expense into every home in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Don’t kid yourself. That is exactly why we are not getting community cable 
television. We will only get it when they get it on their own terms, so that they can continue to pour out 
propaganda directly to the people of this province under the guise of educational television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that this was the longest, dullest Throne Speech that I had ever heard in 12 or 13 
years. And it is. If that meant that this government was looking ahead, was concerned about agriculture, 
and they should be, drought conditions that are on us now, if that meant that they had decided to be 
prudent, set aside some money against that tough day that may be coming in agriculture, then I would 
applaud this Throne Speech. But, it doesn’t mean that at all. It means one of two things. It means that 
already after only a year and a half in office they have run out of ideas. They have become literally 
mentally old and tired. Or it means that they have so much on their plate now, that they don’t dare start 
any new programs, because they haven’t begun to pay for the ones they have got now. I think it is a little 
bit of both. 
 
There is nothing in this Throne Speech. If they get up and say there is nothing in it, because we could 
afford to 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

70 
 

spend any more money, there are all kinds of things that need doing in this province, that would not cost 
more money. 
 
The welfare system is in bad need of reform. The welfare system is in a mess. Local government needs 
more help, needs a rearrangement of their priorities and their responsibilities. 
 
Law and order in this province, again, the city of Regina with the highest crime rate by almost any 
indices of any city in all of Canada. Is there anything in the Throne Speech to say the government 
opposite is going to try to come to grips with this very desperate situation? There is absolutely nothing! 
 
I mentioned our health scheme. Our basic health plans are in trouble. And yet, what does the Throne 
Speech say? It boasts that we haven’t closed the doors of any hospitals. But it doesn’t say that under the 
Blakeney regime there have been more hospital beds closed than at any time in the history of this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STEUART: — The tragedy of it is this has happened because that government over there hasn’t 
had any courage. They know that by just squeezing the handle, by tightening up, they have forced our 
hospitals all over this province to lay off staff, to cut back services and to close beds. They know just as 
surely as they are sitting there, that this blind approach, this lack of courage approach means that the 
beds that are being closed are probably being closed in the wrong places at the wrong time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government was elected on one plank to bring labor peace to the Province of 
Saskatchewan. Here, again, no mention in the Throne Speech, nothing in the Throne Speech. There is no 
labor peace in Saskatchewan, after the election of the NDP. In fact we have one of the worse strike 
records in the past year or two years of any province in all of this nation. There has never been as much 
labor turmoil, there has never been as much bad feeling between management and labor and labor and 
government than exists today between the so-called friends of labor and organized labor in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. And yet what do they do. They bury their heads and refuse to face the situation. 
 
Tomorrow, when I speak, I am going to talk about three things. I am going to talk about the basic 
incompetence of this government. I think I can make a case to show that without a doubt they are the 
most incompetent government that ever sat on Treasury Benches, with probably the exception of one, 
and that was the Conservative Government of 1929 to ’34. 
 
I am going to talk about irresponsibility because they have been a government lacking in responsibility 
on every front. The Premier, the Attorney General, two lawyers, should have been schooled, should have 
known better, have led this province into a situation where it could end up with the greatest financial 
crisis that we have ever faced in our history. Why did they do it? They did because again they didn’t 
have the courage to put the kind of taxes that they wanted to put on the potash and oil industry, put them 
there out in the open, direct, squarely and clearly within their jurisdiction, so that everyone could see 
them. They tried to do it in a sneaky and underhanded method and they got caught. They are not only in 
trouble, the tragedy is the people of this province are in trouble. 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

71 
 

I want to talk about law and order, not on the streets. Someone once said about President Nixon, he 
promised to take disorder and lawlessness off the streets, and he did. He took it off the streets and 
brought it into the White House. I sometimes wonder if that isn’t what we have done here by the 
example we are setting. I am going to talk about lawlessness in government. I am going to talk about a 
government opposite that has shown clearly, time and time again, that they don’t believe in laws for 
themselves and that they are quite prepared at any time to ignore their own laws, to ignore national laws. 
They have become convinced evidently, that in the development of their great socialist plan that laws 
don’t affect them. Any time it suits their purpose they ignore the law, they take the law into their own 
hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed in this Throne Speech, as we all were. I hoped that while I knew that 
there wouldn’t be any great new challenges in mid-term; politically enough aware that in the middle of 
their term with probably two years to go or three years to go, that they wouldn’t be taking on many new 
challenges. But, I did hope that that Cabinet over there, who prides themselves on being young, and 
forceful and innovative, would have at least come up with something that would be challenging, except 
to say that if we are in trouble in the courts we will try to skate ourselves back on side and make a sorry, 
dreary, rehash of all the things that they have done in the past, the fact that they may intend to do them a 
little better in the future. 
 
I have a great deal more to say, Mr. Speaker, and I beg leave at this time to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, there was a 
question raised last sitting day to which I gave an answer which needs to be corrected. Should I do it 
now? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I propose to the Minister under the Orders of the Day, before Orders of the Day. 
 

CABLE TELEVISION 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. 
Speaker, you ruled that consideration be given to my question about computers for Sask Tel’s cable 
television control, after Orders of the Day. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I thank the Member for bringing that item before us at this time. 
 
First and foremost I want to apologize for the condition of some of the microphones in the Legislative 
Assembly, this is a matter that is presently under consideration - the replacement of the sound system. 
Members will have to bear with each other in regard to that system until such time as - it is not 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

72 
 

what’s in the system, but the system itself, I am talking about the hardware, the system is replaced. 
 
How to get back to the subject of cable television and computers. The subject before me is why the 
Member was cut off on the question. I refer the Members to the first Interim Report of the Special 
Committee which was tabled on March 12, 1976. On page nine, it says: 
 

Questions should be asked only in respect of matters of sufficient urgency and importance as to 
require an immediate answer. 

 
This is the basis on which I ruled the Member’s question out of order. I will admit that I was unable to 
see the urgency of the relationship between cable television and the computer facility in the province, if 
that in fact was what the Member was talking about. Therefore, on that basis I ruled the question out of 
order. I think examination of the record will support that. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention about the microphone at this particular desk. 
The Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) and myself did attempt to move the desks today and I think 
inadvertently we moved the wires as well and broke the connections. 
 

LEASING MOBILE UNITS 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, last sitting day the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) asked 
whether the Government of Saskatchewan was going to exercise its option to purchase all of a portion of 
the 151 mobile homes leased by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I answered the Hon. 
Member indicating that a decision had not been made as yet and was therefore unable to answer 
definitively, yes or now. I have subsequently been advised by my officials that effective December 1, 
this year, the department will take options to purchase a total of 150 mobile home units, including the 
137 or all units currently leased by the department as well as 13 used units for sale by Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation. I am also advised that the occupancy of the department’s leased units is estimated 
at approximately 90 per cent during the lease period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The House will pardon me but I interpreted the Minister as bringing forward a 
correction of some type. In fact he was answering the question. Questions that can’t be answered on the 
day they are asked would be answered the next day during the Oral Question Period. However the 
question has been answered at this time. If there are supplementaries I will permit them during the Oral 
Question Period when it next occurs. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

CONGRATULATIONS - ROUGHRIDERS - RAMS 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to rise 
to extend our congratulations to the Saskatchewan Roughriders for winning the Western Football 
Conference Championship . . . 



 
November 22, 1976 

 

73 
 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . I think the Saskatchewan Roughriders are a team supported by all corners of 
the province and people of all political persuasions. There is a relatively short number of subjects on 
which we are all united but I know that this will be one. All will join in extending our congratulations to 
the Riders, to Coach John Payne, to quarterback, Ron Lancaster, the our best wishes to them when they 
meet the Ottawa Roughriders in the Grey Cup Game next Sunday. There have been many 
Regina-Ottawa tussles, not all of them on football fields. I hope that we will be successful in this one. 
 
I should also like to extend my congratulations to the Regina Rams for winning the Canadian Junior 
Football Championship. I think that coach Gord Currie has done an excellent job with the Rams. This 
we would all concede in the light of the victory in winning the Canadian Junior Football Championship - 
called the little Grey Cup. This is a fitting climax to perhaps the most outstanding career in the history of 
Canadian Junior Football. 
 
We therefore ask all Hon. Members to join with me in extending our congratulations to the Riders and 
the Rams and all who are associated with those victories. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the 
Premier in congratulating both the Rams and the Roughriders. I might say that when we were the 
government, we succeeded in defeating Ottawa on many occasions, including the Roughriders, who 
were successful that particular year. This is one time there have been tussles between Regina and Ottawa 
when I have had mixed emotions, but this time I have no mixed emotions. I hope that our Roughriders 
come out and thoroughly trounce them, just the same as the Rams have done. 
 
I should like to say incidentally there was another great event that took place. We had a Miss Canada 
chosen from Saskatchewan, in fact she is a young lady called Miss Foster from Prince Albert. She not 
only is a beautiful girl, she won the Miss Canada aware . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — She’s a Liberal! 
 
MR. STEUART: — Thanks Cy, you are always taking my lines! She is a Liberal which shows she has 
a great deal of brains too. She comes from a fine Catholic family, one of about 14 kids. I congratulate 
her as well as the Rams and the Roughriders. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — May I add my congratulations to the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders for gaining the right to enter the Grey Cup, final and all success to them in 
that game. And also to the Rams for winning the Canadian Junior Football Championship. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 22, 1976 
 

74 
 

CONGRATULATIONS ESTON-ELROSE BAND 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Eston-Elrose): — I agree with the Leaders of the political parties in this Assembly 
in passing on their congratulations. 
 
I should like to point out to this Assembly this afternoon, that this particular Grey Cup, as far as 
Saskatchewan is concerned, is somewhat historic in that the official band representing Saskatchewan for 
the first time does not come from a city but rather from a rural area. The Eston-Elrose School Unit band 
is the official band representing Saskatchewan at the Grey Cup parade. These youngsters are extremely 
nervous but proud about this. Tomorrow morning at about 7:00 o’clock they will be loading on the buses 
to make the drive to Toronto for the Grey Cup. A great deal of credit has to go to the youngsters, to the 
band directors, and to the parents of the youngsters from the Eston-Elrose School Unit who have seen 
this thing through. Although it may not turn out to be the most classy band that you have watched, I am 
sure that they will do the Province of Saskatchewan proud. I would guess that the average age would 
range somewhere between 13 and 14 years. I am very proud to make this announcement and even have 
more pride in the fact that they come from the Eston-Elrose School Unit. I would hope that all of 
Saskatchewan will be proud of our band and certainly want every Member of this Legislature to watch 
very closely when the Grey Cup Parade comes on television. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:45 o’clock p.m. 


	QUESTIONS
	COAXIAL CABLE
	ADDRESS-IN-REPLY
	QUESTIONS
	STATEMENT



