



















































Hansard: November 24, 1976


117 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, November 24, 1976. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Last Mountain-Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, may I on behalf of yourself and all 

Members of the Assembly extend a very warm welcome to the Grade Seven and Eight students from 

Quinton School. They are accompanied by Miss Perrot and Mr. Hubelet, their teachers. Also with them 

are Mr. Mathi and, Mr. Kreitzer and some other parents. 

 

I hope, as we all hope, that they have a very enjoyable and a very educational stay here in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of yourself and other 

Members of the Assembly I would like to extend a very hearty welcome to ten Grade Twelve students 

from the community of Glenavon and their teacher who is accompanying them, Mr. Priechuk. 

 

I regret very much that the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) isn’t here because I know they came 

down No. 16 highway and that they would like to discuss the problem with him. I do hope they have a 

very enjoyable afternoon in the Assembly and I hope that the Premier gives them his strongest and his 

loudest so that they can go home and recall very vividly their day in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

LEGISLATION BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT OF CANADA 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question, or perhaps more 

properly a series of questions to the Attorney General. The questions are in connection with a reference 

in the Throne Speech to a possibility of certain retroactive legislation being brought to this Legislature to 

deal with certain cases that are before the Supreme Court of Canada at this time. My question to the 

Attorney General now is, do you propose to bring this legislation to this Assembly prior to any decisions 

being made by the Supreme Court of Canada? 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say to the Hon. Member exactly because 

Government policy has not yet been finalized. Generally speaking we are watching the developments in 

the court cases with a great deal of care and as developments take place there, the Government will be 

continuously assessing its position. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

118 
 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The only development that has to take place now is for 

the decision to be handed down. Would the Attorney General not agree with me that if an ordinary 

litigant acted in the same manner that this Government is acting, that is in effect saying to the Supreme 

Court of Canada if you don’t uphold our legislation we are not going to obey your decision, we are 

going to do something else, if an ordinary litigant took that position and said to the Supreme Court, we 

are not going to obey your decision that that litigant could be readily held in contempt of court? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The Hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, is obviously confused when he asks the question, 

because if the Supreme Court should rule, like in any other case, that an act is unconstitutional, for 

example, it doesn’t prevent a government from saying based on the decision of the court, we will pass a 

law which is constitutional. As the Hon. Member himself knows, being a member of the bar, 

governments in the past on a regular basis, have brought in legislation to amend legislation existing as a 

consequence of various court actions which exist. Indeed, many of the Bills which have been introduced 

in this Session are a consequence of some judges ruling in some way or other which as a matter of 

public policy it was felt should be clarified as a result of the wording. That is a common occurrence. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ that it is not a common occurrence. A further 

supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Can I ask the Attorney General what would happen if you do not 

have the legislation on the books of this Legislature, or passed by this Legislature, and the Supreme 

Court comes down with its decision and makes certain directions to you, as it is likely to do if you are 

unsuccessful, as to paying money back to companies involved? Will you defy the Supreme Court of 

Canada’s instructions to you in this regard? Or will you call the Legislature immediately to deal with the 

situation? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that the Hon. Member’s question is hypothetical 

and I am sure that he, too, would acknowledge that. I can’t say until we get a chance to look at the 

Supreme Court judgement. We are very confident that the Supreme Court will recognize the provincial 

rights. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary. The question is not hypothetical because it is 

contained in the Speech from the Throne, the whole question. If it was hypothetical it shouldn’t have 

been contained in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Now, would the Attorney General give me one precedent in the British Commonwealth whereby a 

legislature has passed retroactive taxation legislation, as you propose to do? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have such a precedent with me, but I do draw the Hon. 

Member’s attention to a Bill which was read a first time yesterday, I am going by memory here, but I 

think it was The Act Respecting the Regulations Act, which deals with retroactive legislation in 1973 in 

a non-resource area, but as a result of a court case. As I said earlier there are many examples of that type 

of legislation. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

119 

HIGH COST OF FOOD IN SASKATOON 

 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 

responsible for Consumer Affairs. In light of the extensive studies conducted over the last few years by 

the Government of Saskatchewan on cost of food, could the Minister inform this Assembly why the cost 

of food in Saskatoon is consistently higher than its cost in Regina? Mr. Speaker, I ask this question in 

light of figures released in the November, 1976 Statistical Review by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Whelan (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I am sorry I didn’t get the question. I didn’t hear it. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to repeat the question. In light of the extensive studies 

conducted over the last few years by the Government of Saskatchewan on the cost of food, could the 

Minister inform this Assembly why the cost of food in Saskatoon is consistently higher than the cost of 

food in Regina? These figures were released by the Government of Saskatchewan in its Statistical 

Review, November, 1976. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The answer is No. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What is the purpose of this study under the Minister’s 

portfolio if no attention is being paid to statistics? 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Hon. Minister. Could he start to 

come to this House duly informed and would he kindly advise the House when he will be informed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Next question. The Member for Thunder Creek. 

 

USE OF UNIT TRAINS TO MOVE GRAIN 
 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to, if I may, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Transportation. The Minister has expressed his displeasure at the proposed 

use of unit trains to transport Saskatchewan and western Canadian grain to the eastern coast at a time 

when box cars are at a premium in our grain transportation system. Is the Minister expressing the official 

position of his Government of disapproval of the use of unit trains? 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, what we are expressing is an 

opposition to the use of unit trains to move grain to the Port of St. John and the Port of Halifax from the 

inland terminals which has been proposed to us as the vehicle to be used to replace the removal of the 

Atlantic and eastern freight rate subsidy. I think I indicated fairly clearly our opposition to that kind of a 

policy. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Will the 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

120 
 

Minister concede that at this point in time there is a very grave shortage of box cars and will the Minister 

concede, at this point in time, when Canadian exports as a percentage of the share of the world 

international grain trade have fallen drastically, agree that anything which places our grain in an export 

position as quickly as possible and returns those cars to the prairies, is beneficial to Saskatchewan 

farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I think we have indicated for a fairly long period of time our support 

for the country elevator system. The proposal that is being suggested here, which obviously the Member 

opposite supports, is to move grain not from the country elevator system to those ports, but to move 

from the inland terminals. It seems to me this is one further step in support of inland terminals and we 

just don’t agree to that. It is well known, Mr. Speaker, that there aren’t cleaning facilities for export 

grain at either of those two ports. It is well known that the country elevator system doesn’t have cleaning 

facilities. Here we see a plan under the disguise . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A dark, deep plot. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — . . . a dark, deep plot under the disguise of an attack on inflation, to support inland 

terminals and that we can’t agree with. If the Member opposite agrees with that kind of concept, fine. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Is the Minister suggesting to this House that the cleaning of grain on the prairies 

versus the cleaning of grain at the export position is less efficient and is not going to put dollars in the 

pockets of our farmers? And I don’t recall asking any questions pertaining to inland terminals as of yet, 

but are you suggesting that the system we are using now is more efficient than what is being proposed? 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I have to assume that the system of cleaning at the export points, say 

the Port of Vancouver, say at Thunder Bay, is more efficient than the proposal put forward because I 

have not seen any figures in my time to dispute that in fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

HOG COMMISSION 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Because of 

the inability of the Hog Marketing Commission to maintain producer confidence in the hog industry, 

what is your Government prepared to do to restore that confidence and to prevent further 

announcements like this morning of closure by Intercontinental Packers of acceptance of further hogs 

after December 24? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

121 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think the farmers who produce hogs make 

their own decisions. Prices of hogs were very satisfactory all summer. Farmers chose not to produce 

them and I’m sure that they didn’t choose that because they didn’t like the Hog Commission. They made 

their decision and they chose not to produce the volume of hogs which had been produced up until that 

time. I’m sure that the activities of the Commission were not in any way responsible for that. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister then telling the people of 

Saskatchewan that he is prepared to sit idly by and allow another 130,000 decrease in the marketing of 

hogs in this province and do nothing in this particular instance. 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I have no evidence that there is going to be a reduction of another 

130,000 hogs. I don’t know why there should be. The assembly which is now being arranged and is now 

being considered should be satisfactory to deliver all of those hogs to Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Further supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister of Agriculture then 

convey that assurance to Intercontinental Packers so that they in effect won’t then have to close their 

plant to hogs on December 24th, because there is a clear indication of that deterioration? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Member that the reason for the closure of the plant in 

Regina is not because of any act due to the Hog Marketing Commission. Certainly nothing the Hog 

Marketing Commission has done has brought that about. 

 

PILOTS - ACCUMULATED OVERTIME 
 

Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Question to the Minister responsible for the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan. Is the Minister aware that during the past summer some of the pilots employed 

by DNS have accumulated as much as 72 days or two and a half months of potential time off in lieu of 

overtime? 

 

Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the 

amount of time that individual employees may have built up over the summer. With respect to pilots 

who are required at times to fly excessive hours because of forest fire situations or forest fire conditions, 

it’s not unusual for pilots in the north to accumulate overtime which they take off in lieu of paid 

overtime. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that in a peace time airforce, the 

considered safe limit of air time in a 24 hour period is six hours and would he not agree that under the 

ideal conditions of airforce control as compared to 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

122 
 

the hazardous conditions in the North, that this is a significant deterioration in safety to northern 

employees? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s true that the federal Ministry of Transport governs the 

matters of pilot licensing and hours of flying and matters relating to that kind of question. Therefore, if 

the pilots are flying in excess of the hours provided for by the Ministry of Transport, then I think it’s a 

matter for the Ministry of Transport to deal with and not myself. 

 

INSTALLATION OF COAXIAL CABLE 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, if I might direct a question to the Minister in 

charge of Sask Telecommunications. Is it a fact that Sask Tel have hired two out of province companies, 

Mustang Engineering and G. M. Jest, who are and have all summer been desperately laying the ducting 

to install coaxial cable throughout Saskatchewan? They are working now down Angus Street to lay the 

north-south route in Regina. They are working on 22nd Avenue. Is it a fact that these companies, 

working now to desperately in all of the cities will be moving shortly to Prince Albert, to work at the 

same double time and a half rate to get this cable installed? 

 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the Hon. Member’s 

questions, Sask Tel has a very large capital budget, most of which is contracted. This year’s capital 

budget is about $87 million as compared to $24 million in the last year of the last Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Byers: — Sask Tel does have some of its own construction crews, but a good portion of its capital 

budget is contracted and Sask Tel has a very vigorous program under way laying cable in the city of 

Moose Jaw, in the city of North Battleford, in the city of Regina, in the city of Saskatoon and we expect 

that by the end of 1977 that Sask Tel will have laid most, if not all, of the facilities for cable television in 

those four cities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I wonder if the Minister would indicate to the House whether it is not in fact true that 

the intentions of the Government were changed and that the reason that these out of province companies, 

one of whom has brought in crews from Ontario, are working at double time and a half and indeed even 

worked on Remembrance Day, that these crews are here working because the Government is attempting 

to force the hands of the CRTC and get the cable installed, regardless of the law and regardless of the 

intentions of the duly licensed authorities? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, the decision of any contractors who work overtime, to work on Sunday, to 

work on weekends, to work on Remembrance Day, is a decision of the contractors and I’m sure 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

123 

if they are breaking the labour relations laws of this province, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) will 

deal with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I wonder if the Minister would indicate how the Government can claim to be 

bargaining in good faith when in essence the Government is saying we don’t care what the 

municipalities say, we don’t care what the licensing authorities say, we’re going to do what our 

bureaucrats think is right, we’re going to lay the cable and force the hand of the cable and co-op 

companies duly licensed by the CRTC. 

 

Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the Member for Wascana will check some of the statutes of this 

province he may find that the jurisdiction which Sask Tel asserts over cable television and 

communications facilities belongs to the Government of this province, has been the case since 1910 and 

that that legislation was drafted when a former Premier of this province, the Hon. W. J. Patterson was 

the Superintendent of the Rural Telephone Company Association in this province. That was the basis on 

which Sask Tel made its case to the CRTC in February, 1976, which at this time has not been resolved. 

 

I want to say to him further, that the position which Sask Tel and which the Government of 

Saskatchewan has taken today is that it does not really reflect a change in government policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Byers: — Because I want to tell him that when the Hon. Gordon Grant was the Minister of Sask Tel 

and the Minister of Telephones in the former Liberal Government, that he relayed as the official policy 

of the Government of the day to the Department of Communications at Ottawa, the policy which this 

Government is upholding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WESTERN ROTO-THRESH 
 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar). Has your Department made any attempt to assist Western 

Roto-thresh, a wholly-owned Saskatchewan and Canadian company to remain here in Saskatchewan and 

to establish their plant here? 

 

Hon. N. Vickar (Minister of Industry and Commerce:) — No, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have that 

information. It has not come over my desk, but maybe the former Minister might like to answer that for 

you if he can. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I’ll direct the question either to the present 

Minister of Industry and Commerce (he obviously doesn’t know the answer) or to the former Minister 

(Mr. Messer). 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

124 
 

Is the Government aware that cities in the United States close to the Canadian border are now 

negotiating with this totally owned Saskatchewan company for them to establish their manufacturing 

plant there rather than in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the negotiations 

which the Member refers to, but I can say that the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

has had extensive discussions with the principals of Western Roto-Thresh as to their operations in 

Saskatchewan, and I might also say that they have given some considerable assistance in the past, both 

in the way of manpower and by way of finances. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to the former Minister. Would you not 

then agree that obviously what you offered in the way of negotiations with this company fell far short of 

that which they can obtain elsewhere? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree. The problem I think that Western Roto-Thresh is now 

confronted with is one of being able to sell their machines with a margin of profit to the principals of 

that operation. Now I don’t think that anything the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

can do in regard to either management input and/or financing will resolve that problem. That is a 

problem that the management of Western Roto-Thresh will have to contend with. 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — A supplementary question, Mr. 

Speaker. Would the Minister not agree, from his own words with that answer, that the succession duties 

in the Province of Saskatchewan and the labour legislation in Saskatchewan is contributing materially to 

the decision of Roto-Thresh to perhaps locate elsewhere? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree and the Leader of the Conservative Party I think is entering 

into another field totally and entirely. The problem with Western Roto-Thresh, up to this point in time is, 

it has not been able to turn a margin of profit. And I don’t think that any company that’s got a problem 

in trying to achieve a profit is concerned at this point in time about succession duties in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Collver: — The Minister of Industry and Commerce, or at least the former Minister of Industry and 

Commerce should know full well that perhaps there might be other influences in terms of succession 

duties, in terms of patents, royalties, capital costs, that are of substantial value to an organization and the 

fact that they can’t turn a profit in the Province of Saskatchewan may be significantly due to the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s policy. Would the Minister not agree that perhaps a review of those 

other bits of legislation that are so materially affecting Saskatchewan corporations in the light that many 

corporations other than Western Roto-Thresh are considering leaving the province? 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

125 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Member is kind of choking up and if I was in his present 

situation I would be choking too. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let me say that we are aware of such farm machinery manufacturers looking to 

establishing a portion of their operations south of the border. But that is not only happening in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. It is happening in Manitoba, and Alberta as well. And there are some real 

reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. Not to say the least being freight rates, which this Government has stood 

solidly in conveying to the Federal Government that if there is not some change in regard to services and 

freight rates that we are going to lose industry in the prairie basin. I can name industries; Alco in 

Alberta; Versatile in Manitoba, are also looking to operations south of the border and I say to the 

Member opposite that it is because of freight rates and transportation, primarily, that they looked to 

those other locations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

JUNK FOOD - NUTRITIONAL FOOD 
 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct this question to the Minister 

of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) in regard to the recent statements he has been making about junk foods 

in school. I am sure the Minister realizes the amount of money that students’ councils will probably lose 

by the elimination of selling such items as soft drinks, cheesies and the likes within the schools. The 

Minister seems to be very interested in establishing a nutritional program of some form in the schools. Is 

he willing to supply the necessary funds to possibly replace some of the existing vending machines that 

are in the schools, or to provide milk to some of the students within the schools? Exactly how far are 

you willing to go financially to change these junk foods within the school system? 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I made, sometime ago, an expression 

of concern about the availability of junk foods in our schools as it relates to the teaching of good 

nutrition and physical wellbeing of our students and the formation of good health habits as they grow up 

and become older. I also, at that same time, directed a letter to the school boards, after consultation with 

the SSTA and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation urging that they take some steps on their own 

initiative in phasing out the dispensing of junk foods. We have not, and are not in a position, and I have 

given no indication that we are going to be providing any kind of financial remuneration while that is 

being done. It is a decision that is going to be made at the local level. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I was rather amazed that you chose junk foods rather 

than say smoking within schools. Does the fact that you didn’t mention smoking mean that you condone 

the smoking areas that are being set up within some school jurisdictions? 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

126 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s an interesting question, Mr. Speaker, I think a bit facetious. I am not aware 

of any vending machines that dispense cigarettes in our schools of Saskatchewan at the present time. 

 

ENERGY FUND 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, on Monday, the Hon. Member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) posed two questions in respect of the Energy Fund. I would like now 

to give him the answers. 

 

The first part of the question was: What part of the Energy Fund has been used for exploration or 

development on new energy resources in Saskatchewan? The second part of the question: — Has the 

total been spent since the last session prorogued, for the purpose of existing jobs, mines and oil 

production in the province? 

 

The answer to the second part of the question is, no. The total expenditures for the Energy has not been 

used for purposes of existing jobs, mines and oil production. The total up until now that has been spent 

for energy purposes is $25.9 million to October 31. That’s since the fund was established. Of the $25.9 

million, $23 million went in payments to private petroleum and natural gas companies for the petroleum 

and natural gas exploration. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder whether the Minister would indicate 

whether he does not believe that by this improper use of the Energy Fund you are not putting our 

equalization payments with the Federal Government in jeopardy by using the Energy Fund in a way that 

it was not intended when the original arrangements were made with the Federal Government, you are 

not jeopardizing our future payments and the payments from the Federal Government? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The answer is no. The Hon. Member is obviously not informed. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. D. H. Lange 

(Bengough-Milestone) and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse), for an 

Address-in-Reply. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, in my brief remarks yesterday afternoon I’d had an 

opportunity to congratulate the mover of the motion, the Hon. Member for Bengough-Milestone and the 

seconder of the motion the Hon. Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) and I’d indicated that I 

thought each of the mover and the seconder had done an outstanding job. Each is a young man under 30 

years of age; each is articulate; each gave a thoughtful presentation, and each I think, gave notice that he 

serves his constituency well, both in this House and outside the House. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

127 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I had an opportunity to welcome the two new Members to the Cabinet, Dr. Faris, the 

Member for Arm River and Mr. Vickar, the Member for Melfort, and I believe that each will discharge 

the responsibilities assigned to him in an exemplary way. I am very happy to have them in the Cabinet. I 

think they are going to do an excellent job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wanted also to congratulate the Hon. Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. 

Steuart), the Leader of the Opposition for his remarks in this debate. He indicated that they would be his 

last remarks as Leader of the Opposition, and I know that many of us regret the fact that he is laying 

down the burdens of that office. He has served well as a Leader of the Opposition. We naturally felt that 

that was perhaps his best role, but we certainly acknowledged and freely acknowledge that he gave 

outstanding leadership to the Liberal Party and has served his constituents and this House well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I want to report to this House on a good number of 

things which I think are of concern to this province. I want to ask first the question, what makes our 

province strong? Why is Saskatchewan a good place in which to live? 

 

Well there are certainly a number of answers to those questions. There is our great natural wealth, our 

agricultural land and our mineral resources, our forests and our wildlife, the rich bounty that nature has 

given us and which man here has developed. 

 

There are our people, as sturdy and self-reliant a group of people as will be found anywhere on the face 

of the globe. There are our social institutions, our churches and our local governments, our schools, our 

universities, our hospitals and co-ops and community organizations, as rich and well developed a matrix 

of self-help organizations as exists for any one million people anywhere in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There is the concern that Saskatchewan people traditionally have for their neighbour. 

It’s not all we would like it to be, and certainly there are large blind spots, but we have a concern which 

means that essentially in Saskatchewan we have a compassionate society. Some years ago a writer wrote 

about Saskatchewan: — “No place on earth are the good things of life more evenly distributed than they 

are in Saskatchewan.” I am sorry to say that I don’t think that is true. But it approaches truth, and it is a 

high tribute to pay to any society. 

 

I want to talk this afternoon about some of the things which make our province strong, which make it so 

distinctive and so desirable a place in which to live. I ant to speak of those 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

128 
 

things which have caused Saskatchewan people to walk with a new pride and a new self confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Because of past misfortunes and ignorance about our achievements and our potential, 

the understanding of our province among Canadians has sometimes been woefully inadequate. This has 

rubbed off on Saskatchewan people who are perhaps overly modest in any case. The result has been an 

undue modesty among Saskatchewan people about our province and about ourselves. This is fortunately 

passing. The day when people were self conscious and a little bit ashamed of being rural is gone. The 

day of uncritical admiration for the urban society, for the big city, is passing too. Now it is 

understandable why people felt that way. Almost since the dawn of history, from the glories of Athens 

and Rome, to the cryptic comments of Samuel Johnson who said, “He who is tired of London, is tired of 

life,” to the view of a New York cabby driver that anyone who doesn’t want to live in New York is 

somehow queer, we have, with all these views, been urged to believe that urban life was the pinnacle of 

civilization. We no longer accept that view, nor need we, nor should we. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Modern communications have opened up most of the cultural offerings of the city to 

small town and rural dwellers. The western world is in a new era, an era when a gracious, comfortable 

and satisfying way of life can be built on the strengths of rural and small town living with its personal 

contacts and opportunities for participation, combined with the great cultural offerings of the largest 

cities brought to the rural areas by radio, by television and by occasional visiting companies. 

 

This is a new era for North America. It is certainly a new era for Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan 

people are responding with a new sense of pride, a new sense of self worth. 

 

When I go about Canada, or elsewhere in the world, I am proud to say that I am from Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I say that there is a rapidly growing recognition throughout the world that we in 

Saskatchewan have every reason to be proud. It’s a good province and, working together, we can make 

it better. 

 

Now let me turn to some of those things which are most important to the wellbeing of this province. 

There are really four or five intertwined, but I think we can deal with them separately. 

 

First, there is our agricultural industry. There are a number of questions: Will it continue to be 

prosperous? Will it be organized in a way which will strengthen our way of life or weaken it? 

 

There are our mineral resources. Can we develop them in a 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

129 

way which will benefit us and our children, or will the benefits of development be siphoned off by the 

Federal Government, by resource companies? 

 

There are our social institutions. Can we continue to develop our social institutions, our schools, our 

health services and our utilities, our co-ops and all the others in a way which will reinforce the unique 

values of Saskatchewan life, or will these institutions be totally swallowed up in a monolithic North 

American culture? 

 

There is our nation; federal-provincial relations. Can we in Canada develop relations between the 

Federal Government and provincial governments which strengthen regional development within a strong 

Canada, or will we see a further growth in tension between the Federal Government and provincial 

governments, between region and region? 

 

These are vital questions for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Before turning to talk about them one by one, I want to say a few words about our economy and the 

economic outlook. 

 

It is with feelings of pride, but with a certain amount of caution that I turn to this subject. I don’t pretend 

that this Government can take credit for all the goods things that have happened to Saskatchewan almost 

from the day we took office in 1971. I am sorely tempted to take the credit because in the future if 

anything goes wrong the Members opposite will be very anxious to claim that it is somehow our fault. If 

we follow that warped reasoning, it follows that when things go right, then it must be our doing as well. 

I will not take credit for several years of high grain prices, or the good crop this year, nor will I take the 

blame for the low hog prices or the low beef prices. 

 

I won’t claim credit for high resource prices. I will take credit for keeping some hundreds of millions of 

dollars of resource revenue within our province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . money which would have been allowed to leave this province as corporate profits 

under either of the parties opposite. That’s been a positive contribution made by the NDP Government 

to Saskatchewan’s prosperity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think it was a former Liberal Premier who said population figures were the acid test 

of an economy. The acid test of the government’s performance. At least he said that until under his 

government our population began to decline. If we can believe federal statistics, our population is rising 

sharply and our unemployment is the lowest in Canada. I don’t believe that population is the acid test. 

But by that standard we are doing well and again by that standard our Government should receive the 

credit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

130 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is strong. Through a combination of high 

prices, good crops and good management we have been able to avoid some of the problems besetting the 

rest of Canada. We have had a government willing and able to take full advantage of our good fortune. 

We have not been able to avoid the affects of inflation. That is a national problem and no province has 

the power or influence to stop it. And no province in Canada has successfully done so. But we have 

escaped the economic stagnation of some other parts of Canada. We have maintained almost full 

employment and a booming construction industry. 

 

Almost every economic indicator is at or near record level. We in Saskatchewan have done well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But our economy rides on the world prices of a relatively few commodities, such as 

grain, livestock, oil and potash. We are all painfully aware that it is entirely possible for Saskatchewan 

to go into a slump while the rest of the Canadian economy enjoys at least relative prosperity. 

 

Indeed that happened the last time the Tories held office in this province in the 1930s. And the last time 

the Liberals held office in this province between 1967 and 1971. During each of those periods, 

Saskatchewan, relative to other parts of Canada was in depression when they enjoyed at least a relative 

prosperity. 

 

All it takes is two or three bad crops or a big drop in the world price of one or more of our key 

commodities. Grain prices are going down and cattle prices are disastrously low, and hog prices are 

causing concern. Farm cash receipts and net farm incomes will be very satisfactory this year, but lower 

than in 1975. Despite these clouds I think we can look at least to 1977 with modest confidence. 

 

There are other areas where our Government can take credit. At a time when governments everywhere 

are under pressure and some of them are having difficulty borrowing money, our credit rating in the 

money markets of the world is high and it has never been higher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are able to borrow money in Canada, in the United States or abroad at attractive 

rates of interest compared to other provinces. Private investment is at an all time high. Members 

opposite will try to claim that the investment climate in this province is bad. The cold hard figures put 

the lie to that claim. People are as willing to lend money to Saskatchewan as never before and people are 

willing to invest money in Saskatchewan as never before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Private and public investment in Saskatchewan in 1970 was $870 million, in 1975 it 

was not $870 million but $2.2 billion. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

131 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t know whether Members opposite are pleased that Saskatchewan is doing so 

well, but I am pleased that Saskatchewan is doing well, and I am pleased that the New Democratic Party 

is part of that prosperity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me turn now to the four things which I say will determine the future of this 

province. I turn first to agriculture. 

 

The goal of any government in Saskatchewan must be increased farm production and see that the farmer 

has a fair and stable income. Our Government and our university do an outstanding job in seeing that the 

farmers have the facts on which to base their decisions. And farmers make their own production 

decisions and they make good decisions. So far as production is concerned we can safely rely on our 

farmers to do a top rate job. 

 

Farmers need governments not primarily to assist them with production but rather to assist them with 

marketing and in stabilizing incomes. Our Government supports orderly marketing. We fully support the 

Canadian Wheat Board, unlike Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We believe that firm steps should be taken to make farm income more stable. The 

National Grain Income Stabilization Plan launched by the Federal Government is a step in the right 

direction. I want to congratulate the Federal Government on that move. The next step needed is a 

national beef income stabilization plan that offers similar protection to beef producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We will fully support such a plan and we will as a province contribute financially to a 

plan if it is launched on a national basis. The Minister of Agriculture will be dealing more fully with this 

important matter at an early opportunity. 

 

I want to touch on two topics of vital interest to agriculture, rail line abandonment and the statutory 

Crow’s Nest rates. Decisions on these issues will decide whether our rural economy and rural way of life 

is strengthened or whether it is all but destroyed. 

 

How these two matters are dealt with will decide not how much we produce but rather who will get the 

most benefit from what we do produce - the farmers or the grain companies and the railways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the long battle between the people of Saskatchewan and the railways over rail line 

abandonment is approaching a climax. The Federal Government has set up two royal commissions. The 

Snavely Commission dealing with the costs to the railways of grain-handling and the Hall Commission 

dealing with the railways’ requests for wholesale rail line abandonment. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

132 
 

The railways’ submissions to these Commissions pose a grave threat to rural Saskatchewan, in fact to 

the whole Saskatchewan economy. Intertwined are the issues of the Crow’s Nest rates, the shape and 

distribution of our grain-handling facilities and the fate of rural communities on lines which the railways 

seek to abandon. 

 

When first elected in 1971, our Government acted. We set up a special group under Harold Horner, 

former Deputy Minister of Agriculture, to marshal information and arguments on the effects of 

abandonment and on the effects of reorganization of grain-handling facilities. We established a 

transportation research group, to deal particularly with rail transportation. My colleague, the Attorney 

General, was first given the responsibilities of spearheading and co-ordinating these efforts. Last year 

we organized a transportation agency to concentrate even more fully on this vital matter. And the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs took charge and during the last year the Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

given outstanding leadership in this battle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — As part of our efforts, we appointed regional co-ordinators whose job it was to help 

local communities or groups prepare their briefs to the Hall Commission. And the communities 

presented their case to Judge Hall, ably, forcefully and frequently. Whatever could be done, was done, 

and was done well. 

 

As soon as the Hall Commission reports to the Government of Canada, the battle will move to the 

political arena. The railway companies and some of the international grain companies will be calling for 

wholesale abandonment. The people of Saskatchewan will be fighting to keep the rail lines necessary for 

a strong and healthy rural economy. 

 

This fight concerns us all. I recall to your mind what were some of the elements of the abandonment 

scheme proposed by the railways. It is a scheme, for example, which proposes that towns like Wakaw, 

Glaslyn and Gravelbourg be totally without any railways. That is a scheme to destroy rural 

Saskatchewan. It must be fought and it will be fought. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We in the Government of Saskatchewan are firmly opposed to wholesale rail line 

abandonment. We believe that most of our branch line system can serve this province well for many 

decades to come. 

 

This is not to suggest that our grain-handling system should not change. It should. And it is changing. 

The issue is whether the change should take place on a gradual planned basis making the consolidation 

meet the needs of the farmer, or whether the change should be a radical change involving the 

construction of a small number of inland terminals making a large part of our present grain-handling 

system either surplus or obsolete and in effect, making the farmer adjust his methods to the needs of 

consolidation. 

 

To put it more bluntly: Should the face of rural Saskatchewan be determined by the railway companies, 

by Cargill and their 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

133 

friends or should the residents of rural Saskatchewan have the major influence? We believe the voice of 

rural residents should prevail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The argument is being put by the centralists, and some Tories, and some Liberals and 

their friends and supporters, that our current grain-handling system is out of date, old fashioned, next to 

useless and must be totally rebuilt. 

 

That is false. Saskatchewan’s grain-handling system is not obsolete. Certainly there are some obsolete 

elevators but as a system it is a good modern well-equipped grain-handling system. Certainly it will 

need to be changed in the future as any system that exists today will need to be changed. But this is a far 

cry from saying that the grain-handling system which exists today is obsolete. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was the first group to present to the Hall Commission 

on grain-handling and transportation a coherent proposal to argue on a rail line by rail line basis what 

should happen to our branch line system. It was a thoughtful and reasonable presentation and based 

upon ideas as modern as tomorrow. The Government of Saskatchewan also presented a detailed case to 

Judge Hall. We also argued on a line-by-line basis. We had some differences with the Pool, but there is a 

remarkable similarity of view. This is not surprising because we both have a similar perception of the 

rural Saskatchewan we want to see 25 years from now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is clear from the comments of the Members opposite during my remarks, 

suggestions that my remarks are nonsense, and that our grain-handling system is obsolete, it is clear that 

they have a very different perception of what they want rural Saskatchewan to be. It is our belief that 

Saskatchewan 25 years from now should still be based upon the family farm and small communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — For our part we are not prepared to stand by and cheer while agribusiness takes over 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Saskatchewan Government is strongly opposed to inland terminals. As we see it, 

the wholesale use of inland terminals would lead to widespread abandonment of rail lines, the withering 

and eventual destruction of many small towns and villages and a vast increase in costs of hauling grain 

both to farmers and to governments who have to build roads. Mr. Speaker, if we were to bow to the 

pressure of the railways, the Cargills, and as it now seems the Liberals and the Tories, we would have an 

inland elevator system of perhaps 40 points. It would be very 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

134 
 

convenient indeed for Cargill, for the railways. But what would it mean for Saskatchewan? 

 

For farmers, much longer hauls, higher fuel bills, extra time. 

 

For the Pool and UGG, closure and abandonment of hundreds of good country elevators and possible 

financial ruin. 

 

For the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, a multibillion dollar and I repeat, billion dollar cost for new roads, 

for road repairs and upgrading; and a multimillion dollar loss for streets and telephone lines and power 

lines, schools, rinks in small communities which are about to disappear. Yes, multibillion dollar losses 

for the taxpayers. 

 

For hundreds of small communities, curtains! Closure of stores and businesses. Huge personal losses on 

properties and businesses. 

 

For the Federal Government, money saved, because they don’t have to pay for the roads. 

 

For the railways, money saved because they can abandon most of their branch lines and take only the 

cream. 

 

For Saskatchewan people, there are few social benefits, few economic benefits. There are costs. Hugh 

costs. 

 

Simply put, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot afford these so-called benefits. 

 

Our Government is being forced to take defensive action before heavy grain trucks start cutting up roads 

and highways they were never designed to carry. 

 

We built our roads and highways as a complement to our railway system. We believed, and still believe, 

that railway lines are there to carry heavy loads and railway lines are there to stay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There is no reasonable alternative to the action we are being forced to take. Heavy 

grain trucks will wreck our roads. There is no reason why Saskatchewan taxpayers should have to pay 

the bills for massive repairs and upgrading on their road system when we already have a perfectly good 

rail system. 

 

We are not going to ask all those farmers out there who built their own elevator system and their own 

efficient grain-handling system, to pay heavy taxes to subsidize the competition which will then use 

these farmers’ taxes to run the farmer co-ops out of business. That may make sense to the railway 

companies. It may make sense to the international grain companies. But it makes no sense for the 

farmers or taxpayers of Saskatchewan. As a government we will continue to oppose wholesale rail line 

abandonment with everything we have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want now to turn to another subject closely 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

135 

related and perhaps even more fundamental to the economy of the West. I refer to freight rates on grain. 

At the moment we are waiting for the report of the Snavely Commission. As you recall that Commission 

was set up following a prolonged publicity campaign by the CPR attacking the Crow’s Nest rates. 

 

The railways are attacking the Crow’s Nest rates and pleading their case that they are losing money. 

Many of us are a little less than fully sympathetic with the railways’ case. They have allowed many of 

their branch lines to deteriorate. They haven’t bought new equipment and after allowing this to happen 

over a period of years they then tell us that the branch lines are inefficient. I am not surprised. I think 

when we consider this issue fairly we must admit that costs faced by the railway companies as by 

everybody else have risen. It is probable that the Snavely report will suggest that current rail rates are 

too low. 

 

Suppose Snavely does suggest that the railways must have some more money. Clearly there are several 

things that could happen. 

 

1. The Crow’s Nest rates could stay as they are and we could reject the claim on the railway 

companies. 

2. The Crow’s Nest rates could stay as they are and a subsidy could be paid to the railway companies 

either partly or fully making up their loss. 

3. The Statutes could be changed to increase the Statutory Crow’s Nest rates. 

4. The Statutes covering Crow’s Nest rates could be repealed and substituted with some other way of 

setting freight rates for grain. 

 

There is a vast difference in the implications for farmers of each of these four methods. The first two 

leave things as they are so far as the farmers are concerned and therefore are to be preferred. 

 

The third one, changing the statutes to increase the Crow’s Nest rates would increase the rates but still 

leave them governed by statute. The fourth one would remove entirely the protection of the statutory 

Crow’s Nest rates and declare open season on farmers. Now even the Snavely Report says that the 

railways need more money and even if the Federal Government is determined to respond to that claim, 

there is no justification for repealing the statutory Crow’s Nest rates simply because the railways need 

the money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There may be a claim that the Crow’s Nest rates should be increased, that the Statute 

should be changed to increase the Crow’s Nest rates. On that we would argue when the time came. But 

the proposition that the railways need more money is absolutely no support for the proposition that the 

Crow’s Nest rate Statute should be repealed. 

 

On this side of the House we fully appreciate that if the Crow’s Nest rates went, if the railways were 

permitted to charge flexible tariffs as they would, then they would decide which branch lines were 

abandoned, what kind of elevator rationalization we would have, what towns would lose their elevators, 

what towns would live, what towns would die. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

136 
 

Let’s see what happens if the Crow’s Nest rates go. Today to ship a bushel of wheat from Regina to 

Thunder Bay costs about 12 cents a bushel. But without the Crow’s Nest rate we could expect that the 

rate would be something akin to what is charged by US railroads. To ship a bushel of wheat from Wolf 

Point, Montana to Duluth, which is just a little shorter distance than from Regina to the Lakehead, the 

price is not 12 cents, but 53 cents, four and a half times as much. Now picture if you will what the 

railways could do with that kind of flexibility. For the farmer on the branch line destined for 

abandonment, at least in the railways’ plan, the railway can say, “Okay you can deliver your grain if you 

like to Francis or Montmartre, but it will cost you 55 cents a bushel. However, if you want to truck it to 

Regina, we’ll haul it for 30 cents a bushel.” Now that’s a pretty persuasive argument. The difference 

between 55 cents and 30 cents may not be justified by any real difference in the railways’ costs but there 

is no place where that can be argued. 

 

Just take a look at what this means too 107 farmers who deliver over one million bushels a year to the 

elevators at Francis, 10,000 bushels each, a differential of 25 cents a bushel, $2,500 each for each 

farmer. That’s a pretty big premium to pay to keep the elevator open at Francis. The farmers will have to 

haul their grain to Regina. They will ‘choose’ as the saying goes to abandon their branch line. The 

railways will get their way and our country elevator system will go down the drain and very soon the 

branch lines that serve it. 

 

Keep in mind that once the country elevator system is gone, tens of millions of dollars of farmers’ 

money invested in their co-ops will go too. These co-ops will have to build new inland terminals at the 

few selected points but they don’t have the kind of money that Cargill does. The Member for 

Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) outlined the financial power of Cargill. If it gets into a battle of who 

can build inland terminals at 30 or 40 selected points, you know that Cargill will win and you know that 

the Pool and UGG will lose. That’s the design for rationalization which is being put forward by 

Members opposite by those who say that the Crow’s Nest rates should go, by those who say that we 

should have wholesale rail line abandonment. This is a design which appears at least in my mind, to be 

an emerging one. I hear attacks on our grain-handling system, attacks on our branch line system. And I 

ask, rationalization for whom? For the CPR and the CNR, for Cargill, for Continental. Certainly that’s 

one concept of efficiency. But for the Saskatchewan farmer, the implement dealer in Francis, the 

merchant in Montmartre, for the people of Saskatchewan, that’s not rationalization, that’s completely 

irrational. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now in the months ahead we are likely to be subjected to yet another campaign to do 

away with the Crow’s Nest rates. We will hear sorry stories about how much money the rail lines are 

losing. We’ll hear many Liberals and Tories defending the railways, extolling the virtues of the 

international grain companies. We will hear how inefficient our country elevator systems are, and how 

the branch lines have got to go. Don’t believe those stories. I say to all Members of this House and to all 

the people of Saskatchewan, don’t believe those stories. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

137 

Our country elevators, our branch lines, our roads, and our highways are at stake if rail line 

abandonment comes about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The inter-connected issues of rail line abandonment and the Crow’s Nest rates are 

vitally important to the future of this province. I call upon all Members to join with us in defending rural 

Saskatchewan, in keeping our basic rail line system and using it as a basis for building an even better 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I said that our future depends upon agriculture, mineral resources, on 

keeping and strengthening our social institutions and on how Canada as a nation is governed. I want now 

to say something about resources. 

 

When I rose in this debate a year ago, I spent some time outlining the resource policies of this 

Government, particularly our policies on non-renewable resources. The policy objective I said, is firm. 

In a word our objective is to guarantee a fair return to the people of Saskatchewan, in dollars, in jobs, in 

future security. But I also said that our means are flexible, and I set forth the approach we are using, 

resource by resource. This has been an eventful year for Saskatchewan in resource development. I would 

like now to give you a progress report, resource by resource. 

 

Let me begin with oil. In Saskatchewan as in the whole of Canada, another year has gone by without a 

major oil discovery. Nevertheless, there has been a resurgence of interest among exploration companies 

in Saskatchewan’s oil potential. In two sales of oil and natural gas drilling rights held by the Department 

of Mineral Resources so far this year bonus bids have totalled nearly $8 million. That value is double the 

1974 figure and more than double the bonus bids for the entire year of 1970, the last year of 

management by the friends of the big oil companies opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — A third sale is scheduled for December. Thus the 1976 total for bonus bids may well 

top $10 million. Now it’s true that one of the bidders was SaskOil, but another was Shell and Golden 

Eagle and Murphy and Canadian Reserve and Francana, and Husky. SaskOil’s share of the successful 

bids was only $1.4 million. So that the bulk of these drilling rights were acquired by private oil 

companies, these self-same companies that, according to the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake and 

the Member for Nipawin, left this province years ago never to return. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, they’re here. They’re here because there’s more oil to be found in 

Saskatchewan. They’re here because there is money to be made in oil in Saskatchewan, not as much as 

the companies would like to make, but a healthy return. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

138 
 

In consultation with the industry, we adjusted royalties and increased incentive refunds on January 1, 

1976. The royalty schedule was adjusted again a few weeks ago. The price of oil went up by a $1 a 

barrel on July 1, and half of that increase goes to the oil producers. 

 

There has been a new light oil discovery in the deeper horizons in southeastern Saskatchewan and that’s 

very encouraging. So there are some new and modestly encouraging signs in the oil development 

picture. Oil revenues in 1975-76 approached $200 million with the major part of that being set aside in 

the Energy and Resource Development Fund. Perhaps the greatest potential for increasing our 

recoverable oil reserves lies in developing new technology for heavy crudes. We have lots of heavy 

crude in the Lloydminster area. To help solve the problems, Saskatchewan recently entered into a joint 

agreement with the Federal Government to provide over $16 million for research and technical 

development. In the long run we are very optimistic about our heavy oil reserves. 

 

Now let me turn for a moment to our young public entry in oil and gas exploration, SaskOil. A year ago 

SaskOil had reserves of about nine million barrels of crude oil and natural gas equivalent. Today, the 

figure is not nine million, but 30 million barrels. In its drilling program SaskOil has drilled 48 wells 

since last April in this fiscal year, producing 17 oil wells, 11 gas wells and 20 dry holes. That’s a success 

ratio of 58 per cent. And when it closes its books in 1976-77, despite the derision heaped upon SaskOil 

by Members opposite, SaskOil will have returned a respectable surplus to its owners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — SaskOil, a Crown corporation, doing a good job for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — A word about natural gas. Although Saskatchewan has for many years been an 

exporter of crude oil, we have never produced sufficient natural gas to meet our own needs. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation has over the years, made up the difference by importing gas from 

Alberta from reserves which it owns and from other sources. I may say that SPC began buying those 

reserves in the 1950s and with great presence of mind continued to buy them. And I regret to say that 

during the seven years between 1964 and 1971, the government of the day sold off gas reserves to the 

private industry which are now costing us millions of dollars to buy back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The policy of buying oil and buying gas in Alberta has paid off. It has worked well 

for Saskatchewan consumers, assuring an adequate supply at low cost. In recent years it has provided a 

substantial price cushion for gas users in Saskatchewan and so we are not yet having to pay the high 

prices paid in Manitoba or in Ontario where they do not have that cushion. But the day of cheap natural 

gas is coming to an end. So too is the unlimited availability of natural gas from Alberta. We expect that 

some time in the 1980s the amount we can import from Alberta will 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

139 

begin to decline. Looking toward that day, we must take measures now to step up gas production from 

our own reserves. We will therefore be introducing legislation at this Session to establish a Natural Gas 

Pricing and Development Board. It’s job will be to recommend to the Cabinet what prices should be 

paid to Saskatchewan producers, the order of development of new gas properties and any other measures 

needed to achieve orderly development of gas production. It is not likely that any permits to export gas 

will be approved, only one such permit has been issued in the history of this province. But as part of a 

new gas policy, we have adopted a formula which will only permit gas export if productivity from 

proven reserves, plus half of probably reserves will be sufficient to meet Saskatchewan’s own 

requirements over the next ten years on an on-going basis. Current reserves only meet half that 

requirement. Thus until substantial new reserves are proven up, our gas will stay here to meet 

Saskatchewan’s own future needs. 

 

Jack Wotherspoon, a highly respected public servant of 25 years of service with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and until recently Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources, will head up the new Natural 

Gas Pricing and Development Board. 

 

I turn now to coal. With the depletion of other energy sources, Saskatchewan’s reserves of over five 

billion tons of lignite coal have assumed new importance. We have this year taken the first steps toward 

establishing a comprehensive coal policy. The Coal Conservation Act of 1976 passed at the last session, 

sets the framework for a sound policy to guide coal development and use, now and in the future. Work is 

under way on policy development. 

 

The Minister of Mineral Resources will soon be announcing the appointment of the Coal Conservation 

Board provided for in that Act. 

 

Water power. Our coal of course is used primarily by the SPC for the generation of power at Estevan 

and at Boundary Dam. A new unit is being added at Boundary Dam, new coal deposits are being 

developed at Coronach where the Poplar River Project will go onstream in 1979. Coal has been and 

continues to be the most economical source of electrical power. Nevertheless, we must plan well into the 

future if we are to meet the ever-increasing demands for electrical power. And renewable energy 

resources, like water power, become more important as our fossil fuels become scarcer and more 

valuable. 

 

The Churchill River is one hydro site which has potential. As you know the proposed Churchill Project 

has been the subject of one of the most comprehensive studies of social, economic and environmental 

impact ever undertaken in Canada. The results of that study were published this summer. The next step 

will be the appointment of a board of enquiry to review these findings, to hold public hearings and to 

recommend to the Government whether or not this project should proceed. It is an attractive power 

project, but there are important reasons why this project should not be proceeded with, and all factors 

should be thoroughly weighed. That will be done. 

 

A second site under consideration is the Saskatchewan River site at Nipawin. Design work and cost 

estimates on this project are now underway. I am not suggesting we are necessarily going to proceed 

with that project, I am saying that it is under careful consideration. Here the principal factors are 

economic 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

140 
 

factors. There are some environmental considerations, but we are fairly familiar with what another dam 

on the Saskatchewan River will do, and accordingly most of the work is being done on the economics. 

These are being carefully assessed. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation, a Crown enterprise, continues to plan for and provide the energy 

needs of Saskatchewan people as it has done so successfully for many, many decades. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me say a word about uranium and hard rock mining. In 1976 we had a record 

year for mineral exploration in northern Saskatchewan – record year bar none. We estimate that total 

exploration expenditures at about $20 million. This compares with an average of $3.5 million a year 

over the previous decade, six times the record of the previous decade. While uranium is the chief object 

of this northern search, important base metal deposits are also being discovered. 

 

The Key Lake Uranium find for example, is associated with nickel. Preliminary estimates of the Gartner 

ore body at Key Lake, one of the two, indicate uranium oxide reserves of 43 million pounds, and nickel 

reserves of 36 million pounds. There has also been a substantial graphite find near Southend (Reindeer 

Lake) which may go into production in 1979. The Crown corporation, the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, SMDC, is a 40 per cent partner in this venture. There is no doubt that the 

Key Lake discovery has heightened exploration activity. When further drilling and evaluation of 

reserves are made, the two Key lake deposits are likely to form Saskatchewan’s largest uranium ore 

body. The activities of SMDC and others in the field of uranium raise some important questions and if 

time permits, I will address a few remarks to the general question of the development of uranium 

resources. 

 

But there are two other factors in the current boom. First is the Government’s willingness to enter into 

joint ventures, through SMDC. And, the second, is the general acceptance by the industry of the new 

uranium royalty schedules announced last March. 

 

SMDC alone has $8 million budgeted for exploration this year. It is by any measure one of the most 

active mining exploration companies in Canada. It is active in 20 joint ventures. In addition, SMDC 

undertook six projects on its own last summer and we hope that that will be ten or twelve in the coming 

summer. 

 

The Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, another Crown corporation, is doing an 

outstanding job for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let me turn now to the most abundant non-renewable resource, potash. 

 

It’s just a year since this Government, faced with the resource companies’ concerted opposition to our 

taxation and management policies, faced with their calculated refusal to 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

141 

comply with our laws, faced with a number of serious court challenges to our taxation and conservation 

powers, made a momentous decision. That decision was announced to this Assembly in the Throne 

Speech on November 12, 1975. 

 

We said then, and we reaffirm now, that we intend to acquire, in the name of the people of 

Saskatchewan, 50 per cent or more of the productive capacity in this province’s potash industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The first milestone in realizing that objective came just a few weeks ago with the 

establishment of PCS Cory, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

PCS is now producing potash. It is selling potash through its sales organization and through Canpotex. 

Canpotex is the Canadian international overseas selling agency of which PCS is a member. Through 

PCS, the people of this province today have a significant stake in the potash industry. 

 

The Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation will be reporting on the Duval purchase in detail. I 

have just a few observations. You will have before you the report of David S. Robertson and Associates 

which states the opinion that the Duval assets were worth 131 million in 1976 Canadian dollars. The 

agreed price, reached through hard negotiations, was $128.5 million U.S. dollars. The first offset against 

that $128.5 figure is the saving on U.S. exchange, roughly $2 million. Bringing the price down to 126.5 

and 123.5 million dollars. 

 

I won’t attempt to put figures on the intangibles, a co-operative transition, a sales organization, company 

goodwill. 

 

My point is this. A fair price was arrived at, fair to Duval, fair to Saskatchewan, across the negotiating 

table. In this House a year ago, the Leader of the Opposition said that the Government would have to 

pay $225 million for a mine the precise size of Duval. I invite anyone to look at the records, $225 

million. He was obviously wrong. When the Duval sale was announced, he said that Duval “took” the 

people of Saskatchewan, that we shouldn’t have paid more than $90 million, or was it a $100 million. 

And I say he’s obviously wrong again. 

 

If there is one thing you can be sure of with the Leader of the Opposition, it is that he’s never a little bit 

wrong, he always goes the full way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Recently he revealed some facts, so-called, about salaries paid by PCS to senior 

officers. Again as the true facts published by the Chairman, my colleague, the Member for 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

142 
 

Biggar showed, the Leader of the Opposition was just over 100 per cent wrong – about his usual batting 

average. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite should look at the statement issued by the Member for Biggar. He 

makes very clear that no employee of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is getting more than 

$60,000 Canadian. None. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And $60,000 Canadian is less than half of the $125,000 which the Leader of the 

Opposition alleged was true and was false. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We believe that the Duval deal is a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. It is a 

solid start toward putting our policy in place. But it is only a start. And PCS is actively pursuing other 

acquisitions. With PCS Cory we are about one-fifth of the way towards our objective. 

 

I want to express a word of appreciation to the people who head PCS; Mr. Dombowsky and the other 

senior staff of that corporation. I know the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake will know Mr. 

Dombowsky well. He was the Member’s Deputy when the Member was the Provincial Treasurer, and I 

know he had full confidence in him then, otherwise he would not have allowed him to occupy the key 

post of Deputy Minister of Finance in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, another Crown corporation, is 

making its mark on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In summing up our progress, let me be brief. 

 

In the year before we took office in 1970-71, the total revenue to the province from non-renewable 

resources was less than $33 million. In 1975-76, those resources contributed, not $33 million, but $304 

million in government revenues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, that would not have happened under any but a New Democratic Party 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, I must sound a warning. The measures upon which these resource 

revenues depend are under attack. They are under a strenuous attack by the multinational 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

143 

corporations, by the Federal Government and yes, by the Government of the United States. 

 

If I was amazed in June when a U.S. Grand Jury returned an indictment which all but named the 

Government of Saskatchewan as a criminal in violation of U.S. anti-trust laws, I was shocked in August 

when the U.S. Justice Department named a very large number of Canadians as “unindicted 

co-conspirators” in a criminal conspiracy, named people including my predecessor, the late Premier 

Ross Thatcher. 

 

The actions in question were those related to the introduction and enforcement of potash prorationing by 

Mr. Thatcher and his government. This was action taken in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not in the 

United States. 

 

Mr. Thatcher and his government were applying Canadian law to Canadian corporations; to Amax 

Potash Ltd. of Canada, not Amax of the United States; to International Mineral and Chemical Canada 

Ltd., not to IMC in Libertyville, Ill.; to Alwinsal of Canada, not the parent companies in Germany and 

France. 

 

Yet the implication of the indictment is unmistakable: that Premier Thatcher and the Government of 

Saskatchewan, in applying Canadian law to Canadian companies, took part in criminal offences charged 

against U.S. corporations. 

 

Let me state the case another way. The U.S. Justice Department seems to be saying that Canadian 

corporations extracting a Canadian resource are constrained from complying with Canadian law because 

they are subsidiaries of corporations whose shareholders reside in the U.S. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I reject this attempt to apply U.S. law in Saskatchewan. This Government will resist to the 

fullest possible extent such infringements on Canadian sovereignty and on the sovereign rights of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wish to acknowledge that, on this issue, we have had the full support of the Federal 

Government and the Department of External Affairs. I wrote to the Minister of External Affairs in 

Ottawa in early September, and a diplomatic note to the U.S. State Department followed, with some 

positive results. I express my appreciation to the Government of Canada. 

 

I said our resource policies were under a strenuous attack in the Canadian courts. And, Mr. speaker, the 

resource corporations and the Federal Government of Canada are joined together in these attacks. 

 

The constitutional validity of the prorationing scheme and prorationing fees is being challenged in the 

courts by Central Canada Potash. And standing with Central Canada, for the plaintiff and against 

Saskatchewan is the Attorney General of Canada. 

 

Bill 42, the law establishing our royalty surcharge on oil, is under legal attack by Canadian Industrial 

Gas and Oil, CIGOL. That law was upheld in the Court of Queen’s Bench, over the objections of the 

Attorney General of Canada. It was again upheld in the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, again with the 

Attorney General of Canada on the side of the oil companies. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

144 
 

And when CIGOL appeared in the Supreme Court of Canada two weeks ago, standing by their side, for 

the oil companies and against Saskatchewan, was the Attorney General of Canada. 

 

Standing reservedly for Saskatchewan were the governments of Alberta, Manitoba and Quebec. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And when the potash companies joined in an appeal to the Supreme Court for a 

ruling that potash reserve taxes must be repaid by the Government, arguing for the appellants and 

against Saskatchewan, was the Attorney General of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pattern which emerges is all too clear. This Federal Government of Messrs. Trudeau 

and Lang which the Members opposite are attempting to support, that Government is willing to join any 

ally, any multinational corporation, in any fight which will increase its centralist powers and cripple the 

provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Prime Minister knows that he cannot directly exert control over resources. The 

constitution is unequivocally clear on that point. But he eyes the United States and he sees how, over the 

years, the courts in the United States have eroded and weakened the powers of the States, through court 

decisions. And he apparently wishes to alter Canada’s constitution through the same means. He and his 

party profess to be defenders of federalism. Their actions proclaim them to be, as they always have been, 

defenders of central power in the interests of the corporate heartland of central Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now because Saskatchewan has taken the lead in attempting to regain control of its 

resources, and to regulate the development of those resources, to tax them adequately, we are in the 

vanguard of this fight. But all of the provinces recognize that they are involved. Their future, like ours, 

is on the line. That is why Alberta was with us in the CIGOL case, and that’s why Manitoba is with us in 

the CIGOL case, and that’s why the Government of Quebec, the old government of Quebec was with us 

in the CIGOL case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think I’m not being alarmist when I say that we are moving all too rapidly toward a 

constitutional confrontation in Canada on the question of resources. I hope I’m wrong, but all the 

elements are there. 

 

Now let me serve notice to the resource companies and to the Federal Government, that this 

Saskatchewan Government will use every legitimate weapon at its command, to preserve its resource 

revenue base, to maintain its right to conserve resources and to exercise its full constitutional powers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

145 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the third support for Saskatchewan well-being, the 

organizations we have built to run our affairs. They are many, they are good and they are all our own. 

 

First and foremost are all those things which make up the rural way of life. I’ve talked about some of 

them, the railway branch lines, our elevator system. There are other things that strengthen rural life. To 

preserve the family farm we have the FarmStart Program, the Land Bank Program. The Land Bank has 

helped the 1,700 farmers set up viable farm units. Under FarmStart, 2,500 have received loans for 

livestock operations. The average age of farmers leasing land from the Land Bank is around 30 years. 

The average age of farmers receiving loans from FarmStart is around 28 or 29. 

 

These are solid, constructive steps to get young people on the land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Operation Open Roads and Operation Mainstreet have hard surfaced 325 main streets 

in villages and have connected over 300 small communities to the provincial highway system. 

 

Because we believe small businessmen have an important place in the Saskatchewan economy we have 

provided help through the business representatives of the Industry and Commerce Department. And 

through new rules of SEDCO, which have made dozens of loans available to small businessmen in small 

centres and now the mainstreet development and rural community business retention programs will help 

more small businessmen in smaller centres. 

 

We’ve overhauled our housing program, with the result that there are thousands of new homes going up 

in smaller centres. Dozens and dozens of villages and smaller towns, which got no low rental housing 

under the Members opposite, now have projects, small projects perhaps, but projects which are big for 

their communities. And I think of places like Southey and Choiceland and Arcola. They mean that the 

older farm people can move off the farm and turn the farm over to the next generation and live in new, 

modern accommodation in their own town, near their family and friends. 

 

This has gone a long way to keeping these villages and towns alive and prosperous. 

 

There are new recreational facilities, curling rinks, swimming pools, golf courses, community halls, 

senior citizens centres. It’s a treat to travel around rural Saskatchewan as I do and see the many 

improvements and the pride and sense of accomplishment on the faces of the people who have made 

these improvements a reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With people like this we still have a very strong rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We took natural gas to smaller centres like the village of 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

146 
 

Jansen which the Government of the day between 1964 and 1971 refused to serve. Under this 

Government, Jansen is now served with natural gas. I could go on: new small rural hospitals at 

Lampman and Elrose and Lestock and Climax – not closing small hospitals, but building new ones; and 

many new nursing homes at places like St. Walburg, Macklin and Ituna. But I think that anyone who 

looks at the record of our Government over the last five years in the many programs which reinforce 

rural life will agree that rural Saskatchewan is a stronger place than it was five years ago. More can be 

done and I will touch on a couple of ways in a moment. I believe that we can strengthen our health 

institutions, I believe we can strengthen our cultural and recreation facilities, I think we can strengthen 

rural telephones. And let me say a word or two about health care. 

 

We look back on a year of progress in health care. Our new pioneering health programs – the children’s 

dentistry program, prescription drugs, hearing aids, the aids to independent living program, further 

advances in mental health – are going well and are giving leadership in North America. 

 

Liberals and Tories say we should be spending money we are using not on potash mines but on hospital 

operating costs. I will say a little bit about that in a moment. Let me look for a moment at the facts of 

Saskatchewan health spending. 

 

Like all other provinces, Saskatchewan faces the problem of dramatically increasing health costs. I am 

proud of the way we have met that problem. We have managed to restrain our spending on health care 

without making major cuts. Alberta increased its spending on health care by only 11 per cent over 1975 

and closed down 300 to 400 hospital beds. Ontario is closing down 3,000 beds and eliminating about 

4,500 jobs. British Columbia increased its premium 50 per cent to $225 per annum for a family and put 

on $4 per day deterrent fee as well. I won’t go into the story of Quebec, the sorry Liberal story of 

Quebec as recounted by my colleague, the Member for Rosemont (Mr. Allan). By contrast with what is 

done in a Liberal province or a Conservative province or a Social Credit province, Saskatchewan 

increased its spending on health care by 26 per cent last year. I say that is a good record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are proud of our medical system. We don’t want to re-introduce deterrent fees or 

to close small town hospitals. Those are techniques used by Members opposite. We will continue to look 

for ways to reduce the cost of expensive facilities, the use of expensive facilities, and see if we can find 

less expensive alternatives. We will need the co-operation of doctors and nurses and health workers and 

all of our citizens. With that co-operation, it can be done and, indeed, is being done. 

 

I said I would say a word about this Tory argument, and now this Liberal argument, that we should use 

windfall oil revenues for the day-to-day hospital operating costs. It is true that a few years ago when the 

value of oil shot up, we moved to capture a large share of that windfall increase for our people of 

Saskatchewan. Even though our oil production is small compared to Alberta’s, the amount of money in 

new revenue to our province is significant – more than a hundred million dollars extra a year. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

147 

We had a choice. We could have used that money for ongoing Government expenses – things like health 

costs or municipal grants. And those things are good and important. Or we could set a big chunk of that 

windfall money aside to invest in the future. We decided it was wiser and more prudent to safeguard this 

province’s future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have been putting substantial sums aside each year out of oil revenues in our 

Energy and Resource Development Fund. There are critics of this policy. Some say we should never 

have passed Bill 42 at all, that the oil royalties should not be coming to the Provincial Government, but 

should be going to the oil companies. That is the position of the Liberal Party. Others say that if we 

collect the money, we should be spending it on current expenses for current purposes. Daily we hear 

them say, “You shouldn’t be spending the money on potash, you should be spending it on nursing 

homes or hospital costs or the like.” 

 

We disagree. We believe this extra money should be invested in long term capital projects. You ask, 

“Why?” and you might well ask why. Because it is a good thing for a government to have more money 

to spend. There are always more good ways to spend money than there is money in the Treasury. But we 

looked ahead 10 or 20 years and we could see our oil drying up. If we spent these windfall funds on 

day-to-day expenses now, there would come a day of reckoning for some future government. When the 

oil runs out, government programs would have to be cut, or huge increases in taxes would have to be 

imposed. 

 

We asked ourselves, “Isn’t it a better idea to take these one-time revenues from a rapidly depleting 

resource - oil - and set them aside to invest in resource development which will benefit us in later years, 

our children and our children’s children.” And that’s what we have been doing. Some of these oil funds 

have been invested in developing new energy resources like uranium. And some have been going into 

potash. A large share of the Duval purchase fund came from the Energy and Resource Development 

Fund. I said before that for Saskatchewan, potash is a resource unlike any other. In world terms, our oil 

reserves are so tiny as to be invisible. We may have a great deal of uranium, but much of it is yet to be 

discovered. But with potash, right now, we hold 40 per cent of the world’s proven reserves. By investing 

in potash, we are trading short term oil revenues for a public stake in an industry which will serve this 

province well for at least a century, maybe many centuries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think that makes good sense. As I’ve said, not everyone agrees with me in this 

cautious approach to the use of the Government’s capital funds. “Don’t buy potash mines,” they say. 

“Instead, spend the money on things we need today. Let tomorrow take care of itself.” 

 

I reject that approach. We should not spend Saskatchewan’s oil heritage heedlessly. We are the stewards 

of that heritage. We will invest those one-time dollars in resources, resources like potash. These 

resources are the province’s bonus for 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

148 
 

tomorrow. We think they’re good investments. We think they’ll make money for health care for 

generations of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Another important new initiative to strengthen rural Saskatchewan is the newly 

announced rural telephone program. This is the next step in those important steps like the SPC rural 

electrification, grid roads and school buses which did so much to improve life on the farm. You may 

recall some of that history. Back in the late 1940s and 1950s, it was the CCF that created a well-run and 

efficient organization out of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It was the CCF that got moving on 

converting our power system into one efficient, integrated, and reliable interconnected grid. 

 

In those times the SPC invested many millions of dollars in rural electrification. This brought power 

eventually to almost every farm house in Saskatchewan, using imaginative technology developed right 

here in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba. We say that that is just one more example of what local people 

here can do to solve local problems. What SPC has done for rural Saskatchewan, Sask Tel is now 

proposing to do. Many years ago, there were a large number of small power systems in Saskatchewan. 

Gradually they were transferred to the SPC. Now we propose to do the same thing with the hundreds of 

rural telephone companies. We will integrate them into Sask Tel, if they want to be integrated. 

 

I want to emphasize that this is a voluntary program. Those rural telephone companies can vote on 

whether they wish to amalgamate with Sask Tel. If they vote in favor of amalgamation and take the 

appropriate steps, then they will become part of the Crown corporation. Those who wish to stay with 

their present organization will continue to do so. By merging with Sask Tel, rural companies will gain 

for their subscribers the advantages of access to the advanced technology that the big companies like 

Sask Tel have at their disposal, the same technology now available to Sask Tel subscribers in the cities. 

They will have the advantages of access to Sask Tel’s full services, including installation and 

maintenance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that although this Government is the first to recognize the advantages of 

local control in many activities, we also recognize that an efficient and centralized operation can 

sometimes serve people better than a multitude of local services. That was true with power. With 

telephones, the rural people will make up their own minds. We think this new program to assume 

responsibility for rural telephone companies on a voluntary basis is a good program. It will be one more 

encouragement to people to live and carry on business in smaller communities. 

 

The cost will not be small. If a large number of rural telephone companies take advantage of this 

program - as we expect they will - it will mean an outlay of upward of $100 million over a few years. 

This is a very large sum of money for Sask Tel to invest in order to install and update rural telephone 

services. It is a lot of money but we think this expenditure is fully justified and we believe the people of 

Saskatchewan will agree. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

149 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we will provide a very active program of taking rural telephones to the 

farthest regions of this province. 

 

Another program is to establish a Cultural and Recreational Facilities Capital Fund. This new fund, 

announced in the Speech from the Throne, will need an expenditure of $26 million over four years 

beginning on September 1st, 1977. The fund will have a double commitment to the principle of 

community life. It will encourage people to develop proposals and make decisions at the local level. 

Grant applications must come through municipal governments. Cities, towns, villages, rural 

municipalities, local improvement districts, Indian bands, libraries, other community service bodies will 

be eligible for grants under this new program. 

 

The basic formula will be $25 per capita with an extra $5 per capita bonus for projects supported by 

more than one community. The idea is to encourage the development of better multi-use facilities within 

easy reach of people no matter where they live. My colleague, the Minister of Culture and Youth, will 

give many more details on this program. The idea of the program is to see that better facilities are 

available right across the province. As far as the bigger cities are concerned we hope that much of the 

money will find its way into newer areas where facilities are not yet in place. That will be up to the city 

councils to decide. We believe this program will provide jobs particularly in the winter months. We 

think it is a good program, a flexible program designed to fill local needs and to make provincial tax 

money available for spending at the local level by local people. We have no doubt that the money will 

be spend wisely and well and the result will be a Saskatchewan which is an even better place in which to 

live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated that there appeared to be four bases for prosperity in 

Saskatchewan. I have mentioned agriculture, mineral resources and the wealth of institutions which have 

made our society so strong, which have allowed Saskatchewan people to participate so fully in the 

decisions which affect their lives. The fourth thing is federal-provincial relations. 

 

The relations between the Federal Government and the provinces have rarely, if ever, been at a lower 

ebb than they are today. Relations between the western provinces and Ottawa are possibly even worse 

than relations between Ottawa and some of the other provinces. 

 

I will not at this time, because I expect that some other Member will elaborate on them, dwell in detail 

on the financial relations between the Federal and the Provincial Governments. I do want to point out 

very briefly what is involved. 

 

Moves taken by the Federal Government appear to be part of a system of withdrawing federal support 

from a very large number of programs and, at least from our perspective, appear to be part of a number 

of moves which involve at attitude of 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

150 
 

confrontation, rather than accommodation in the field of federal-provincial relations. We have new and 

different rules by the CRTC. And I want to emphasize that the rules which they are attempting to 

enforce in Saskatchewan are new rules put in by the CRTC, bound to be resented and resisted. We have 

moves to take control of provincial resources. New moves let us say in resource taxation which were 

bound to be resented and resisted by the provinces. The list goes on and I could give you grievances that 

other provinces have because I meet with them at federal-provincial conferences. Most of these federal 

actions are unnecessary, disruptive, counter productive and negative. They are grave threats to national 

unity, even John Turner says so and he should know as he was part of the ‘tough guy’ stance of 

confrontation which the Federal Government appears to have adopted. 

 

I touch now on apparent controversies in financial terms. The Federal Government has been 

overspending and overspending by billions and they have decided to cut back by withdrawing part of 

their support from medicare, part of their support for hospitalization, part of their support for post 

secondary education, part of their support, for example, for RCMP financing, and also the revenue 

guarantee which they gave to the provinces in 1972. 

 

I know Canadians get pretty confused about all this high finance. They don’t really care whether a 

program is paid for by the Provincial Government or the Federal Government because they feel they are 

going to have to pay the taxes anyway. But let me make this clear, total income taxes in Canada are 

going to go up because of the financial moves of the Federal Government. What are these moves? They 

are going to withdraw the revenue guarantee. Now that is a guarantee that they gave to the provinces in 

1972 when the Federal Government made unilateral changes to the income tax plan. The provinces say 

those changes are going to cost us money. The Federal Government says, oh, no, and if it is it will only 

be a small sum. The provinces with some prudence said, fine, if it isn’t going to cost much how about 

guaranteeing it. The Federal Government said, all right, we will guarantee it. And what happened? The 

guarantee has been costing the Federal Government in the order of $900 million a year. Now our share 

this year is $37 million and the Federal Government is now saying, oh, we made a great mistake, we are 

going to cancel that guarantee. We say, are you going to reverse the changes you made in the income 

tax? Oh, no, we are not going to reverse the changes we made in the income tax we are just going to 

cancel the guarantee. What is their argument? Their argument is that the guarantee was only for five 

years and the provinces should readjust their figures. In another language that means raise taxes and that 

is going to happen. But they said something more, they said we made such a mistake over those five 

years that as for the last two years we want to change the rules, retroactively. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Surely not retroactively. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Retroactively! They want, in 1976, to change the formula for payments for 1974. 

That is one thing they are doing, the revenue guarantee, withdrawing that, that is $37 million we are 

entitled to this fiscal year and with respect to the next fiscal year we are entitled to zero and that means 

five points on the income tax or an extra $100 for every 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

151 

taxpayer in this province or pick your own tax but it is a lot of money. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . potash mines . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Use the money earmarked to buy potash mines. Once again the proposal to use those 

oil revenues for current purposes. I say that that folly of the Liberal Party will come back to haunt them. 

 

The second thing the Federal Government is doing is withdrawing from their contributions to medicare, 

post secondary education and hospitalization. They are drawing back, admittedly they are drawing back 

gradually, but it will have this effect. It will mean that a larger and larger proportion of those programs 

will have to be financed from provincial taxes. It will mean that the richer provinces will be able to run 

these programs more effectively than the poorer provinces. Inevitably national standards will erode. And 

the gap between ‘have’ and ‘have not’ provinces will widen. 

 

We have always objected to that. We do not particularly suffer because we are in about the mid-point of 

the income scale of provinces. But we have consistently said that there ought to be a federal contribution 

on some basis like per capita so that the poorer provinces can maintain standards somewhere equal to 

those of the rich provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We operate our schools that way, we operate in our province that way and we think 

we should operate federally that way with respect to these key national programs, like medicare, 

hospitalization and post secondary education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have said earlier that the relations between the Federal Government and the 

provinces have rarely, if ever, been at a lower ebb than they are today. I ask you to consider the 

situation. I can’t speak for relations between Ottawa and Toronto, the Government of Ontario, but they 

certainly are not good. My reading of the state of relations between Ottawa and the maritime 

governments, is that they are very definitely strained. When I look at the relations between the 

Government at Ottawa and the Government of Newfoundland, I don’t have to surmise, they are very, 

very strained indeed. I say more strained than at any time since 1949. I invite you to talk to any Member 

of the Newfoundland Cabinet. 

 

Consider western Canada. In the last 25 years I can remember no time when the mood of discontent was 

so pervasive and so deep. I don’t mean discontent about the state of the economy in western Canada, I 

mean discontent with the relationship between the government at Ottawa and the governments of the 

four western provinces. And now Quebec. We have a crisis in Quebec caused by the sheer folly of the 

Liberal Party. The combined effect of the inept policies of the federal and provincial governments had 

left Quebec voters bitter about unsolved social problems. But rather than tackle those problems we saw a 

cynical attempt to divert attention by calling an election and by 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

152 
 

calling it on the separatist issue. No election was necessary and the PQ were not making separatism the 

issue. The Liberals called the unnecessary election and they called it on the separatist issue. They played 

roulette with national unity and they lost. Now we have a crisis. A crisis bearing the indelible stamp 

“Made by the Liberal Party.” 

 

We Canadians, all of us will have to face that crisis. We need leadership. But I say not leadership of 

those who created this crisis in the course of their efforts to further their narrow partisan interests. We 

need leadership from those who are committed to Canada and who are able to draw a distinction 

between the welfare of Canada and the partisan interests of their political party. 

 

I profess no expertise about Quebec politics. But it seems to me that the public in Quebec did not vote 

for separatism. And I may say recent polls seem to suggest that this is the case. Rather they were 

prepared to risk a PQ government because they felt a Levesque government would be more likely to 

come to grips with some of the real social problems facing Quebec. 

 

It’s at least arguable that if Mr. Levesque is able to bring a greater measure of social and economic 

justice to the people of Quebec, then he will have played a major role in keeping Quebec in Canada. He 

will have dissipated much of the resentment and feeling of injustice and discrimination that has been 

feeding the fires of separatism. 

 

Our Government proposes to regard the PQ government as the duly elected government of the Province 

of Quebec and deal with it as we would any other government. We wish it success in dealing with the 

social problems that beset our fellow Canadians in Quebec. We are prepared to work with it as we 

would with any other government in Canada on common problems. We think any other position at this 

time would be harmful to national unity. 

 

I know there are some - notably the Liberal Party and certain multinational companies - which take the 

view that the public has no right to elect a government that they don’t approve of. But that is not our 

view. We respect the decision of the voters of Quebec as we expect others to respect the decision of the 

voters of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I want to say a few words on an issue which 

seems to have emerged into the public forum a good bit in the last few days. I speak of cable television. 

I say the story of cable television is a story of the Saskatchewan Government’s attempts to bring cable 

TV to Saskatchewan people as quickly as possible in the face of a power play by Ottawa. We have had 

Members opposite freely concede that Sask Tel is attempting to lay cable as rapidly as it can. They are 

some of the same people who are saying that somehow we are holding up cable TV. I am not sure how 

we can hold up cable TV and lay the cable as fast as we can, but we are accused of doing both. Shortly 

put, what the Federal Government is doing is telling its cable TV licensees in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 

Regina and North Battleford that they can only use Sask Tel’s cables provided Sask Tel gives up 

ownership of part of our provincial telephone system. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

153 

The argument put forward was that if these cable companies rented the cable from Sask Tel, then Sask 

Tel would somehow be controlling the programming. That is rubbish! The CBC and CTV rent facilities 

from Sask Tel and Sask Tel does not control the programming. Maybe somebody should be controlling 

the programming on the CBC and the CTV, but we are not doing it. The Federal Government controls 

programming if anybody does. Apparently the federal Minister of Communications has now admitted in 

its dealings with Manitoba that there are no problems with the cable operator renting the service from a 

provincial telephone company. We say that under those circumstances let’s get on with the job of our 

cable companies leasing their cable from Sask Tel. 

 

But with Saskatchewan the federal agency, the CRTC, is still insisting that the cable companies must 

own a part of the provincial telephone system. Naturally, we oppose such suggestions. We are running a 

very effective and efficient telephone service in Saskatchewan. We think we have a better telephone 

service here in Saskatchewan under provincial jurisdiction than do people in those parts of Canada 

where private companies operate under federal jurisdiction: — Bell Telephone, BC Tel. I say our rates 

are lower, our service is as good or better. 

 

So the CRTC is attempting to make itself free with our telephone system. It is attempting to give away 

strategic parts of our phone system to several private companies. I am sure that is very generous of the 

CRTC to give away our telephone system. However, I don’t think it is unreasonable of us to resist this 

generous gesture by the CRTC. 

 

I want to explain pretty carefully that what we are talking about here is not something at the end of a 

line. Clearly Sask Tel can transmit signals to somebody’s television set and we don’t insist on owning 

the television set. Clearly they can transmit signals to somebody’s computer and we don’t insist on 

owning the computer. But that isn’t the CRTC proposal. The CRTC proposal is that the cable company 

own something in the middle. It is like a water pipeline with pumps along the line. Suppose we operated 

a water pipeline and had six customers at the end of it. And one of the customers said what about these 

pumps that you have placed along the line to pump the water? We say, what about them? And they say, 

well, we want to own one of those pumps. We say, we are not going to let you own one of those pumps. 

Then you would be able to decide which of those six people at the other end of the line would be served. 

They would say, yes, we want to tell you whom your pipeline can serve. That is what the CRTC 

proposal is. It is a proposal that the amplifiers along the line be owned by the cable company. Why? So 

that the cable company can tell the telephone company who can use their cable. It is an effort to get 

exclusive use of the cable, by owning not the cable, but the amplifiers. Now I think you can understand 

why we are resisting that proposition. 

 

We have seen how private companies behave in running telephone systems and we see particularly how 

private cable TV companies operate in other provinces. We don’t think that they would use that power 

to control that cable in a way which would generate funds to take cable TV to smaller centres. We don’t 

believe that because everywhere in Canada where private cable TV has operated they have not used their 

profits to take cable TV to smaller centres. There is no suggestion on the part of this Government that 

we wish to deny the use of Sask Tel 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

154 
 

facilities to anyone who wants to use those facilities for any lawful purpose. But what we will not agree 

to do is to give an exclusive franchise for private operators to use our wires and cables for their profit 

and to the exclusion of other possible uses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We are confident that our powers and our jurisdiction cover the use of our own 

telephone system by people of Saskatchewan to send information to one another in a closed-circuit 

system using our cables and our own telecommunication facilities. If it is totally within province and 

that nothing goes over the air, we say it is provincial jurisdiction. That means closed circuit TV 

programs. It may mean community programs generated within a community and sent by closed-circuit 

cable. It means video telephones. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What if the signal comes from outside? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will come to that in a moment. It also means films and video tapes that are not 

broadcast but are carried by closed-circuit TV. 

 

We agree that the Federal Government has jurisdiction over all broadcast signals - that is to say signals 

which are transmitted through the air by Hertzian wave. Ottawa has legal control over radio and 

television broadcasting. We might sometimes question whether they are doing a very good job but we 

don’t challenge their legal right to do so. I hope that point is clear. If we are talking about anything that 

comes over the air we are not talking about provincial jurisdiction and we are not claiming it. 

 

What we do object to is the contention that Ottawa has the right to control what goes on an in-province 

closed circuit cable system. We don’t understand the basis of what contention. We want to control it in 

the same way that the Government of Ontario controls it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You go to any major hotel in Toronto and you will find a closed circuit cable TV 

system. You will find that controlled by the Government of Ontario. I don’t know whether what is 

shown is their selection of programming . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . but I am saying that it is not controlled by the Federal Government and is 

controlled by the Ontario Government. We see no reason why what goes on in Ontario shouldn’t go on 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In particular, we totally reject the claim that somehow we are stopping the 

introduction of cable TV to the 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

155 

four Saskatchewan communities I mentioned because we won’t give up control of our telephone system. 

We are laying the cable as fast as we can. I am glad that Members opposite now concede that. It is 

available for use by broadcasters who have been licensed by the Federal Government just as it is 

available to any other customer who has a legal proposition. 

 

We say that anyone who wants, in effect, to broadcast radio and TV signals should have a CRTC 

licence. Because we say that is a rebroadcast of an on-air program and that is controlled by the Federal 

Government. But if people or groups want to operate a closed-circuit system which is within provincial 

jurisdiction, and using non-broadcast program material, then we are ready to do business. 

 

If we have a phone which has a television screen on it, as we may 20 years from now, we don’t want to 

hear anyone say that that somehow is TV and controlled by the Federal Government. We say that since 

it is all on the wire and not through the air at all, it is not under federal jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I don’t like you boys controlling . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I know that the Members opposite feel that if the Federal Government controls 

something that it is pure. There is not a suggestion of political taint in the granting of any radio licence 

in Canada, who would ever think that. Except that when the Liberals are in, the Liberals get them, and 

when the Tories are in, the Tories get them. But that is sheer accident. They wouldn’t want political 

considerations to creep into that area. So therefore they want it controlled by the Federal Government 

but not that Provincial Government, because we are political. We think ours is a reasonable position. 

 

Now why is Sask Tel so insistent on retaining control of its cable. It is my belief that we will only get 

cable TV in smaller communities like Meadow Lake, Humboldt, Assiniboia and Nipawin, if Sask Tel 

provides the cable. And Sask Tel can only do this if it applies the same rate-averaging principles it has 

applied to the other telephone services. It must get what revenue it can from its city cables and use that 

revenue to put cable in other centres. It will rent some of the cable space to CRTC licensees if they wish 

to rent it. But it can also use the same cables for other strictly provincial telephone businesses, computer 

connections, video-phone services, for shopping services, for educational TV, SaskMedia, to name four. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Hon. Member seems to suggest that it is inappropriate for SaskMedia to have 

cable television programs of an educational nature. It is entirely proper for the Government of Ontario to 

have an entire education television network, it is entirely proper for the Republicans and I guess now the 

Democrats in the United States to have a whole educational TV system. But if Sask Tel so much as 

allows any of its cable to be used by the provincial Department of Education to transmit a program, that 

is somehow despicable. Well that brackets the Liberal Party for what they are - totally, totally politically 

oriented and wholly unable to see the mote in their own eyes. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

156 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I say that if the private cable company owned part of our telephone system it could 

deny the use of the entire cable system for other non-broadcast uses in the way that I have illustrated 

with my pipe line analogy. Please understand that the CRTC proposal is that the cable TV company 

must own part of the system right in the middle, and that’s what allows the CRTC to give or deny 

permission for the use of those cables. They could then insist that the cable company operate these 

profitable services, such as connections between a branch bank and a main office branch or the like. We 

say that money should belong to the people of Saskatchewan to allow cable to be laid in smaller centres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But we say that if the CRTC controls it and if they can say who can use that cable, 

then we can kiss good-bye to any cable in the Humboldts or the Meadow Lakes or the Assiniboias, 

because the money, the cream that would be skimmed off by the cable company, simply will not be 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why we believe that the only chance for people in Saskatchewan to have open 

access to the cable TV, and the only chance for people outside the larger centres to get cable TV is for 

Sask Tel to continue to own and control all its own equipment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now I shall try to summarize again what our position is: We want cable TV in 

Saskatchewan as quickly as possible; we want Sask Tel to own all the hardware; we want Sask Tel to be 

able to use the hardware any way it legally can to make a profit; we want Sask Tel to use the profits to 

take cable for cable TV to smaller centres; we do not want to challenge any legal powers of the Federal 

Government; we do not want the Federal Government to challenge any legal powers of the Government 

of Saskatchewan. Now that’s what we want. 

 

What we are doing is this: We are laying coaxial cable as fast as we can; we are not prepared to sell out 

the hardware; we are prepared to provide service to all legitimate customers; we are not prepared to give 

one customer exclusive control of the cable. 

 

What we believe will result from what we want and what we are prepared to do is this. Cable TV will be 

operating in some centres in Saskatchewan within the next year. This cable TV will be provided either 

by broadcast cable TV companies licensed by the CRTC, or by closed circuit cable TV companies, or 

both. In any event, cable TV is coming. I know that that will disappoint Members opposite who persist 

in spreading the myth that somehow Sask Tel is delaying cable TV. But however much they may be 

disappointed, cable TV is coming. And when it comes their myth will be gone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am convinced that 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

157 

Saskatchewan people have the possibility of having more variety and more distinctiveness in cable TV 

offerings than almost any other place in Canada. We have the possibility of cable TV in more smaller 

centres than anywhere in Canada. I don’t say probabilities - possibilities - and I say they are exciting 

possibilities, and I hope in one year’s time to report on much more concrete results. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the hour grows late. I want to ask all Hon. Members to consider the 

Throne Speech. As I recall the Throne Speech and as I look at our province and its people, the 

tremendous progress that has been achieved in five years, I am proud of what Saskatchewan people have 

done and I’m proud that our Government was a part of that progress. I am proud that the positive 

program of the Throne Speech points to the way of still further progress. I am disappointed but not 

surprised at the amendment proposed by the official Opposition as almost totally negative. And since I 

believe that this province rejects that negative approach by Members opposite, and continues to support 

the positive programs set out in the Throne Speech, I will oppose the amendment and support the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Premier takes 

his seat would he permit a question? 

 

My question, Mr. Premier, is this: You mentioned the ownership of cable TV and the amplifiers in the 

centre of the system. Is the Premier prepared to give his assurance to the private cable companies that 

Sask Tel is prepared to give a long-term commitment to lease that equipment in order that they can make 

their plans for capital expenditures in accordance with reasonable assurance rather than any kind of 

short-term month to month rental that they can’t bank on? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, I think the Hon. Member makes a good point and I think that I don’t know 

whether this has been considered in detail but obviously we are not talking about month to month. They 

would have to have a long-term solid deal. And I think that we are not trying to play games in the sense 

that we are saying that so long as they are not asking for the exclusive use of the cable, then we are 

prepared to enter into a deal with them whereby the over-air cable TV people could use the cable. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Are you prepared to give them your assurance that during the term of the lease they 

would have exclusive rights to cable TV to the people of those communities that they are licensed to 

serve - you wouldn’t want to have two or three or four cable companies all serving the same community 

surely? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t know whether we can have two or three or four cable companies, and I am not 

sure whether we would be prepared to bargain away that one. If we can get two customers to serve 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

158 
 

we would be delighted to have two customers to serve. 

 

If you are asking whether we would give them a long-term contract, I think the answer is yes. The 

exclusivity is bargainable. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, first of all I want to 

congratulate the mover and seconder of the Speech from the Throne for the great ability that they 

displayed in delivering their speeches. I listened to them a couple of times over the radio and every time 

I heard them they were still better. I want to congratulate the Premier for (I don’t know where he gets all 

his energy, but he has more than I have right now) doing such a wonderful job. He has kept 

Saskatchewan in the forefront and he has always spoken with great discretion. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Member for Melfort (Mr. Vickar) and the Member for Arm River (Mr. 

Faris) for their appointments to the Cabinet. I am sure that the Member for Arm River is going to see to 

it that our drinks are a little smaller and that the Member for Melfort is going to be a great business 

administrator. 

 

I can tell you that some complain because the Premier has too many Members in the Cabinet, but I 

always was told that a ship at anchor did not need a very big crew, whereas a ship on the move you need 

people at every post. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I also want to compliment the Whip and the House Leader, and the chairman of 

Committee for the real job they have done over the years. 

 

The Speech from the Throne is a very important document, and up until now there has been very little 

that has been said about page 7 on the Votes and Proceedings pertaining to highway traffic and safety. 

Later on I am going to say a few words about this, but in the meantime I have other subjects to cover. 

 

I want to talk about my constituency and some of its problems. I want to tell you that many years ago we 

had a gopher problem, now we have a beaver problem. Some people have a funny idea in their heads 

that conservation meant planting beavers in the middle of pastures and flooding the pasture. Some way 

we will have to find a way to deal with the problem in our area as the complaints are coming thick and 

fast. Some people, somewhere along the line, many years ago did not know what the meaning of 

conservation was and that’s why we got into this problem. 

 

Now we have heard a lot about television and there is one thing that I would like to tell you. I am a 

farmer and the animals that grow on that farm respond to the environment. My crops respond to the 

environment. While we till well, we fertilize and we get the rain, then we have a wonderful crop. All 

through this television controversy we have never heard a word about the environment television is 

causing on our society. When television programs can portray three rapes and two murders an hour you 

cannot tell me that it hasn’t got an effect on the people out in the country and all over the province. I 

think there has got to be a little better sorting out of the smut 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

159 

and junk that is being poured on television just to make it interesting. So much for that. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) for his appointment probably to 

the Senate. I am very happy that some people are finding their way up there. I know quite a few who 

have sat in this House. I have been here since 1959. I was happy in a way, and yet I was disappointed 

because I thought that maybe I would get that appointment because I can speak French and English. 

Nevertheless, I want to congratulate him for the good humor he brought to this House. He was given a 

cookie monster and he is going to take it to Ottawa. Now this is really something. Some have no sense 

of humor whatsoever and they want to kill the whole thing. Well, I think that was very nice of the 

Member for Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Lange) for the gesture he has made to the two leaders of the 

opposing parties and even if the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart) is not in the House, 

I want to wish him well and I want to say that he has also made a great contribution to this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now I want to congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy). 

Being a municipal man, I was reeve for seven years, and the only way they could get rid of me as reeve 

in 1959 was to elect me to this Legislature. In this way they got rid of me. They weren’t so lucky with 

the mayor of Regina. They elected him to the Legislature and he is still the mayor of the city of Regina. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That means that this man has got such great ability that he can handle both jobs 

very efficiently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now my constituency is composed of people from every land. They speak many 

different tongues and you know I look at this whole set-up as a beautiful garden. Some people would 

like to have the flowers in the garden all the same color, but when I go to Cudworth and I hear the 

German language being spoken or Ukrainian, it is really something what we have in this country. They 

learn to live together, they appreciate each other’s culture, and yet some people would want to break up 

Canada because of the writing on the cornflakes box. I want to say that as far as the election in the 

Province of Quebec (my parents came from the Province of Quebec), and I’m not ashamed of it. The 

reason they have a separatist government today was brought about from the corrupt practices of the two 

former governments. I don’t think that you will see Quebec separate by any stretch of the imagination. 

What some people would like to do is cause confrontation and to give themselves an excuse for severe 

exercises. But I hope that people in Parliament, at least, will hang onto their heads and learn to accept 

the things you cannot change and change the things they can change, and look at the whole Dominion of 

Canada as a flower garden that has its merits. I wouldn’t want the girls to all be blondes, because I 

married a dark haired one (she’s grey now). While I’m talking about her I want to thank her for the 

wonderful job she has done as my secretary . . . 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

160 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — . . . and all this time she hasn’t got paid for it. She continues to work without being 

paid and she has not turned me down yet. I hope she can hang on for another three years because I think 

we are going to terminate this whole job of being Member of the Legislature. But I am not going to be 

too far, I will still be poking at politics. 

 

Now I want to go on to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) and he is not here. I’m sure he is making 

good use of the time in what he is doing while he is away. I want to congratulate him for the extension 

of No. 41 Highway called the Wakaw cutoff. It’s bringing our people closer to the cities with better 

service and I’m sure that after he has gone as far as Wakaw he will continue as far as Melfort. I also 

want to say that on the rail line abandonment question it is very important that we try even today to build 

the kind of highways that will carry some of these trucks. However the opposition that is before us on 

the question of stopping them on our grid roads is valid and I am all for it. We have spent millions of 

dollars on grid roads to give service to the farmers and today we are trying to sell the idea that they 

should move these products with these big trucks, 900 bushel trucks. 

 

We had the Yellow Creek elevators filled from farm trucks, the railroad went out in the spring, and the 

Wheat Board or the powers that be decided to haul the grain out with trucks. In two weeks, they put 199 

or 120 big tandem trucks on to move that grain. I am going to tell you that about 20 miles of that road 

was completely massacred. And it is still not in good shape today, because the base of the grade was 

completely destroyed. You would follow behind one of these tandems, and you would see the grade go 

down about four inches and then come back up again. In some places where there was water in the 

ditches, the motion of going up and down would pump the water to the surface of the road. 

 

I was in the elevator at Yellow Creek when a trucker was phoning headquarters. He says, can you give 

me another road to go on I can’t go on that one any more. He wanted another 20 miles to smash up. If 

you want a sample of rail line abandonment, we had one there. The damage to that grade is still visible 

today. 

 

I want to congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs for the wonderful job he has done on the 

question of rail line abandonment. 

 

We have other problems, such as drainage problems, with farmers who become very hungry for land and 

are going out indiscriminately without plan, draining their sloughs. I am going to tell this Government 

that we have to get to that problem as soon as possible, because the people on the receiving end of 

drainage from three and four and five acres of water from each farmer are going to have a serious 

problem of flooding. I don’t think this is politics, but I think the Government had better have a very 

serious look at that. As a matter of fact, I am afraid we are a little late, but better late than never. 

 

I also want to thank the Minister of Agriculture for his cow-calf program, that is going to mean a lot for 

the smaller 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

161 

farmers. I tell you, it is not a very pleasant situation to try to keep a herd over and use your revenue from 

other sources to keep your herd intact. I have one of my own sons who has about 50 or 60 head of cattle, 

and he is trying to hang on, but I don’t know how long he is going to be able to hang on either. I am sure 

there are many people in the same position. 

 

I also want to compliment the Government for the FarmStart Program. I can notice now throughout the 

country, new houses being built along main roads, mainly built by young people who are coming back 

to the farm. When this program started the average age of our farmers was 58 years of age. Something 

had to be done. I want to congratulate this Government for having the courage in spite of all the talk of 

the land we were going to take away from the people, in spite of all the noise, they brought in the Land 

Bank legislation. Before the Land Bank came in, it was not the person who needed the land who got it, it 

was the person who had too much already. We are trying to bring in a program that will put a stop to 

that. 

 

Now we hear a lot about the health program. As I said a moment ago, I have been here for quite a few 

years. I can remember back in 1923 when I was a little boy going to school and an epidemic of diptheria 

struck the school. There were 60 children in school and when it was all over eight school children had 

gone to their graves within two weeks and a total of 14 died from that district. That was in 1924. I 

remember the names of those little boys just as if it happened yesterday. There were two little boys who 

sat in front of me on Friday and were dead on Monday. When I found out that vaccine for diptheria was 

available in 1917, why did these kids go? Because there was no program to immunize these young 

children and they died by the dozens. Yet, the vaccine was available. You don’t forget these things. The 

Liberals in 1919 talked about medicare and hospitalization, yet by 1944 nothing was done, very little. I 

won’t take everything away from them, they brought in care for TV. My golly, at that rate we wouldn’t 

be half way there yet if it hadn’t been for what they call the CCF in those days, ‘the Liberals, in a hurry.’ 

 

Well, we were in a hurry because there was a need to be in a hurry. Later on when the Salk vaccine 

came about, I have a member in my family who was hit with polio, inside one year in this province we 

wiped out polio. That was done because there was a decent organization of medicare and hospitalization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now I am going to refer to the part in the Speech from the Throne, about the highway 

and traffic safety. 

 

Next year we are going to declare 1977 ‘Traffic Safety Year.’ Now I know we are going to bring in a lot 

of programs, seat-belt legislation, some will be for, some will be against. Where I have attended 

meetings, after listening to the pros and cons, the people support it wholeheartedly and 100 per cent. I 

think this question here should go across political lines. We had an intersessional committee represented 

by three Liberals and six NDPs, three of the most dedicated Liberals and dedicated NDPs that you could 

find in this House. Mr. Boldt, Mr. Guy and Mr. Grant, came up with many recommendations, and what 

we are trying to do is to carry out some of the recommendations. We are talking about saving 100 lives a 

year and at 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

162 
 

least $12 million on our health costs, with seat belts alone. This program is not going to be successful 

unless the people in our society are going to start providing good examples, while they are on the road 

and respect the rules of law on our roads. 

 

I want to quote one passage from the Highway Safety Report in the letter of transmittal: 

 

As in all problems to do with people, there is no easy answer. The problem must be tackled on all 

fronts, and it is essential that drivers become well informed and have an awareness of their moral 

responsibilities in the matter of traffic safety. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

In 1974 we killed 318 people in traffic accidents. The committee believes that this loss to society 

resulting from traffic accidents can no longer be tolerated and that measures recommended in this 

report would significantly improve the present situation. 

 

This report has been a best seller, they ran out of them and you know that last year we had 1,000 

reprinted. I am going to tell you what we are looking for today, and what I am saying, we are looking for 

crusaders, not people who are going out there sniping at the program. I can remember when we brought 

in .08, brought in by the Thatcher Government, the Members on that side of the House. We supported it 

wholeheartedly because it was a good program, it was realistic. Today we are going to ask everyone in 

this House to go out and be crusaders in 1977, work with the Safety Council, work with every safety 

program that will be proposed. 

 

I know that there will be a lot of programs, bringing films to the communities. Carl Shields has been 

appointed director of the program, who I am sure was not chosen for his politics, but for his ability and 

the position he holds. 

 

I want to point out another thing in the Speech from the Throne, changes in the courts. I sat on the 

Safety Committee in 1965-66 under the Thatcher Government, I spent one year on the Liquor 

Committee, and was chairman of the last committee which made its presentation in 1975. I have seen 

many situations. We visited places on the continent. We visited court rooms where the people walking 

out of the court room would say, can we bring our friends to sit in on the court? We visited the court 

rooms in this province and I would say it would be sacrilegious to refer to this type of traffic court that 

we have in this province as justice. I think it is one of the worst performances you can have in the traffic 

safety effort, is to continue with the type of court we have today. 

 

The traffic court experience has to become an educational experience and not a means of laying $25, 

$500, or whatever the case may be, on the table and going disgruntled and unhappy. We are not going to 

cure the alcoholic by taking $500 out of his pocket. We are going to hurt his family more. We have 

nothing compared to what other jurisdictions are doing for the alcoholic. These roads have been found, 

programs have been looked into and they do work. We have got to bring them into this province and do 

something about it. 



 
November 24, 1976 

 

163 

Well now your government is just as guilty as this one here. There is another thing, last year I had 317 

students visit the Legislature and I posed the same question, Mr. Speaker, to all of them. How many of 

you have taken a first aid course? Even if I said, put your hands up those who have in this House, I think 

there would be very few. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Take a vote . . . 

 

Mr. Thibault: — It’s not up to me to take a vote, so I am not going to be bothered with it. Out of 317 

students, there were seven of them that had taken first aid. Out of those seven, two of them were 

teachers. Can you imagine our schools today with teachers who haven’t got a course in first aid? Can 

you imagine that about one out of every hundred of the motorists today when they see an accident look 

the other way, because they don’t know what to do. At the International Conference in Toronto we were 

told that about 20 per cent of the people who die on our highways would not have died had a person 

with experience been on the scene to start with. 

 

Now the first aid course should be for parents as well as students before they come out of Grade XII. In 

New Zealand, they start first aid in kindergarten, little kids playing along the rivers and ponds will save 

each other from drowning. To say that we have done so little is not a credit either to this Government or 

the former government on the other side, because you haven’t done anything either. 

 

I hope that the Minister of Education is going to take a real look at having better health education in our 

schools and it will reflect itself in the amount of hospital bills and hangnail cases that the doctors have to 

look after. I am looking with a lot of hope to the propositions made here in the program listed in the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

In closing I would say a few things more, I could go til 7:00 o’clock, I have so much to say. 

 

Now the question of DWI courses that I would like to raise. I think the Phoenix experience is turning out 

well where the judges give the first offenders of DWI, which is Driving While Intoxicated, they have a 

month to complete a DWI course, and can continue driving while they are taking their course and at the 

end of a month, if they have completed their course successfully, they get a restricted license to continue 

driving. What we are doing today, we rip the license away and this person who loses his license loses jib 

job, and he has every reason in the world to keep on drinking and to go to the pub more often. I hope 

that we have a DWI program coming on, and I am sure it is. 

 

Now on this question, we are all for these things, but I am going to tell you I have pecked at this traffic 

safety issue ever since I came here. I know in 1961 we brought in a resolution to introduce traffic safety 

in the schools. Every Member in this House, on both sides of the House from the teaching profession got 

up and said the curriculum is so crowded, we cannot introduce traffic safety. I am going to tell you, give 

me that curriculum for a couple of hours, I’ll throw enough junk out of it - and all you need for a first aid 

course is 20 hours of a St. John’s Ambulance course. We cannot find 20 hours in the 15 years of a child 

going to school! I think we had better have another look at our priorities. 



 
November 24, 1976 
 

164 
 

The driver training course is really to get youngsters starting to drive but later on there is the defensive 

driving course which improves their driving. The Power Corporation, for instance, had a very high rate 

of accidents. They put all their drivers through a defensive driving course and the result was that they 

reduced the accidents by 50 per cent. Well, I am going to tell you, let us give everybody a defensive 

driving course and that will reflect itself by decreasing the number of accidents we will have. 

 

I am going to say in closing, I could go on for another hour, but I say in closing, we want crusaders for 

safety in 1977 and I hope that every Member of this House will join the crusade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — You can see by my remarks, that I am going to support the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few brief remarks to make in this 

Throne Speech Debate but the hour is getting late and I, therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:34 o’clock p.m. 


