



















































Hansard: December 02, 1976


 

504 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Thursday, December 2, 1976. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
Hon. J.R. Messer (Kelsey-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you 

to the Members of the Assembly a group of students from Mistatim High School. I was told they were 

going to be in the Speaker’s Gallery. I don’t see them there but I hope they are in the Legislative 

Building somewhere. They are accompanied by the principal of the school, Mr. Larry Monsees. I am 

told that the student council chose to organize their own tour of the city, I therefore don’t know just what 

points they visited in the city. I am sure that they have chosen an interesting time for themselves. I hope 

that they will also enjoy their time at the Legislative Building, in particular that portion of it that is spent 

viewing proceedings in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I know that all Members will want to extend our welcome to them and wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to this House and through you to 

the Assembly the Grade Ten students from Midale Central School. They are accompanied by Mr. Arlin 

Ryan and the bus driver, Mr. Harold Krueger. They are from the famous country of the late Dr. 

Mainprize and right in the heart of the oil fields. 

 

It is our hope that you have had a good day at the Mexibition and that you enjoy your stay here and have 

a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, should like through you to welcome a group of 

22 students from the Killaly High School. I am not sure where they are seated, but they are a group who 

live south of Melville near the Qu’Appelle Valley. It is a small school but it is one of the schools that at 

one time I had the honor of being chairman of the school unit. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

welcome them and I am sure you do as well. 

 

I know that they will enjoy the House today and particularly in view of the fact that in the lobby I know 

they have already seen a wonderful display of the parliamentary system, the origination and 

development of the mother of Parliaments, Great Britain. I think there is just one of the greatest lessons 

to be learned from it and I know they will benefit from it. On behalf of all of us here I should like to 

make these students welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

505 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I should like also to take the opportunity at this time to 

introduce to you and to the Members of the Assembly a group of students from the Garden of Eden of 

Saskatchewan, from the Saltcoats constituency. They are from Saltcoats and Bredenbury Schools and 

they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Farquharson and Mrs. Thies, and I believe their bus driver, 

Ron Popalich. 

 

This is one group of schools that continuously comes to the Legislature to sit in on our sessions and we 

appreciate very much their coming here. I know they have had an interesting morning and I am sure they 

will have a further interesting afternoon. I want you all to greet the Saltcoats and Bredenbury Schools 

and wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Last Mountain-Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of you, Sir, and on 

behalf of the Members of the Assembly, I want to introduce and to welcome ten students from the 

Nokomis School, it’s a Grade Eight class. They are accompanied by their teacher, Scott Richardson. We 

hope that you have a very enjoyable and a very educational afternoon here at the Legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J.G. Allen (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through 

you to the other Members of the Legislature a group of 12 students seated in the Speaker’s Gallery from 

Saskatchewan House. They are taking occupational English courses at Sask. House. They are 

accompanied today by Mrs. Joann Zikman. I look forward to meeting with them after three o’clock. I am 

sure all of us would like to welcome them to the Legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BACK LOG IN COURT SERVICES 
 

Mr. S.J. Cameron (Regina South): — A question for the Attorney General, I am wondering whether he 

or his department requested Mr. Huggett, whose memo was a subject of some comment here yesterday 

afternoon, to conduct an examination of court services in the four western provinces and, if so, whether 

that examination has been completed? 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I quite frankly have to take notice of that question. I know 

that there are some studies but I would have to inform myself before I advise the House. 

 

RUSSIA ENTERING POTASH MARKET 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

506 

Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I wish there was something we could do 

about that title. 

 

There is an article in the paper this morning, headlined, “Russia Believed Ready to Expand Potash 

Production”, which I assume you are familiar with. This confirms that Russia is getting into the 

international potash market. Now I am not going to ask you to reassess your policy on nationalization 

because I know what the answer will be, but has your company or the research branch of the PCS, done 

any studies to see where Russia will be entering the market? That is are they competing with 

Saskatchewan for traditional customers Saskatchewan has developed through the years for the potash 

that will be soon produced from Russia and who are those customers if you are aware of them? 

 

Hon. E.L. Cowley (Minister of Potash Corporation): — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have done some internal 

work and we have had some studies done with respect to marketing. I think that if the Member has read 

the Robertson Report which was tabled in this House, there was some reference there made to the likely 

expansion of the Soviet potash industry and that the Soviet Union would be in the future the major 

potential competitor with Saskatchewan potash, as they are the only country which has reserves of 

potash which come close to approximating those of Saskatchewan. The Soviet Union is a potential 

competitor in many areas where Saskatchewan potash is involved, for example, the United States. There 

have been some arrangements arrived at between the United States and the Soviet Union. While some of 

these are of fairly long standing I don’t believe much, if any, Soviet potash has moved into the American 

market. But there is a potential competitor there and of course that is a major competitor we will have to 

meet because approximately 70 per cent of our current market is in the United States. They are also a 

potential competitor I would think in the Pacific rim countries which is another area where 

Saskatchewan would have somewhat of a natural market vis a vis our other competitors. 

 

The difficulty in assessing the amount of competition that one faces from the Soviet Union has two 

aspects. One, there is within the eastern block a tremendous demand for potash. One of their difficulties 

may be, whether it is a need for foreign exchange versus a need to grow more wheat in the Soviet Union. 

So how much new production will go into export markets and how much will go into satisfying the 

demands within the Soviet Union, is a question that is difficult to answer. If you assume it is going into 

the export market then you have to look at the United States and the far East and so on. So that I think in 

a nutshell is some of the general comments I would have in response to the Member’s question. I don’t 

think it is a surprise. I think all of the people that we have talked to in the potash marketing end of things 

have suggested that there is ongoing in the Soviet Union a significant expansion of their potash 

production. The question is how much will they be utilizing themselves or within the eastern block. 

 

Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Minister has told us about the difficulties and I 

appreciate there are difficulties but in view of the Russian position and in view of these expected 

developments in Russia what have you done to protect the traditional markets for Saskatchewan? That 

is, have you entered 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

507 

into long-term agreements with the customers? Are you doing anything to offset the threats from Russia 

for the sales of our potash? 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, in the long run I suppose for export markets, two or three 

things will be determining factors with respect to Saskatchewan potash’s success in meeting Soviet 

competition. One of them obviously will be the efficiency with which we can produce potash. A second 

one will obviously be freight rates, vis a vis the markets we are going into. We have suggested that we 

are prepared and I think the Premier did this at the world fertilizer conference in New York, that we 

were prepared to discuss and enter into longer-term contracts. To date we have not entered into any 

long-term contracts as a corporation. The Member will be familiar with the contract which was recently 

announced in the Pacific rim between Canpotex and Korea. We are using Canpotex as are most other 

producers in Saskatchewan as our marketer outside of North America. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. One of the great dangers of course, of Russia 

entering into the field with selling potash to the United States, is the suggestion that’s been made, that 

they will endeavor to trade potash for wheat and this is not new. You are aware of this suggestion having 

been made in the past. The danger is, of course, we could not only lose a traditional customer in the 

United States for potash, we could lose Russia as a traditional customer for our wheat. Now, I’m asking 

the Minister, have you made any studies as to this field? Are you in a position to advise the House today 

whether there are negotiations in the United States between Russia and the U.S. to develop such a barter 

arrangement, or are you in a position to give us any advice at all today on this? 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are aware of some discussions that are ongoing between various 

groups within the United States and the Soviet Union. I’m not in a position to say as to what the details 

of that are. I think, obviously, we’re not in a position to compete with the United States in this regard in 

that we are not much of an importer of potash. So the idea of us importing potash and trading for wheat, 

while it’s a viable one for the United States, obviously isn’t something we could compete with directly 

in terms of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Soviet Union has been involved in the potash industry for a long time. I think if one checks the 

levels of potash production, you will find that the Soviet Union is the major producer of potash in the 

world. Now they are also a very large internal consumer. Everyone expects the Soviet Union to continue 

to export potash. Everyone expects Saskatchewan to continue to export potash. They expect us to 

continue to compete. the question is how much of a penetration will the Soviet Union made into 

American markets and in what areas. Areas where they have traditionally used Saskatchewan potash, in 

the mid-west, for example, or areas which have not traditionally been our market in the United States, 

which of course would be of considerably less concern to us. 

 

We think that we have taken into account the fact that the Soviet Union will be a competitor in making 

our marketing forecasts. 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

508 

Mr. Malone: — Could you tell us how you have taken this into account and be as specific as possible? 

What have you done to take this into account? 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the Soviet Union will be there, will be a 

competitor and will be selling potash into the United States. We have attempted to make an estimate of 

what areas they will be competitive with us and we have decided on the best advice we can get, that with 

that competition and other competitions, we still see a significant growing market for Saskatchewan 

potash in the United States. 

 

CIGOL CASE — POTASH 
 

Mr. R L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Premier. Yesterday, the Premier announced that the Legislature might be called back into 

Session over the holidays, if the Supreme Court rules against the Government of Saskatchewan in the 

CIGOL case. Would the Premier today, give us his assurance, that the Government of Saskatchewan 

will, before implementation, submit the retroactive bill to the Court of Appeal directly under The 

Constitutional Questions Act, in order to get an immediate ruling on the legality of the Governments 

actions? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Several comments on that. The general answer is, of course, No, 

because I will not give now an undertaking of how I’m going to act three months hence or four months 

hence or two months hence, in the light of a situation which neither the Member for Nipawin nor I 

know. We do not know what the judgment of the Supreme Court on the CIGOL case or any other case is 

and accordingly we do not know what the appropriate course of action is and accordingly I am not 

willing to commit myself to a course of action now on facts which I do not know. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the so-called immediacy of getting a decision, if Bill 42 had been submitted to 

the Court of Appeal under The Constitutional Questions Act, I can only assume that the Court of Appeal 

would have ruled it to be constitutional because they certainly said that when the matter came before 

them. Presumably then it would have been appealed to the Supreme Court and far from an immediate 

answer, one might have got an answer, but it would have been a very long way down the road and I’m 

not at all sure that I am prepared to wait, was prepared to wait last time, while the oil companies got $4 

million a month and while it wended its way through the courts at the expense of the taxpayers to the 

tune of $4 million a month and I’m not sure that I would be prepared to do that in the future. 

 

I know that the Member for Nipawin would believe that $4 million a month was an appropriate payment 

to the oil companies, because there is a circular aspect to it, but we don’t enjoy that circular aspect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Collver: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I am informed 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

509 

that through the normal course of the court actions taken, it takes approximately three years by the time 

that a question of constitutional law is finally heard by the Supreme Court of Canada. Especially if the 

Government of Saskatchewan does not co-operate as, for example, it is not co-operating in the potash 

cases to get the matter heard as quickly as possible and, therefore, if there are delaying tactics taken, it 

could take to three years. In The CIGOL case, for example, the judgment will perhaps be down in 

February of 1977 and it was originally submitted in February of 1974, so it takes three years. 

 

I am also informed that it takes six months approximately to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the Member could get to the question. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, if I could present this question, because the Premier has alluded to the fact 

just now that it would take a long time to go directly to the Court of Appeal. That’s precisely the point of 

my question. So I’m attempting to clarify the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m aware of the fact and I’m sure the Member is, that the Member is allowed to 

provide a certain amount of background information in which to frame the question, but it seems to me 

like a recital of maybe more than is necessary to put the question forward. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Here comes the question. Is the Premier not aware that a three year delay from now or 

from the implementation of the proposed retroactive legislation might only postpone the inevitable, that 

the Government of Saskatchewan might constitutionally be required to repay the money three years 

from now, anyway, if the court case is heard in the normal course, but if the case goes directly to the 

Court of Appeal and you get an immediate ruling or a six month ruling, at least you’ve got two and a 

half years if the ruling happens to go against you, that you can adjust your expenditure level? Would the 

Premier not agree with that concept? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I agree with a portion of it. Clearly when something is at issue and if there is a 

three year delay, then the consequences of a three year delay could be greater than a delay of a year and 

a half or what might happen if it were directly referred to the Court of Appeal. I don’t know when the 

CIGOL case was heard by the Court of Appeal, but it was some considerable time back and I would 

think, therefore, that probably, if I accept the Member’s estimate of three years from the time that a bill 

is passed until the time that it may be ruled upon by the Supreme Court, it might be cut in half by a 

reference to the Court of Appeal. I’m not prepared to admit that we should forego our revenues which I 

believe are justifiable revenues of the Province of Saskatchewan for eighteen months or for a shorter 

period of 12, 13, 14 months, while a reference is made to the Court of Appeal and while that reference 

then is appealed to the Supreme Court and while the hearing is going on and the judgment is being 

rendered. I think that would be unwise. 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

510 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, would the Premier be prepared to give his assurance to this Assembly 

today that after implementation, the Government of Saskatchewan would immediately submit this 

proposed retroactive legislation, directly to the Court of Appeal in order that the Supreme Court could 

hear the case and rule on its constitutionality as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The answer is the same one I gave to question number one. I am not prepared to give 

any assurances now as to what is going to happen four months from now, that the Government might do, 

based on a series of facts that I do not now have at my command. I will make and we, my colleagues, 

will make what we think if a rational judgment, but we’ll make it on the facts at hand. The facts are not 

at hand and accordingly any commitment to act in the future, pursuant to facts which are not now 

available is an unreasonable request for a commitment and I say, No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Collver: — Would the Premier not agree then, therefore, that any suggestion of retroactive 

legislation in the light of facts that are not presently at hand is irresponsible behavior on the part of the 

Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I do not agree with the Hon. Member. I think that there were prior to the phrasing of 

the Speech from the Throne reports to the effect that the CIGOL (Canadian Industrial Gas and Oil 

Limited): case might go against the Government. I think nobody can say whether it will or not, but 

obviously that possibility was raised, a possibility not previously contemplated to a serious extent 

because of the fact that we had been unanimously successful in the two courts below. It seemed to me 

that the Government owed it to anyone who may be making plans with respect to the possibility of that 

judgment going one way, to state its position, and we said that we would be prepared to introduce some 

legislation as stated in the Speech from the Throne. That seems to me only reasonable. We clearly are 

leaving our options open, but that was an option we were considering and one which, at least in our 

judgment, the public was entitled to know about. 

 

WORK NOT COMPLETED BY HIGHWAYS DEPARTMENT 
 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — A question to the Minister of Highways. 

 

Mr. Minister, much of the work which had been planned by your Department has not been completed, 

much of it has not been started, a significant portion of it has not been tendered. Would the Minister 

explain to this Assembly today exactly what is going on in the Department of Highways, or what has 

caused this change? 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — I thought questions were a matter or urgency in this 

House, but with your permission I will try to briefly answer that question. 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

511 

I can assure the Members opposite that the budget that they permitted us in this House has been spent, 

that the carry-over will probably be less this year than any number of years in the past of program, and 

that certain programs because of the unusual year in construction were completed much faster. 

Therefore, the progress payments on certain projects were required and in order to stay within the 

budget we had to delay the calling of other tenders that some people complain about. but the program, if 

we take the total amount of work planned and permitted by the budget, we are well in line and the 

progress of the total program has been successful and will not exceed the budget, but probably have less 

carry-over of any year in the last three or four. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister telling this Assembly that in effect you have 

overbudgeted or underbudgeted in some areas because by your own admission you have not even let 

tenders on work which you informed this Assembly, at Budget time, that you were going to do this year. 

And yet you haven’t even let the tenders on it. And are you telling us that you have overbudgeted on the 

major portion of your work for this year and that is why you could not proceed with this additional? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No, I am not saying that at all. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — The Minister just indicated that the budget for the Department of 

Highways was already spent and I believe we’ve got about four months left in the fiscal year, 

approximately. Does this mean one of two things — (a): that you didn’t budget properly and in fact have 

overspent already so that projects in the next four months will not be done; and that in fact you have 

done exactly the same thing as the Attorney General did and have run short of money? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No, that’s not true either. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker, 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Next question. 

 

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BOARD 
 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Finance. 

 

Does the Minister agree with the Saskatchewan Government Employees Association who state that 

because of the decision in the Workers’ Compensation Board dispute that the Provincial Wage Control 

Board really doesn’t have any legal power to roll back any signed contracts, and would the Minister 

comment on the significance of that particular decision? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Public Sector Prices and 

Review Board is appointed by Order-in-Council and as the Government approved a set of terms of 

reference, it is true we did not pass legislation and while in that particular case the matter was referred to 

the court and a judgment has been handed down by the court. All I can tell the Hon. Member is that our 

board 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

512 

has been very effective, it has worked, it has had the acceptance I think more than any other board. They 

are doing a fine job and in that particular case we are studying the decision of the court. It is only in one 

case that it has been referred and the Hon. Member may be aware that even with the Federal legislation 

that was passed by other provinces and the courts have dealt with it and have even overruled, e.g. in 

Ontario decisions by the federal board, despite the fact that they had legislation. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister contemplating making any 

changes to the regulations to ensure that any of the future decisions are binding? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the terms of reference have been examined. There are no immediate 

plans for changing the terms of reference, but it may be necessary. We are monitoring the situation 

carefully and if the need arises to alter the terms of reference, we will consider it. 

 

DEPARTMENTS OVERSPENDING THEIR BUDGETS 
 

Mr. Lane: — We have now had an admission in fact that two departments have spent their budgets, 

close to spending their budgets, already with several months left in the fiscal year. Can the Minister of 

Finance tell us how many other Government departments are short of funds already indicating either 

poor planning or a misleading budget from last year? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, there are no departments that are short of funds. 

 

Mr. Lane: — A supplementary to the Minister of Finance. I understand that two Ministers have already 

indicated otherwise. Are you prepared to stand by your statement? Now, Mr. Minister, I would like you 

to assure this House that in fact we are not going to have a deficit budget, an assurance given last year. 

One that seemingly has been a false assurance given by the Minister and that in fact, Mr. Speaker, we 

will have a balanced budget promised by the Minister. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member has been very glib about talking about finances. I 

noticed the other day he made an allegation that 24 departments or branches or agencies of the 

Government were not audited by the Provincial Auditor. That is a complete falsehood and the Hon. 

Member as chairman of the Public Accounts knows that to be true but he is trying to catch some kind of 

headlines equally as he is trying to allege . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, he is trying to make news for himself because of discrediting himself in 

the last several months. He knows that it is incorrect and he knows that moneys were provided. This 

Legislature approved the budget, it is a budget that is providing sufficient funds for all the departments 

and all agencies of the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

513 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I will ask the Members to not put questions which are argumentive and which 

call for an argumentive answer, which is equally as undesirable as an argumentive question. 

 

FARM WELLS IN POPLAR RIVER AREA 
 

Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister in charge 

of the SPC. At the mining site at the Poplar River area, the pumping of water at the 70 foot level has 

now affected farm wells over two miles from the site. I am informed today that more farm water 

supplies have been tested and found unfit for human consumption. While SPC has attempted without 

success to find suitable waters in the area, can the Minister tell this Assembly what he intends to do to 

give these farm homes immediate suitable water supplies? 

 

Mr. J.R. Messer (Minister in charge of SPC): — I have conveyed to the House on previous occasions 

that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and its engineers have committed themselves to farmers if 

wells are affected, to replace that water by the drilling of other wells. I am aware as the Member has 

noted that there are problems in trying to re-establish adequate and acceptable qualities of water from 

deeper wells. We therefore are undertaking to look at purification systems or means of being able to 

treat that water so that it would be of an adequate and acceptable standard. If that is not successful we 

will have to undertake to provide sources of water by other means, that may be by the establishment of 

reservoirs on the farms which would be filled by hopefully natural runoff. If that’s not the case it would 

have then to be filled by human means, trucking and filling these reservoirs. If that is not acceptable 

we’ll have to find some other means of establishing a reservoir of water. But the commitment has been 

made and we will see that they will have adequate supplies of water. I know that it is somewhat 

frustrating during the interim of time where the pumping has in fact affected those wells and we are 

having difficulty in giving immediate good quality water. 

 

Mr. Nelson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has assured us he is trying, I can assure the Minister it is not 

successful. Has the Minister considered piping water from the town water tower that is not too far away 

from the farms already affected? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I have not personally undertaken to consider that. I appreciate the 

proposal that the Member for Assiniboia Gravelbourg advances. I can assure him if having exhausted all 

other alternatives that remains to be a feasible alternative to consider. Yes we would consider that, and 

would hopefully reach the stage of consideration at a very early time so that these farmers who are 

affected are not affected for a prolonged period of time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder with leave of the House if I 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

514 

could undertake to introduce a group of students who I thought were here earlier and introduced, but 

they came in only several moments ago. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should like to introduce to you and through you to the Members of this House 

a group of students sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery from the community of Mistatim. As I said earlier, 

they are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Larry Monsees. I see also another constituent of mine, Mr. 

Herbatiuk with them, there may be some other people as well. I know that they have arranged a tour of 

their own of the city, so I am not aware of where they have been. I hope they will enjoy the visit to the 

Legislature. I hope that they will take note of the proceedings in this Assembly and appreciate its 

democratic principles and practices. 

 

I will be meeting with them at 3:30 o’clock to answer any questions they may have. I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that all Members will wish to welcome them and wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

DISPLAY — RE PARLIAMENT HISTORY 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before Orders of the Day, I want to acquaint members with the comprehensive visual 

display which is being assembled in the upper rotunda of the Legislative Building, it has been referred to 

earlier today. 

 

This particular display travelled to various centres of Canada and traces the history of parliament from 

Alfred the Great to the present day. It was originally prepared at the request of the Japanese 

Government. The display was first seen in the Museum of the Diet in Tokyo in 1973. The British High 

Commission which is organizing the tour says, 

 

. . . All the historical milestones of orderly constitutional government are illustrated in the 22 panels 

which include reproductions of eight ancient manuscripts and parchments, such as the Magna Carta 

and the artist’s impressions of the times. 

 

The display details the history of parliament itself, rules that govern parliamentary procedure and how 

parliament makes laws. The display will be open to the public in Regina until late January or early 

February, when it will be shipped to Winnipeg for further display. 

 

Prior to assembling the exhibit here in Regina, it was in Edmonton. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, if I may, I should like to rise on a Point of 

Correction on the matter raised by the Minister of Finance — I’m entitled to correct a 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

515 

mis-statement. Mr. Speaker, would you rule if it is a Point of Correction or a Point of Order. The other 

day you suggested to me I should rise on a Point of Correction to correct a mis-statement, that’s what I 

am rising to do. I don’t know if it is Order or Correction? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Can the Member state as briefly as possible what the Member wishes to bring 

forward? I can assure the Member if it is a Point of Debate I will rule it out of order. 

 

Mr. Collver: — It is not a Point of Debate Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to table a document, if this is so 

desired. It is a list of the 27 organizations associated with the Government of Saskatchewan in which 

audit reports were not issued for the fiscal year 1974-75. It is located in the Public Accounts Committee 

of April 2, 1976. I would be more than happy to table this document, if that is what I have to do. 

Otherwise I am prepared to read the list into the record to correct the Minister’s statement. I don’t know 

which is preferable. Since this particular document has already been tabled in the Legislature one would 

hope that the list could be read there. If not I am prepared to read the list. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe what the Member is doing is re-presenting something that is already before 

the Assembly. His point is with regard to the interpretation of a document which has been tabled and I 

think that is a debatable matter. 

 

I think we can move on to the next item of business. 

 

WHITE PAPER — TRADE PRACTICES LEGISLATION 
 

Hon. E.C. Whelan (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Before the Orders of the Day I want to advise 

the Members of the Assembly that I have tabled a proposal for a Bill on Trade Practices as a White 

Paper. The two main objectives of the Bill are (a): to prevent or stop unfair, unconscionable acts or 

practices, and (b): to provide remedies for consumers who have suffered losses as the result of such 

practices, as well as providing protection and compensation for consumers. 

 

Such a Bill would also provide trustworthy business people with the opportunity to operate in a 

marketplace where competition from unfair or unscrupulous operators would be curbed. The proposed 

Trade Practices Bill would have very broad application and affect more people in more ways than most 

other Acts of the Legislature. For this reason, we encourage both business people and consumers to 

write their comments to the Department of Consumer Affairs. We hope that all interested people will 

take this opportunity to have input into the vital area of Trade Practices legislation. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister accept a question prior to his taking his seat? Would the 

Minister assure this House that before any press conferences or anything on the particular Bill, that he 

will give us his assurance that it is not a direct copy of the federal bill as was done with legislation last 

year by the Department? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Yes, I will give you that assurance, it is a combination of several bills from several 

provinces that are quite 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

516 

similar. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO MR. AND MRS. PONTO 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to make a brief comment. 

All of us, I think, have admired the bearing and youthful vigor of the Sergeant-at-arms, Mr. Ponto, and 

accordingly I think it will come as a great surprise to Members to hear that Mr. and Mrs. Ponto look 

forward to celebrating their 50th wedding anniversary on January 5th, next, before we reconvene. 

Because that event will take place before we reconvene I wanted to extend to Mr. and Mrs. Ponto our 

very best wishes on this occasion and to express the wish that they will have many more happy years 

together. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

RULING ON AMENDMENT TO ELECTION ACT 
 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Chairman of Committee of the Whole): — Mr. Speaker, during the proceedings of the 

committee I ruled an amendment, moved by the Attorney General, out of order, on the grounds that the 

principle of the amendment went beyond the principle of the bill. My ruling was challenged. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The ruling of the chairman of the committee has been challenged and the question 

before the House is: shall the ruling of the Chairman of the committee be sustained. 

 

Ruling of Chairman sustained on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 28 
Blakeney MacMurchy Faris 

Bowerman Mostoway Rolfes 

Smishek Larson Cowley 

Romanow Whelan Tchorzewski 

Messer Kaeding Nelson (Yorkton) 

Snyder Kwasnica Allen 

Lange Dyck Koskie 

Kowalchuk McNeill Johnson 

Matsalla Feschuk Banda 

Robbins   

 

NAYS — 7 
 

Collver Birkbeck Berntson 

Larter Ham Katzman 

Lane   

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): moved second reading of Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The 

Election Act No. 2. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I’ll call then Bill 55, The Election Act No. 2. I think all the Members are familiar 

with this. This 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

517 

amendment seeks to deal with the question of Government advertising. The present prohibition with 

respect to general elections of course will remain. In the case of a by-election this proposed bill will 

prohibit publication of Government activities in the constituency in which the by-election is to be held. 

In the case where the constituency in which the by-election is to be held contains in whole or in part an 

urban municipality, keeping in mind the Sutherland situation, having a population in excess of 20,000 

inhabitants the prohibition will extend to the whole of the urban municipality and thus publication of 

Government activities will be curbed in the constituency and in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we know fully the situation which has been before the Members for some time. 

 

I move second reading of Bill No. 55. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few comments. 

 

We had a situation tonight develop and it developed solely because of the incompetence of the Attorney 

General of this province. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, a government and an Attorney General . . . 

 

Mr. Cowley: — . . . Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What’s the Point of Order? 

 

Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me as I recollect the rules that a Member speaking in one 

debate in the same Session of the Legislature cannot refer to comments made in another debate, on 

another bill or whatever in that same sitting. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the Member is speaking to the principle of Bill 55 and must restrict his 

comments to the principle of the bill and not make his comments in the order of a Point of Order, which 

it appeared to me he was making. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I have not yet commented on another bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, surely the people of this province are entitled to a situation and actions by an 

Attorney General that can bring legislation before this House once. I don’t know why the Attorney 

General found it impossible to have us discuss Bill 55 twice and deal with this amendment twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I would ask the Member to not deal with what appears to be some kind 

of Point of Order, because within my knowledge this is the first time that this item has come before the 

House. consequently, I have to treat it as an initial discussion of Bill 55. 

 

Mr. Lane: — This particular bill, Mr. Speaker, has 



 
December 2, 1976 
 

518 

ample precedent and it has background which is vital to the discussion of this particular bill. Now we 

have to be assured by the Attorney General and he has failed to do it, that this bill will be able to get 

through a committee tonight. We don’t have that assurance. We haven’t had time, as the Opposition, to 

review the bill, make sure it is in compliance. I don’t know about the other Members, but I just got my 

copy on my desk just now. If the Hon. Members are saying I had ample opportunity before, then they 

are saying, Mr. Speaker, I should be able to refer to what was before this House before, and I can’t do 

that according to the rules and according to the Attorney General, and according to the Minister — 

irresponsible for the Potash Corporation. 

 

Now, it seems to me that if we are going to discuss this matter then surely we should have had more 

time. We are taking an assurance from the Attorney General (I have to refer to matters before, I might 

add, Mr. Speaker), but we don’t have any assurance that this bill is going to get through committee. As a 

matter of fact, referring to the past record of the Government their drafting is so poor that it’s doubtful 

whether this particular bill is going to be drafted or has been drafted well enough to be able to get 

through the hard scrutiny of the chairman of the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Now why the Attorney General with his terrible record on presenting legislation would not refer to those 

remarks in his second reading speech, again it is beyond me. Is it because the Attorney General is having 

so much trouble in his department; is it because the Attorney General’s department is falling apart under 

his very nose that he keeps giving us an assurance that this bill is properly drafted and this amendment is 

in compliance with the Act. Surely, Mr. Speaker, that is something we were entitled to on the second 

reading speech of the Attorney General. Why he refused to give us his personal assurance that this bill 

was properly drafted, that there will be no more games played, why he couldn’t give us that assurance is 

something I think shows the utter disrespect of this House which the Attorney General has shown 

tonight. We know it, the Attorney General knows it and I think Mr. Speaker, that the actions of the 

Attorney General in this Assembly tonight brought this House into disrespect, disrepute and it is time to 

stop the game playing and it is time to get on with the business and the people of this House and I want 

to hear from the Attorney General, that notwithstanding the poor shape his department is in; his bad 

record on bringing poorly drafted legislation before this House, that he will give us . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Speaking about getting back to the business I would caution the Member 

that I haven’t yet heard his discuss the principle of the bill that I see before me, as Bill 55. It seems to 

me his entire remarks have been directed as a quasi-personal attack on the Attorney General. I am 

unable to understand it, since the bill is new to me, it seems to me that the Member for Qu’Appelle 

should have made his intervention earlier in the evening when I asked leave. I didn’t recall anyone 

saying they wouldn’t allow leave for this bill to proceed. No one intervened at that time. It was granted 

leave to proceed. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that I am referring in my remarks to an omission in the remarks of 

the Attorney General, an assurance which I think the Opposition Members deserve, and that 



 

December 2, 1976 

 

519 

is an assurance that this bill because of the urgent matter, urgent being the fact that we expect to adjourn 

the House out of courtesy to Members to my right and that an assurance from the Attorney General that 

this bill is in fact properly drafted and it will get through Committee of the Whole tonight, an assurance 

that the Attorney General very pointedly refused to give us. I think that that refers directly to the 

remarks of the Attorney General in second reading, Mr. Speaker. And again, the Attorney General’s 

record is so bad in bringing bills before this House, I hope that in his reply to this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! will the member deal with the principle of the bill. He can call for the 

Attorney General to include something in his comments in closing the debate on the bill, if he wants. 

But, I don’t think it requires an attack of any kind of the nature that I have heard. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to close a debate in the light 

of the remarks made by the Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle. I do want to close by simply saying one thing 

which I think should be absolutely clear to everybody. This bill is identical to the House amendments 

which the Member for Qu’Appelle and the Conservative Party have had for, I don’t know how many 

hours today. They know and he knows it. I think that I would be upset somewhat personally by the 

criticisms on what I think is a purely personal attack if they came from any other quarters than from 

where they do come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MOTION 
 

HOUSE ADJOURNMENT 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — I move, seconded by the Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of 

Finance): 

 

That when this Assembly do adjourn at the end of the sitting day on which this motion is adopted it 

shall stand adjourned to a date set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the Government and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each Member seven clear days notice, if possible, by wire and registered mail of 

such date. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 9:47 o’clock p.m. the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the Throne and 

gave Royal Assent to the bills presented to him. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:50 o’clock p.m. 


