
























































Hansard: January 07, 1976


 
 

1676 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

31st Day 
 

Wednesday, January 7, 1976 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

IMPLICATION OF THE PATENT LEGISLATION 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of 
the Day, I would address a question to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) in the absence of the 
Premier. 
 
Is the Attorney General aware of the implications of the patent legislation in Canada, in fact, in the 
world as it relates to the proposed potash expropriation and potash legislation in the Province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I think I can answer the Hon. Member for Nipawin, that 
I suppose that we are as aware as we need to be subject to your first and second supplementary. Maybe 
you should ask the first supplementary and we will see where we go from there. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I gather then from the Attorney General's comments that he has 
reviewed the patent legislation and as it relates to the potash takeover. Is the Attorney General aware 
that many of the processes and some of the equipment that is used in the mining of potash in the 
Province of Saskatchewan is either under lease or protected under the patent legislation and that no 
expropriation of potash equipment, that is under patent or under lease, is possible under the laws of 
Canada and the international patent regulations? And that if an attempt is made to expropriate these 
processed and this equipment and the organizations do not allow or want them to be expropriated that 
there will be no equipment or modern machinery left to mine the potash and you will be left with a hole 
in the ground with nothing to mine it with. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, I would say to the Hon. Leader of the Conservative Party that here he is 
totally wrong with all due respect, because the law in expropriation is very clear — at least in our 
judgment it is very clear and I don't think that even the Opposition in course of the discussions of Bills 1 
and 2 have offered any different point of view, and that is that the province has the right, 
unchallengeable right under the constitution, for expropriation of physical assets and other assets, 
perhaps not strictly related to the physical aspect of plants, that are within the jurisdiction of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. That is clear, whether there are patent provisions or whether there aren't any 
and I would also dispute further the Hon. Leader of the Conservative's statement which prefaces the 
question and that is all, or almost all, of the mining operations are under some form of patent or some 
form of similar protection. I don't believe that to be the case, but in any event the power 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1677 
 

of expropriation for the province is a very sweeping one and I think an absolute one. 
 
I want to repeat again, which has been a stated policy of the Government, it is our hope that once Bills 1 
and 2 are passed that, in fact, we may never need actually to use the legislation that is there, that some 
arrangements can be made with the companies involved. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a second supplementary question. I an certain that the Attorney 
General is aware that the laws of expropriation do not apply to lease equipment, with all deference and 
respect, the equipment that is under lease from manufactors in Germany and in other areas of the world, 
who hold patent rights who may not wish to lease their equipment to the Province of Saskatchewan 
because of the expropriation legislation in the province. 
 
Is the Attorney General not aware that the expropriation legislation is not applicable to lease equipment; 
that he cannot expropriate lease equipment that is controlled under patent legislation? Is the Attorney 
General then and the Premier and the remainder of the Government of Saskatchewan now prepared after 
all of the facts that have been presented, in every different area, to withdraw the legislation or call 
another provincial election on the issue? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I think on the question of the power of expropriation and leasing 
and patents I already made my remarks in response to the first supplementary question. 
 
To answer the second part of the Leader's question respecting withdrawal, I think I can say quite clearly 
and unequivocally on behalf of the Government that there will be no withdrawal of Bills 1 and 2. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — The policy of the Government is stated and we will proceed with Bills 1 and 2. 
 
As to the question of the second part of the supplementary, the matter of an election, all that I can tell 
the Leader of the Conservative Party is that there will be an election and whenever the date of the 
election is called, it will probably be much too soon for the Conservatives. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

CHALLENGE TO A SERIES OF FORMAL DEBATES 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Attorney General in 
the absence of the Premier. 
 
Yesterday, you may recall I asked the Premier a series of questions. (a) Whether or not you were 
prepared to have public hearings around the province on the potash question. (b) Whether you were 
prepared to reconsider referring it to a sessional committee for public participation, and (c) Whether you 
were 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1678 
 

prepared to institute a system of public discussion forums around the province. 
 
He rejected, as you remember, the latter two very promptly. That was followed by a formal challenge by 
us . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — ... to formally debate the potash question in centres around the province on the 
15th and 16th of January, next week. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think I should just ask all Members to respect the House with 
regard to the practice of the House with regard to asking questions. I notice that the previous questioner 
prefaced his remarks considerably and in fact was changing it into a debate. I know that the Member 
who is asking the question now is not getting to the point of the question. I wonder if he could hasten 
that. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Perhaps, I could be more brief, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps at the same time the hon. 
gentlemen opposite can be less sensitive. Yesterday we delivered a letter to the Premier, by the Leader 
of the Opposition covering the question, challenging the Government to a series of formal debates 
around the province, seven in total. We noticed Cabinet was meeting last night and late last night and we 
wonder now whether you are prepared to accept our challenge and go forward with the debate? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I tell you, Mr. Speaker, indeed Cabinet was meeting late last night but I can also 
tell the Hon. Members in the House that one item that was not on the agenda for any serious 
consideration was the Leader of the Opposition's letter on the question of debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I think that that letter — and with all due respect to the Member for Regina 
South, can be characterized in a way that the Leader of the Conservative Party is quoted on television 
and radio as having characterized it, as a political ploy and that the people can see through it very easily. 
The debate of this important Bill has been going on for some considerable number of weeks and months 
here in the Legislature. This is the parliamentary procedure. We think that the debate has been very fully 
reported. We may quarrel with some aspect of the reports of the press, but generally it has been fully 
reported, fully reported for all sides and I think not very often I agree with my friend, the Leader of the 
Conservative Party, but I do in this case, that that is a transparently obvious political ploy and the people 
of Saskatchewan will recognize it as such. 
 
We are prepared to debate with you anywhere we can. We have here in the Legislature and might say 
that here in the Legislature and everywhere have consistently, in my judgment, whipped the Liberals on 
the questions of the day. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1679 
 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, despite all the comments of the Attorney General I don't think he in 
sum and substance answered the question. Do you in fact reject the challenge that we issued to you 
yesterday. Is that the answer? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can answer the first supplementary of the Member, Yes, 
categorically rejected because it is clearly a political ploy as I have indicated. It is not serious. Any 
debate which takes into account no requests or no consideration of the Conservative Party, treats the 
Conservative Party with almost arrogant disdain in the letter. It is something which we cannot abide by, 
but apart from that what better place to debate than in the great debating chamber in the Province of 
Saskatchewan, this Legislature. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I gather that at long last the Attorney General has said no, the 
Government is not prepared to accept our proposal in total and I ask as a last supplementary — Are you 
and the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) prepared to meet with Mr. Penner and me in Yorkton 
next Friday evening at 7:30 or 8:00 o'clock where we have a hall booked with a neutral chairman and 
prepared to debate the issue? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would be very interested in that type of a debate personally 
because I feel quite confident about the merits of the argument and the ability of both the Minister of 
Education and with some modest regard, with myself in this area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that didn't come out right. But I have two reservations, 
Mr. Speaker. The first one is that the Legislature will in all likelihood still be sitting on either Thursday 
or Friday. That bothers me very much because of legislative and other commitments. And the second 
one that bothers me equally, is that while I would very much like to debate with the Members from the 
Liberal Party or any Liberal Party and let the audience judge the outcome of that, I am very, very 
hesitant to provide a forum for at least one or two of the leadership aspirants on the opposite side. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I would simply say that if you want to fight for the Liberal leadership and to get 
it, good luck to you but please don't ask the Minister of Education and me to provide the audience for 
you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INVESTIGATION INTO FEASIBILITY OF PRODUCTION OF GAS FIELDS 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to direct to the Minister of 
Sask Power (Mr. Messer). 
 
I am sure that the Government opposite when deciding or 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1680 
 

contemplating the purchase of Consumers Oil, initiated some sort of investigation into the feasibility of 
that purchase. I wonder if the Minister in charge of Sask Power can inform me if the Provincial 
Government initiated or SPC initiated any studies to investigate the productive capabilities of the gas 
field located in west central Saskatchewan and east central Alberta that are holdings of Consumers Oil 
Limited? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I should like to know if the Minister in charge of 
SPC is willing to table those investigations in the House? 
 
MR. MESSER: — The answer to that is, No. I don't believe it is in the public interest, Mr. Speaker. 
There have been a number of comments made, by independent observers, knowledgeable observers in 
regard to gas production, oil production in both Saskatchewan and Alberta. My understanding is that 
without exception all of them have recognized this transaction as a very good one for the Province of 
Saskatchewan and for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Speaker, a second supplementary. If the Minister is so confident that the 
information in those investigations would meet with the agreement of the Saskatchewan public, I can't 
see how it wouldn't be in their best interest to see that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I should like to ask then if the Minister would provide this House with the names 
of those firms that investigated or that conducted the investigation into Consumers Oil and the holdings? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that this can be handled much better in Crown 
Corporations Committee. It is a matter for Crown Corporations and if the Member wants to get into a 
debate I would suggest he put the question on the Order Paper and we will also debate the sale of the 
Hatton Gas Fields under the Liberal Government in 1965. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF TRANSACTION OF OIL FIELDS 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Am I correct in saying, and correct me if I am wrong, 
that the deal went through in mid-December and I wonder why if the deal did go through in 
mid-December, why the Minister kept this matter from the House when the House was sitting and why 
the Minister then announced the matter not in the House, but announced the matter by way of a press 
release? 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1681 
 

And, secondly, I wonder if the Minister would indicate whether my information is correct, that an 
estimated one-third value of the Consumers Oil deal is their three per cent gross royalty on the Grizzly 
Valley gas field in British Columbia. I wonder why the Saskatchewan Government is using 
Saskatchewan money, not just to create jobs in Alberta, but to create jobs in exploration in the Province 
of British Columbia? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, it was by mutual agreement between the shareholders of Consumers 
Oil and Saskatchewan Power Corporation that the announcement come early in the Near Year, 1976. 
That was mutually agreed to and I don't think that is unusual in such a transaction. 
 
In regard to the reserve or the field in British Columbia, the deal was to purchase the total holdings of 
Consumers Oil. There was some modest reserves in comparison to reserves in Saskatchewan and in 
Alberta held in British Columbia. We know that it is highly unlikely that we will be tapping those 
reserves for Saskatchewan use but if there is proven gas in that area, we know that it is still a good 
business venture to undertake to develop those gas reserves and sell them in the immediate area, which 
will, in return, give us some income on that investment to purchase other reserves or seek and find gas 
for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that primarily the intent and objective of the transaction was to find and assure a supply of gas 
for Saskatchewan consumption, but in this instance there was a small percentage of the holdings that we 
know that we will unlikely be able to put into the province but nevertheless it will be a good business 
venture for the province and for the Corporation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister might indicate to the House that he would check 
further because, indeed, I'm told that one-third of the value is the Grizzly Field and that part of the 
reason — check this and if I am incorrect advise us — but part of the reason that many people are saying 
it is a bad deal, is that they are underemphasizing the value of the three per cent gross royalty. 
 
Secondly, I wonder if the Minister would agree that this is the first time that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is entering into a deal not to buy products, but a deal to — as the multi-national 
companies that you hate so much — but a deal to go into investment in another province, that you are 
now going into the straight business of putting money out and that because of the way the British 
Columbia Government operates, that they buy all of the gas product, there is no possibility that we can 
ever buy the gas product from the Grizzly Field, but instead we would only be able to buy from the 
British Columbia Government. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that the Member for Wascana's information may be correct 
but it certainly is not the information that has been conveyed to me in regard to the quantity of gas that is 
in the Grizzly area. It has been conveyed to me to 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1682 
 

be somewhat less, much less than one-third of the total reserves. 
 
I may then say, Mr. Speaker, that I don't believe there is any other real attractive or legitimate way of 
acquiring extensive reserves of gas in areas other than Saskatchewan by the purchase of Consumers Oil 
or by similar ventures where we undertake through joint participation, to seek out not only gas 
exploration and purchase but by development of our own gas. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I have a second supplementary. Might I only suggest to the 
Minister that if there were no other means that you might have considered buying the Saskatchewan 
assets instead of buying the company. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has indicated that he will check those figures and I wonder if he would as 
well check other figures. The Alberta new gas rate is about 60 cents, if I am correct. The British 
Columbia new gas rate (the price paid by the NDP Government that then was when it set the price), if I 
am correct is 65 cents. That's without royalty. And in Saskatchewan it's 22 cents and on that you pay a 
royalty so that it's a 10 or 11 cent price. I suggest to you that the reasons that the gas company and 
Saskoil are exploring in Alberta and British Columbia is they can't make a buck here. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, in response to that, let me simply say that both the Member for 
Wascana and the Member for Estevan yesterday in the Legislature and on television, say that the answer 
to finding adequate gas reserves in Saskatchewan is to drill and drill and drill and encourage more 
participation in Saskatchewan. 
 
They know, and it is common knowledge to anyone in the industry, that there is not sufficient gas in 
Saskatchewan to meet our demands in the next twenty or thirty years. It is totally logical, Mr. Speaker, 
that there be undertakings initiated now to explore and develop gas in other areas than in Saskatchewan 
to acquire reserves so that we can have confidence in being able to supply our consumers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know the Conservative Party and the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan wouldn't do that. They would sell 
the Hatton gas field, they would use up all the gas in Saskatchewan and wake up some morning with 
absolutely no gas for the consumers here and consequently pay a ridiculous price for it. Well that's not 
the policy of this Government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

HAS GOVERNMENT ENGAGED EASTERN CONSULTING FIRM 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, I took as notice a question (I 
think we have had four questions today and I just took as notice yesterday) a question asked by the 
Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mrs. Edwards), which was whether or not the Government had 
engaged (and I'm saying by the Government — we as the Government and of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) engaged consultants to help to recruit employees for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? I have now had an opportunity to examine that question and have been informed that the 
answer 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1683 
 

is 'yes', on or about the 1st of November 1975. This was the effective date when the consultants started 
work to assist in the engaging of employees for the Potash Corporation. 
 
MRS. E.G. EDWARDS (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Attorney 
General has answered the first part of my question, would I be allowed to ask a supplementary? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — In that case, I should like to ask the Attorney General what was the name of the 
firm and how much they are being paid? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am not in a position to reveal the name of the 
firm at this time, for quite obvious reasons, and that is they are involved in the search for very highly 
skilled, high-profile people for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. To reveal the name of the firm 
may very well jeopardize the operations that they are undertaking as headhunters for the Government 
and, therefore, I cannot consent to answer the question. 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Second supplementary. I really can't see any reason that the name of the firm 
could not be . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What's the question? 
 
MRS. EDWARDS: — Second supplementary. Where and what companies is this firm recruiting from 
and in what salary ranges are they offering and whom have they recruited to date? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are three questions there. As to 
announcement as to future employees, these will be made by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in 
due course, as we have already made some, some considerable appointments and future ones will be 
made. The announcements as to salary ranges will be obviously competitive. They will have to be 
competitive if we are going to get the type of people that I think are necessary. The salary ranges will be 
the kind to attract the top-flight people necessary for this operation. 
 
As to the first part of the question, namely what companies have been contacted, I can't reveal that for 
the very same reason that I responded to the first supplementary question. That the recruitment is 
important and it is going on now, and that could only jeopardize the sensitive discussions with 
individuals and/or companies that may or may not be going on with the company. In due course, I think 
we can reveal all this information, and as people are hired the Legislature will be almost the first people 
to know. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1684 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

MESSAGE RE ERNEST BOYCHUK — OMBUDSMAN 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day, pursuant to Chapter 87 of the Statutes of 1972, I 
have received a message from the Ombudsman. I will read the message and table the letter. It is 
addressed to me and it says as follows: 
 

I have the honour to submit my resignation as Ombudsman for the Province of 
Saskatchewan effective January 6th, 1976. 

 
I am resigning my position to assume the duties of Chief Judge of the Magistrates' Court 
for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
It has been a great privilege for me to have served the people of Saskatchewan in the 
position of Ombudsman. 

 
I have the honour to be 
Sir 
Your obedient servant 
 
E.C. Boychuk, Q.C. 
Ombudsman 

 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I be 
permitted to make just a brief statement and this is following on your reading of the letter from Mr. 
Boychuk. The statement I wanted to make was to announce (and it has already been done in the letter) 
that the appointment of Mr. Boychuk, Q.C. as Chief Judge of the Magistrates' Court for Saskatchewan, 
effective today, Wednesday, January 7, 1976. 
 
I think most Members of the Legislature will be familiar with Mr. Boychuk. He is a native of my home 
city, Saskatoon, received his education in Saskatoon, obtaining a Bachelor of Arts in 1956 and a 
Bachelor of Law in 1958 from the U of S. He practised law in the law firm of Rees and Smigelsky of 
Saskatoon from 1960 to 1963 and served as the city of Saskatoon's prosecutor from 1963 to 1967. From 
1967 to 1973 he was judge of the Magistrates' Court and in 1973 he was appointed as Saskatchewan's 
first Ombudsman, a position that he has held until the date of the resignation letter. 
 
I should like, Mr. Speaker, before taking my place, to stress how important the appointment of Mr. 
Boychuk as Chief Judge really is to the Government and to the people of the province. I think it is an 
essential move towards the fulfilment of this Government's commitment to improve our court system 
and in particular that court with which the majority of people must deal — Magistrates' Courts. 
 
Members will know that we have proposed, and details will be coming out in the budget, as we have 
developed them further, some far-reaching changes in the administrative operations of the Magistrates' 
Courts. 
 
The appointment of Mr. Boychuk as the Chief Judge, following upon the appointment several months 
ago of Mr. Marvin Bruce as 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1685 
 

administrative director for the Magistrates' Courts, will permit the province to move ahead with 
improved procedures at an accelerated pace. 
 
Now as everybody will know, in Mr. Boychuk I think we have an excellent person as Chief Magistrate. 
His past experience as I have enumerated, city prosecutor, city solicitor, magistrate and Ombudsman, 
really show that Mr. Boychuk has not only the competence, but the integrity to really ensure that the job 
can be done in the Magistrates' Courts area. I am confident that the new Chief Judge will ensure the 
independence and the integrity of this very important level of court services — the Magistrates' Court of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I should also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that pursuant to The Ombudsman Act an Order in Council has 
been passed, late last night, appointing Mr. William Keith Barker who is presently the assistant 
Ombudsman to the position of acting Ombudsman, pending selection of a permanent replacement for 
Mr. Boychuk. The Ombudsman position will now be advertised by the office of the Legislative 
Assembly and a new Ombudsman will be appointed by the Cabinet on the recommendation of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
In closing, I should like to pay a word of tribute on behalf of the Premier and the Cabinet and the 
Government and I suppose all Members of the Assembly to Mr. Boychuk for what I think have been two 
years of outstanding service as Ombudsman for the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is very difficult to start a new role. It is very difficult to start something which is as new, or was as 
new, to the Province of Saskatchewan as the position of Ombudsman. There are difficulties with the 
bureaucracy. There are difficulties with interpreting legislation. There are difficulties in hiring personnel 
and I'm sure many disappointments and frustrations on the way to setting up the credibility of the office. 
I am convinced that Ernest Boychuk, as our Ombudsman, has done one great service to the people of the 
province, and that is to establish the credibility of the Ombudsman as a permanent and valuable feature 
for the citizens in their attempts to gain redress to bureaucratic inaction or bureaucratic wrongdoing, not 
wrongdoing but wrong decisions by the bureaucracy, the type of role that the Ombudsman should be 
involved in. I know that all of us have received recommendations from Ernie from time to time. We 
have tried our best to make the changes. Sometimes we disagree with them. I'm sure in the future we 
will disagree with the Ombudsman but on balance it has been a good healthy process for government, 
one that I was very proud to be associated with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I should like to thank the indulgence of the House for giving me the opportunity to 
make this announcement of Chief Magistrate and say these few words on behalf of all of us if I conclude 
this the transfer of Mr. Boychuk as Ombudsman to Chief Magistrate. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps I may be given a minute or 
two to respond briefly on behalf of the Opposition. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1686 
 

The announcement by the Attorney General on the resignation received by you, Mr. Speaker, is in a 
sense both good news and bad news. Bad news in the sense that Mr. Boychuk will be leaving the post of 
Ombudsman. In the short period that he has been there, and I can quite agree with the Attorney General, 
he has among other things, established clearly the credibility of that office. He always approached the 
problems of that office in an energetic and effective way. He was most approachable and I know that 
many people, what we have commonly come to and refer to as the little people, with a whole variety of 
problems arising from dealings with government, have found in him a champion of them and of their 
problems and he always pursued them with energy and with vigor, even though it led to government 
offices and government offices at a rather high level. A very, very effective Ombudsman, I think, for 
Saskatchewan in the last two years and as I say in that sense it is bad news because we will be losing 
him. 
 
Good news, in the sense that he is eminently qualified to be the Chief Justice of the Magistrates' Courts. 
Mr. Justice Hall, you may remember, a year or more ago recommended to the Provincial Government 
that we should have a Chief Justice of the Magistrates' Courts. We are pleased now that we will have a 
Chief Justice in the first place. We are pleased secondly that the Chief Justice will be Ernie Boychuk, 
who as I say is certainly eminently qualified to fill that post. We look forward to dealing with a number 
of other areas of concern that we have with the Magistrates' Courts. As you know we have a long period 
at the moment between arrest and trial, which is not very satisfactory. We have other suggestions to 
make in that respect and we will be making them as time goes by. As Members know, we too, have been 
pressing for some time to have a Chief Justice. We are very pleased that we now will have it and we are 
very pleased indeed with the choice of Chief Justice. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MERRY CHRISTMAS TO UKRAINIAN CITIZENS 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, if I may be permitted just one further 
privilege. 
 
As Members will know, today is Ukrainian Christmas Day. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — As soon as I heard the word Christmas, somebody said 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1687 
 

to me that they hadn't seen my motion for extended hours of sitting yet. But that doesn't apply for 
Ukrainian Christmas. I am sure that all Members of the Legislative Assembly would join with me in 
wishing the hundred thousand or so Ukrainian citizens who make up the Saskatchewan population a 
very Merry Christmas, Happy New Year coming up. The Ukrainian-Canadian people are very proud of 
their cultural and religious background. Many, indeed, maintain and celebrate these traditions on 
Ukrainian Christmas Day. I know that in my household my mother does to this day, and if it weren't for 
the House I would be there, and the contribution that is made by the Ukrainian-Canadian people is one 
that I am sure all Saskatchewan people agree and share in. Accordingly, I should like to wish on behalf 
of the Members of the Legislative Assembly Khrystos Razhdayetsya — Merry Christmas. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 1 — An Act respecting the Development of Potash Resources in Saskatchewan be now read 
a second time, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Lane. 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the amendment to Bill 1 
with mixed emotions. I'm pleased to be able to once again speak on behalf of the majority of the people 
of Saskatchewan who obviously are not interested in seeing the nationalization of the potash industry go 
forward, but I am a little saddened as well by the fact that it's likely the last opportunity I'm going to 
have in second reading to debate the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have prepared very carefully my remarks, recognizing the amendment that is before us 
and recognizing the fact that I have already spoken to the original Motion. I have prepared my remarks 
very carefully because I don't want to stray from the intent of the amendment that has been put before 
us. I should like to take an opportunity just to refresh the memories of the Members of the House in 
terms of what the Motion says. 
 
The amendment, Mr. Speaker, indicates that Bill No. 1 be not now read a second time. That the subject 
matter of the Bill be referred to s special committee on the nationalization of potash and lists a number 
of Members of the House who ought to be on that committee. It indicates that the committee should 
have power to investigate the effect of the purchase and the ownership of potash mines by non-residents, 
foreign and corporate persons and government. This committee will have power to sit during the 
intersessional period and during any Legislative Session, except when the Assembly is sitting, and that 
notwithstanding certain sections, allowances and expenses shall be paid to Members of the committee 
when they are sitting. 
 
It says further that such a committee will have power to send for persons, papers and records and 
examine witnesses under 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1688 
 

oath; to receive representations from interested parties and from members of the general public, and for 
this purpose to hold meetings away from the seat of Government in order that the fullest representation 
may be received without unduly inconveniencing those desiring to be heard. And that the special 
committee be further instructed to submit its final report to the Assembly with all convenient speed. 
 
I read that, Mr. Speaker, very carefully when I prepared my remarks. I reread it and in attempting to 
come up with some reasonable logical way of expressing my views with regard to the amendment I have 
enumerated ten reasons, Mr. Speaker, ten reasons why I think that Members of this House ought to 
support the amendment. Now, I had another reason given to me this morning in response to the question 
from the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mrs. Edwards) and the reply given by the Attorney General 
which would really give us 11. I'll just deal with that one very briefly first. 
 
I think the reply that the Attorney General gave to the question about whether a firm had been hired to 
look for, to search out a manager for the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. His reply was that up until 
now there had been no one who has been hired. Now, he may have not said it in those words, but I think 
that's what he was getting at. That a search was done some time in the early part of November. I'm rather 
surprised in the light of that, that the Government wouldn't be quite anxious to accept this amendment. 
Now we have been told a number of times, Mr. Speaker, that this is a great deal, that this is a great new 
venture, that the Government's going to have no difficulty in getting people to operate it, that expertise is 
not going to be a problem. They have been over six weeks now, I understand offering a pretty fancy 
salary, I don't know for sure what it is, I expect it will be something in the range of $50,000 to $70,000. I 
don't know what you have to pay to get potash corporation executives. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — How much do you pay the city commissioner? 
 
MR. PENNER: — Not that much. Well, I'll tell you. It's about half. It's about half of $65,000 or 
$70,000 and I understand, I can understand that you would be upset about my reaction, about my 
comments about the fact that you are having difficulties hiring someone. It would seem to me that in the 
light of that, that it would be well worth your while and as I say I had ten reasons, this is the eleventh 
and I'll give it first. To give yourselves time to do a good search, to find out whether in fact you are able 
to get the expertise because we haven't had any indication yet that you are going to be able to get the 
expertise. But if we had an intersessional committee the Member for Saskatoon Centre says yeh, we 
have. We have got indications that we have the expertise. Well, you know if that's true then I think that 
this House and I think that the people of Saskatchewan ought to have some assurance that it is true. 
Certainly, an intersessional committee that would examine all of the implications would have an 
opportunity to bring that forward, Mr. Speaker, and be able to tell this House and be able to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan that the claim and that's all it has been, it's been a statement, we can get the 
expertise. No evidence. I think that in a matter as important as this one, as significant to the people of 
Saskatchewan as this one, that 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1689 
 

we should have the information presented to us, tell us. The only way that can happen before these Bills 
become law is ... I really don't care Herman, do you know that? I really don't care. 
 
I indicated a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, that I had ten reasons why I felt that the amendment should be 
supported, why I think that Members opposite should accept the amendment, why I think that Members 
to my left — thank you, there are at least two of you here this morning, it's good to see you sitting there 
— why we should have the support of the Members from my left as well. Because the amendment is 
very clear, it's very logical, it's very supportable. 
 
I support the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I think it's a very logical, a very reasonable approach to what is 
becoming the great potash situation in Saskatchewan. I know that those of you who are listening on the 
other side of the House are listening with bated breath and anticipation about what kinds of reasons I 
could possibly have for wanting to see this amendment accepted. 
 
The first reason is this. That the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to more information than they have 
now. They are entitled to the marketing and the economic analysis that the Government has done. That's 
the first reason. That the people of the province are entitled to more information than the Government 
has provided up until now. 
 
You know, it's important to understand in the debate so far we haven't heard from very many people on 
the other side of the House. We heard the Attorney General this morning say he's not afraid to debate. 
He even indicated he had some talent in debating. That may be. If it is, I invite the Attorney General to 
get up on the floor of the House, as we invited him to come out to the people of Saskatchewan and 
debate the issue. We heard that other Members on the other side have debating talent. We understand 
that the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation has some debating talent. If that's true I invite the 
Minister to get up and speak in the debate. I understand that the former Minister of Education and I keep 
forgetting what his new portfolio is, has some debating talent. We'd like to hear the Members of the 
Cabinet get up and tell us and tell the people of Saskatchewan why it is that the Government is going 
ahead with this takeover. On what basis have they made the decision? Where are the marketing studies? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Personal Privilege. I want to point out to the Hon. 
Member for Saskatoon that I spoke in this debate and if he'd like me to speak again in this debate if he 
sits down I might even make the attempt. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, that I said that about the former Minister of Education. I 
guess what he had to say didn't really impress me very much. I guess what I was really meaning was the 
Minister of Social Services, that I wished he would get up and I wished he would tell us a little bit about 
why it is that the Government of Saskatchewan is embarking on this potash nationalization. I still 
haven't had any real facts given. None at all. If you have studies, we implore you to give them 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1690 
 

to us. If you can show us that there are in fact some economic reasons . . . well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if 
you might ask the Member for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) that if he wants to get into the debate 
that he should get up and get into the debate when I'm done. We'd be delighted to see him get up and get 
into the debate. It would be the first time. We in Saskatoon went for four years and we had the silent 
whatever number it was, never got up, never said very much. We never heard very much about anything 
that was done. It would be nice to have him get up. I'd be delighted to see him get up and as soon as I sit 
down I hope that he'll do that. 
 
Now before I was interrupted, Mr. Speaker, I was trying to determine whether or not the Government 
has got any studies. Are there any marketing studies? Are there any economic studies to show how this 
move to nationalize the potash industry is in fact a realistic move. 
 
We have heard people comment, well now wait until we get into committee and maybe we might show 
you something. Well, I'll tell you, that's not good enough as far as we are concerned. Common sense. I 
don't know whether very many Members over there have got much but just a little bit of common sense 
would indicate that if in fact the Members opposite have some studies that they would at least in their 
comment that we'll discuss them in committee, hold them up and show them and say we've got them, but 
we don't want to do it here, this is a debate in principle, we'll debate it when we get into committee and 
you'll see what the story really is. Now we haven't even seen that. How long have we been going in this 
debate? A long time. Twenty days, 18 days, we may be going for a long while yet. I really don't know it 
depends on whether we can get this kind of information. Well let me give you the kind of information 
that is available. There are some facts available, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I'd like to hear them. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, that's good because you are going to hear them as a matter of fact whether you 
really want to or not. These are some of the facts that have been made available. Some of the facts. Now 
we don't know whether they are all of the facts or not but here are some of them. These are the facts that 
have been distributed by the potash companies. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Fairly presented too. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, I don't know. We would know though if they were fairly presented if we saw 
the kinds of facts and the kinds of studies that they have got. But have they shown them to us? No they 
haven't. Of course, they haven't. 
 
Well there has been a bit of a potash story told by the potash companies. Since they are the only facts we 
have got to go on I guess we have to assume they are the only facts around. We haven't had any facts 
presented to counter them, so let's listen and see what is said. 
 
It says: 
 

That potash along with nitrogen and phosphate is a major 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1691 
 

ingredient in the fertilizer family so necessary to enrich the land in certain areas of the 
world to provide the farmer with a greater crop yield. As the map would indicate (and 
there is a map here and it tells about where you get the potash and where it's marketed 
and so on) and figures above show the reserves of potash in the world are enormous. 
Productive capacity however must be increased to supply growing world demand. 

 
MR. SKOBERG: — Is that the second one or first one? 
 
MR. PENNER: — No, that's the first one and there are four. I'm on the first one. I'll keep you up to 
date, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

To meet the challenge new production facilities will be required. Where will these be 
located? 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I'll tell you Mr. Attorney General I had the comment made earlier by my friend the 
Member for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) and he pointed up and said only one and I really don't 
care. I really don't care. Well, that's fine. I'm really not concerned about that. You see the people whom I 
really hope will learn to care, are the people on the other side of the House. One of the things I am 
beginning to learn in Opposition is a very important lesson that I hope I will not forget when we form 
the government. That is to learn to be sensitive to people. To learn to be sensitive to what's going on out 
there, and not to become cloistered in, you know, a closely knit little group who do not really care about 
the people out there. That's a lesson I hope I'm not going to forget. It's a lesson that I see that you people 
have already forgotten. 

Now where will the potash be located then? Where are all these reserves located? Are 
they all in Saskatchewan? No, not necessarily. 

 
This fact sheet says. 
 

Eastern Europe and Russia are rapidly expanding their potash production. Modernization 
of existing mines is under way in West Germany and France. There are known deposits 
in Thailand, in Laos and Brazil and Jordan which could become economically attractive 
as world demand increases. 

 
I'd like to know what position the Government has with regard to that. How do you analyse that kind of 
information? How have you justified in your own minds the fact that you are going to take money from 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, and you are going to pay corporations who presently exist in Saskatchewan, 
allow them to go out into the world markets whether they be in North Dakota or Montana or whether 
they be in Brazil or Thailand or New Brunswick, use our money and become our competitors. What's 
the rationalization for that? How have you justified that in your minds? We should like to hear that and 
hopefully there will be a speaker or two who will get up and talk about that. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1692 
 

Clearly Saskatchewan does not have a monopoly on potash reserves or production. I think that we would 
all accept that, that's a matter of fact. Nor have we any guaranteed position in the international market 
place. 
 
Now recognizing that, what do your marketing analyses show you? What have they shown you with 
regard to markets five years down the road, ten years down the road, fifteen years down the road? 
Maybe that's too far, maybe you can't get an analysis that far down the road. But at least over the next 
five years. 
 
Well, that's the first sheet my friend, the Member for Moose Jaw North, now let's go on to the second. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Two? 
 
MR. PENNER: — No there are four, this is the second one now. I hope the notes that you are taking are 
good notes. 
 
Saskatchewan, it says on this sheet and I won't read it all. I'm not interested in delaying things in here, 
but I want to make a few points, so I'm not going to read it all, but there are a couple of paragraphs on 
this sheet that I've got underlined. 
 

Saskatchewan is the largest individual producer and exporter of potash in the free world. 
 
But, I guess we all knew that. 
 

But we can't hope to maintain our position without expansion. Expansion which was 
planned by the industry. Expansion which is stalled by high taxes. Expansion which may 
fail if undertaken by amateurs. 

 
Well, what you are prepared to do as owners of the potash industry in Saskatchewan with regard to 
expansion? Where are your economic studies. Have you done any economic studies? What kind of 
guarantee do you have that we are not going to have another branch of bureaucracy that's handled by a 
bunch of amateurs? You have been running around the country, maybe you have been running around 
internationally looking for someone to head up the Potash Corporation. 
 
The Attorney General indicated to us this morning that so far you haven't found anybody yet, despite 
very high salaries offered. What guarantee that it's not going to be handled by amateurs? An 
intersessional committee would give you an opportunity to show the people of Saskatchewan and if you 
are really serious about your ability to do it all, you wouldn't be afraid of an intersessional committee. 
 

Anticipated increases in world prices could make the development of productive capacity 
and expansion of existing facilities economically attractive for potash producers in other 
parts of the world. 

 
Saskatchewan's hard earned share of the world potash markets is not captive. Unless 
present tax loads are eased to permit expansion Saskatchewan will lose its competitive 
edge and our customers will look to other suppliers for their increasing needs. 

 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1693 
 

Well what have you done with regard to the business of competition? What kinds of studies have you 
done to indicate that you have even thought of that, that you have even looked at it? 
 
Now surely to goodness the Attorney General wouldn't be bringing a Bill through the House if they 
hadn't thought of that. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Yes, he is. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, but that's pretty fundamental. You know, it is, it's really pretty fundamental to 
the whole business. I would think the Attorney General and he's a fairly bright individual, at least I have 
always felt that, would have some kind of study and I don't think that it's asking too much for this 
House, for the people of Saskatchewan to see those studies. It would be interesting to see them 
compared to the study they have done of the Bredenbury mine. Maybe lots of the answers about why 
they are buying all the industry in Saskatchewan are related to what the studies of the Bredenbury mine 
situation told them. That's only speculation obviously, but it would be great to hear it. It would be great 
to know. 
 
Well to my friend the Member for Moose Jaw North I just turned to fact sheet No. 3. Now remember 
please Hon. Members that these are fact sheets that are not provided by the Government. They are fact 
sheets that have been provided by the industry. Remember too that this first reason that I have given 
why we ought to have an intersessional committee is because we need some more facts. 
 
This one says this: 
 

To build and operate a potash mine successfully . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I just take this opportunity to, I am sure I don't have to remind the Member 
that he spoke on the main motion, he spoke on the first amendment, he's now speaking on the second 
amendment. Therefore, he must confine his remarks solely to why he believes that the subject matter of 
this Bill should be referred to a special committee to study the matter. I have been listening very 
carefully for quite some time now and I'm not able to connect it to what you are supposed to be 
debating. Perhaps the Member can make the connection. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to point out initially and I certainly don't want to do anything 
that is against the regulations of the House. But I tried to point out that in looking at the amendment, I 
felt that in order to be fair to the intent of the amendment, which says that we ought to refer the question 
to an intersessional committee, that I should then give reasons why I feel that way. The first reason I 
have given is, that I feel that we need more facts. And what I am doing, Mr. Speaker, is showing that 
while we have had some facts from people who are party to the total question, that is the potash 
industry, we haven't had very many facts come from the Government yet. That is where I am at in terms 
of trying to keep this very closely in line with the intent of the amendment. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak to 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1694 
 

the Point of Order for a moment? I suggest to you, respectfully, both on behalf of my colleague and also 
because I have some comments to make later in the day about the amendment that the second paragraph 
and the fourth paragraph of the amendment are the broadening paragraphs of the amendment. Now I 
don't say that you may not be right in this particular instance at this particular time, but I know that Your 
Honour is viewing the matter. Those are the broadening paragraphs, I suggest. I may at some time be 
arguing that position to you further. 
 
The second position particularly, in asking an investigation of the effects of the purchase and so on, I 
think broadens into some examination of the facts. Not anything like as broad and far reaching an 
address for instance as was presented to you by the Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley yesterday. 
But a broader effect than simply a direction to an intersessional committee. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The interesting aspect of the debate yesterday was that the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley was speaking on the main motion and the amendment, so he had complete latitude. If 
the Members are to interpret a Resolution, the broadening aspects as you refer to of the Resolution was 
before us as a licence to talk about the whole issue again when they have already spoken about it twice, 
then I am certainly going to have to look more closely at what kind of amendments I allow in the House. 
I would say that the Member has to consistently relate to why he thinks this should be referred to the 
committee. I agree with the Member, I heard his initial comments about why he should have a 
committee, but then the Member might have been debating the original motion later on because I was 
unable to make the connection. That is the point I was making, that the Member should consistently 
relate to why. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize that in terms of debate in the House I am new 
to this. As I said I am trying to relate to reasons why I feel that there should be a referral and I expect 
that if I begin to stray that you will let me know. 
 
The point that I was making then in terms of this business of facts about the potash nationalization, facts 
which I feel the Government needs to provide to us, facts, which in my mind as yet the Government has 
not provided, indicate that there is no highly trained pool of experts around to run a complicated industry 
like the potash industry. I think that it is incumbent upon the Members opposite despite the fact that they 
are not particularly interested in listening to what I am saying this morning, I think it is still incumbent 
upon them to give us an opportunity to find out whether in fact there have been studies done; whether or 
not in fact expertise is available. 
 
MR. LANE: — The committee might be able to find out. 
 
MR. PENNER: — That is right. If it were referred to an intersessional committee, at least we would 
have the assurance of that intersessional committee. 
 
I think another thing, Mr. Speaker, that the intersessional committee would be able to do it would be 
able to clarify the 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1695 
 

position with regard to the tax question. There has been a lot of talk and a lot of debate about the 
question of the tax matter. I am on fact sheet number four now, Mr. Member for Moose Jaw North. I 
think the business about the tax matter is extremely important. 
 

Since the early 1960s potash companies have been faced with a series of tax increases 
and the most recent has been the reserve tax. It was introduced by the Government in '74 
and it is the one tax that threatens to break the potash camel's back. 

 
It goes on to say, and 
 

the graph shows how taxes have increased since 1962. 
 
This is the way the potash industry puts it. As I say they are the only facts we have got to date. What 
facts do the Members on the other side of the House have to put forward? It goes on: 
 

In 1972 a prorationing fee was levied, it doubled in 1973. It was about this time that 
potash companies emerging from a soft market situation and moved toward capacity 
production and began to plan for expansion. Then came the reserve tax, November 1974, 
made retroactive to July of the same year. Last month without warning the provincial 
government announced its plan to take over effective control of the industry. 

 
If your business was faced with a similar situation would you fight to protect your 
investment and your future or would you pack it in and move elsewhere? The potash 
industry has chosen to stand firm. 

 
We think, Mr. Speaker, at least, I believe, that reason number one, the reason why we need to refer this 
matter to an intersessional committee is clear. There are some facts around. Most of those facts have 
been produced and made available to the people of Saskatchewan by people other than those sitting on 
the other side of the House. I think it is incumbent upon them to complete the story. Let's see it all. An 
intersessional committee will give us an opportunity to do that. 
 
I want to go on to my second reason. If the Member for Moose Jaw North is still taking notes, heading 
number two, you can call it if you like and then we will go on from there. People of the province have 
been continually asking questions about what this thing is all about. I suppose this reason, Mr. Speaker, 
is related to the first reason. The fact that there aren't very many facts around would lead us logically to 
say, that people are then going to be starting to ask some questions. What kinds of questions are being 
asked? What kinds of questions could an intersessional committee look at? 
 
An intersessional committee might begin by asking first of all, why? Why is the Government interested 
in nationalizing the potash industry? People have been asking me that question. I tell them I haven't had 
an answer yet. I haven't had a reasonable answer from the other side of the House yet. We have been 
going for five weeks. So I have to guess. Now I don't think that as a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly in discharging my responsibilities to the people in my constituency that when I am 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1696 
 

asked that question I should have to guess the answer. But my guess is that they are interested in state 
control. Because there hasn't been any other answer given. I guess they are interested in state control. 
I look over the last few years. I look at the Land Bank; the oil industry. I look at the remark that was 
made by the Minister of Natural Resources when he was speaking in Saskatoon after the NDP 
Convention when he was asked by a reporter, "Is it safe to assume now that all other industries in the 
province are going to be left alone?" and he said in the long-term it isn't safe to assume anything. He was 
concerned about uranium. I think we need an intersessional committee to start giving some answers. 
Why is the Government embarked on this kind of a crash course with disaster? Because that is all it is. 
Until the people on the other side of the House are prepared to get up off their rear ends and tell us why 
they must do it and justify it in their own minds, and justify it so that it looks at least reasonable even 
though we may never support it in principle; and justify it so that the people of Saskatchewan can 
understand it, then you are abrogating your responsibilities to the people of this province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we need an intersessional committee to tell us why. Somebody suggested to me the 
other day that the bedrooms of the province aren't even safe any more. Maybe that is overstating it, 
maybe that was my reaction too. Maybe I groaned and said, oh, come on now, that is going a bit too far. 
But there are people out there talking that way. There are people who are talking about the motive of the 
Government being state control. Is that the reason? If it isn't then come out and tell us the reason. Give 
us some justification. Get out some studies and show us why it is a reasonable move for the people of 
Saskatchewan to take. Don't just sit there hiding behind the curtain of government and not get up and 
debate it. 
 
There is another question that has been asked. I think it is another question, Mr. Speaker, that as far as I 
am concerned an intersessional committee ought to ask, and it ought to give an answer. That is, how 
much money? We have asked that question in the House and we have read an answer in the newspapers 
and we have heard it in the House. The Premier has said, ladies and gentlemen of Saskatchewan, 
Members opposite it is going to cost you between $500 million and $1 billion. I will tell you that is 
really great. That only allows for a 100 per cent error. That doesn't tell us how much of the industry 
either. I would suspect that that might buy one or two mines or three maybe when you look at inflated 
rates, inflated costs. What part of the industry is $500 million to $1 billion really going to buy for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
I know that the people of Saskatchewan, and most of them are like me, they don't understand big money. 
Talk about a billion dollars, it boggles my mind, I can't even picture it, I can't picture what $500 million 
is all about either. All I know is that it is a lot of money. 
 
How do you justify spending $500 million to $1 billion? I ask the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. 
Dyck) what justification has he got for that? How does he justify that in a logical sequential reason? I 
challenge him if he does have an answer, to get up off his rear end in this House and tell us what the 
answer is. If he can't do it then have one of his 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1697 
 

colleagues get up and do it. 
 
C.D. Howe a few years ago, in the great pipeline debate, made the statement, "What's a million". I think 
we all know what happened to him. Here in Saskatchewan, a few years later we have the Premier come 
into the House and on the media and when asked what is this going to cost the people of Saskatchewan, 
between $500 million and $1 billion. In effect what is $500 million? 
 
I think there would be an opportunity if we had an intersessional committee to study the economics of 
that. To take a look at the debt the province already has. I think the debt the province has right now, Mr. 
Premier, and if I am wrong, I know you will correct me, is about $900 million, a little less. Some of that 
is liquid debt, or self-liquidating some of it is a dead weight debt or whatever. I don't care whether it is 
self-liquidating or unliquidating, it is debt. What is being suggest to me is that we double the debt. If we 
are going to double the debt let's see some figures economically given that justify it. We haven't seen 
any yet. That gets back to the marketing studies, the first reason why I suggested we ought to have an 
intersessional committee. 
 
I think the suggestion that the Premier gave when he was asked the question what is the amount of 
money that this is going to cost, and he said between $500 million and $1 billion is an affront to this 
House and an insult to the intelligence of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I think there is another darn good question that an intersessional committee could 
address itself to. And that is where is the money coming from? Is it coming from investors in North 
American, is it coming from investors in Europe, is it money that is going to be coming from those big 
bad multinational groups? Where is the money coming from? 
 
Another question, what will the interest rate be? Are we going to get it at 10.25 per cent, or 10.50 per 
cent. Is it going to be 11 per cent? You know when you start talking about those great big huge fantastic 
sums of money that I said a little while ago, I really don't understand — I understand it well enough to 
know that a half per cent on a billion dollars or $500 million is a pile of money. What is the interest rate 
going to be? A committee might be able to find out. I think we need the answers to those kinds of 
questions before we get into the kind of position that Bill 1 is going to put us into. 
 
I think another question that we need to have an answer for is what kind of money do the mines make 
right now, what kind of income? What kind of a statement can you give us indicating what the profit of 
these mines really is? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it is strange but this debate has been going on in this House now for four 
weeks, there hasn't been a statement from the other side of the House yet about what the financial 
situation of the mines is right now. I suppose there are some mines in this province, Mr. Speaker, it is 
fair to say that would just dearly love to sell out because they are not doing very well. I have got some 
figures here that 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1698 
 

represent, I think a fairly average kind of Saskatchewan potash mine. I think that it is important that 
when we look at reasons why this thing should be referred to a committee that Members on the other 
side of the House have a chance to think about this. I think there are some Members on the other side of 
the House who haven't really done very much thinking about this whole thing. They have sat day after 
day, but they haven't thought much about it. 
 
Here is a potash mine that is producing 1.2 million tons of product. It cost about $100 million to 
construct and is valued at a minimum of $225 million today. That is an average potash mine. For the 
fiscal year '74-75 its profit and loss statement is as follows. The volume of the product about 1.2 million 
tons; revenue at $42 a ton — $50.4 million. Cost of doing business and here I am talking about the 
wages and the supplies and the sales and the costs and everything else about $18.65 million. Gross profit 
before taxes $31.75 million. Those figures are out. And the Premier would know whether those figures 
are out or not. And I invite him to stand up in the debate and tell us what the figures are. Give us an 
indication of what the actual financial situation of these potash mines really is. So we can find out 
whether in fact we are or are not buying a pig in a poke. 
 
Let's go on, provincial taxes in millions. Royalties about $.98 million. Prorationing charges $1.5 million; 
mineral tax $.14 million; lease rental $.02 million; E & H tax $.43 million; provincial corporation tax 
$5.56 million; reserve tax $11.6 million. A total of $15.23 million. Municipal tax on top of that. 
 
Another thing this intersessional committee could look at is, what is the position going to be of the 
potash mines once owned by the Government? I think that the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. 
MacMurchy) might be able to answer this, if he has answered it forgive me. I have forgotten the answer. 
What is the position going to be with regard to local taxation once these mines are no longer paying 
taxes as private companies to municipalities. Is the province going to pick that up and pay that out to the 
municipalities? That is a pretty important question for me. My school unit has a couple of potash mines 
in it and it has a pretty significant impact upon the revenue that is collected. Not only as far as the school 
unit is concerned but upon the revenue collected by the municipalities in that area. I wonder if we might 
have that clarified, Mr. Speaker, if that money is going to be paid in lieu of taxes then we had better add 
that to the cost factor, because that is then going to be paid out by the people of Saskatchewan. Right 
now the companies are paying that out to the municipalities. You and I as taxpayers are going to start 
paying that, if in fact there are going to be grants in lieu of taxes paid out to the municipalities. 
 
Well, as I was saying, we have got municipal tax, we have got federal corporation tax, depreciation at 
let's say five per cent and so the net profit for this mine, an average 1974-75 profit for this mine is $6.95 
million. 
 
Now let's take a look at another statement, this is profit and loss statement for the same mine after 
government takeover, based on no loss of market or of efficiency. This statement is predicated on the 
Government paying $225 million for the 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1699 
 

mine. I think that is too low a figure, it is likely going to be higher. If we are talking about $500 million 
we are probably talking about a mine and a half, maybe two. If we are talking about $1 billion, we are 
maybe talking about three mines, just that everybody understands what we are really into. Revenue of 
$50.4 million, cost of doing business, $18.6 million, gross profit before taxes, depreciation and interest 
payments, $31.75; municipal tax $.43 million; interest on $225 million at 10.5 — there's an assumption 
that it is going to be 10.5 per cent interest rate — it may not be — it might 10.25 per cent, it might be 11 
or 11.25 per cent; I don't know. Nobody has told us. The committee might be able to tell us, maybe they 
could find out some of the answers that the Government hasn't been prepared to put to the House. 
 
This statement is predicated on the assumption of 10.5 per cent interest rates, depreciation is five per 
cent for 20 years, and that again is an assumption. We don't know for how long this whole business is 
going to be amortized, it might be 20 years, it might be 30 years, maybe 15, I don't know. Nobody has 
told us. A committee might be able to find out. Anyway depreciation is five per cent for 20 years, 
$11.25 million net profit $8.27 million. Repayment of principal over 20 years $11.25 million, cash flow 
to the Government for the first 20 years, minus $2.98 million. 
 
I say to the Government Members, the Attorney General, the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the 
Minister of Finance if he was here, we don't see very much of him. The Premier he's here. If this is 
wrong, if this does not represent a true picture, but we think it does, then tell us what the true picture 
really is. What in fact is the position of the potash mines today that you are interested in nationalizing? 
Because we would sure like to know. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — So would the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Yes, I think the people of Saskatchewan would be interested too. 
 
Well, these are the kinds of questions. I am speaking now on reasons why there ought to be an 
intersessional committee and one of the reasons it seems to me is because there are lots of questions that 
we haven't had any answers to. I have just gone through some of them. 
 
I get all kinds of questions, these are questions that have come to me from people who stop me on the 
street, they don't all stand there and ask all six or whatever number I listed. Those are the kinds of 
questions I hear, when I go out for an evening. Those are the kinds of questions I hear when people 
phone me, when they write to me. Yes I have had some letters. You know there is a song, lots and lots of 
letters. Well I have had a number of letters. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Read some of them! 
 
MR. PENNER: — No, I better not do that. A couple of days ago when the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley was speaking he talked about the kind of communication he had had from people in his 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1700 
 

constituency. I was interested in the Attorney General, he sat over there and he held up two hands, one 
with five fingers and the other with two. He said, "I have had five letters for it and two against." Well I 
am doing almost as well. I have had four letters for it. He has five letters in favor of the potash takeover. 
He is the Attorney General of Saskatchewan, I'm just little "ole MLA Penner from Saskatoon Eastview. 
I have just as many letters in favor of the potash nationalization as he has. But you know, I have had a 
few more opposing than he has. He said he had two. Well, I have had all kinds of communication from 
people who are concerned and upset. If I were to give you a ratio, I am not going to exaggerate that ratio 
one little bit. I want to tell the Attorney General and the Members opposite that we are looking at a ratio 
of 10 to 1 who are opposed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I see the Attorney General laugh. I am not surprised, I knew he would sit there and 
laugh. The reason he is sitting there and laughing is because he doesn't really stop to analyze the 
situation. He knows darn well that he has become in effect, rather cloistered, because he doesn't really 
listen, it is that insensitivity that I talked about a little while ago, a lesson that I have already learned, and 
I hope Members of my caucus have learned. When we become government, we are not going to forget 
that lesson, we are still going to listen. We are going to be open to the people of Saskatchewan. We are 
going to invite them to comment, whether we are right or whether we are wrong. I have written letters to 
every person who has written to me and said they support it. I said good for you for expressing your 
point of view. 
 
I want to tell the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale the ratio without exaggeration is between 8 and 10 to 
1 who oppose it. I have letters from people who are opposed. I should like to give you an indication of 
some of the things they are saying in the letters in which they are opposed. 
 
Here is one letter . . . 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The first one is in favor! 
 
MR. PENNER: — No, as a matter of fact the first one is a second letter that is opposed from the same 
person. Yes, he is so concerned he has written twice! He happens to be the only one who has done that. 
If you want me to read them both, Mr. Member for Quill Lakes, I'll do that. If he would prefer, maybe 
he would like to see them afterward and save me the time and the trouble of the House to read them 
both. I really hadn't intended even to read all of one, I really only intended to read a couple of 
paragraphs of each. I am not interested in wasting the time of the House. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sit down! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I will when I am done. If you keep interrupting me I will be longer and longer, just 
let me get on with it. 
 

On several occasions, both you and the Government 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1701 
 

have made references which leads me to believe you feel you are talking and acting on 
behalf of the majority of the people of the province. 

 
This letter is a copy of a letter addressed to the Premier. It goes on to say: 
 

This to me seems very much like an overstatement or maybe a matter of somebody 
having forgotten the last election results. The fact of the matter is that the NDP suffered a 
setback of elected representatives to the House as well as only polling less than 40 per 
cent of the votes cast. Under these circumstances I feel it is very questionable to talk in 
these terms and thus leave this kind of impression both in and outside of the province. 

 
Then in the last paragraph — the Member for Quill Lake, I hope you are listening to me. He says: 
 

These are some of the points I wish to bring to your attention. In conclusion I should like 
to make a suggestion. If you believe, if you are fully convinced that you are acting in the 
best interest of the people of our province, please take it to them. Call for a plebiscite. 
Ask the people if they are interested in investing and operating potash mines. I am not so 
sure that this was part of the mandate you were given in the last election. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the amazing things about Members opposite is as I said a minute ago, 
they really don't give a darn what the people of Saskatchewan think, nor are they particularly interested 
in getting the facts out to the people of Saskatchewan. We have made many suggestions about how you 
can get this out and let the people of the province know what you are doing. 
 
The Attorney General laughed a minute ago when I said the ratio is 8 to 10 to 1. Stop and think for a 
minute. Mr. Speaker, 80.3 per cent of the people who were eligible to vote in the last election got up and 
voted and of that 80.3 per cent, 40.7 of them voted for you. You put it around another way, six out of 
every ten people in the Province of Saskatchewan who are adult and of voting age did not support you. 
Let's also recognize the fact that there are some people who are NDP members in the Province of 
Saskatchewan who supported you in the last election who are opposed to the potash nationalization. You 
know it, and I know it, if you don't know it, it is only because you haven't been listening. 
 
I have had people come up to me and say, look I voted NDP in the lat election, they never indicated that 
that's what they were going to do. I said, of course they never indicated that that's what they were going 
to do. That's the ploy of government, you get in and then you tell the people what you are going to do. 
They did with the Power Corporation rates. They knew what the rate increases were gong to be before 
the election. What did they do? They said there would be some increases. You knew what the rate 
increases were going to be. You say that are justifiable, there is no problem in having people understand 
that they were needed. They weren't announced beforehand, however. They were announced after. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1702 
 

The same thing applies here. Of course they weren't going to come out and say we are going to 
nationalize the potash industry. They are going to say afterwards, if they were elected and you were. Oh 
no, we have got 40.7 per cent of the popular vote, the people out there like us, they elected us. Now we 
are going to do it. We are not going to tell anybody we are going to do it. We are not even going to give 
the people any reasons why we are going to do it. We are just going to do it. We are going to do it 
because we are the Government. We are going to do it because we decided we wanted to do it. We are 
not concerned about what the implications are for the province, we are not concerned about the kind of 
debt this province is going to be in. We are not concerned about the fact that this may frighten off 
investment, that this may kill the province. We don't care about that, we know this is our last term in 
office, we are not going to get re-elected in 1979 anyway. So let's do it! Well, I don't think those are 
good enough reasons. 
I will tell you they are the only kind of reasons available to be given, because in the time that we have 
been in this House we haven't had any other reasons given. But a committee might. I am not even sure 
that a committee could get the answers but at least there is a chance. We have tried a number of ways to 
get some of these reasons. We suggested in another amendment that there should be a study, that was 
defeated. We have proposed this amendment, all it says is, let's get the facts out. I don't see anything the 
matter with getting the facts out. I think it is a pretty reasonable approach. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Unless you are afraid of the facts! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Unless there are none! That's a possibility, it could be that there are no facts. I have 
seen Members over there really excited about this amendment, between their sleeping and reading of the 
paper. They are obviously enthused about this amendment, it is pretty clear what is going to happen to 
this amendment, it is going to be defeated. Somebody over there said, defeat it, so it will be defeated. 
There aren't many reasons given why it is going to be defeated Gordon, ... I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I 
called the Minister, my friend, the Minister of Municipal Affairs by his first name. He says, he was the 
one who told them. 
 
We proposed another way of getting the story out to the people, let's go out and debate the issue. The 
letter was sent from the leader of our caucus to the Premier, suggesting that we go out and debate. The 
Attorney General got up this morning and said, we're not interested in providing a forum for leadership 
candidates. I think that's what he said. I want him to know, that he is right in one thing, when we 
proposed that idea we had 15 people to challenge the Cabinet Members. If he says we have 15 
leadership candidates on this side of the House, he is absolutely right. It was another attempt to get the 
story out to try to get the people of the province to understand the answers to some of the questions they 
have been asking and are getting no answers. I think that is one of the things that a committee could do 
and could do very well. 
 
How many reasons have I given why we ought to . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You haven't given . . . 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1703 
 

MR. PENNER: — I have. But I just want to review and make sure that we don't lose track of where we 
are at. I suggested that we needed initially to get answers to some questions; I suggested that we are 
entitled to more information. Those two really go hand in hand, if we had more information, an 
intersessional committee could get that information, then the intersessional committee would be able to 
give the answers to the kinds of questions that the people of the province are asking. If that were to 
happen, then we could get on with the third reason why I think this committee should have the 
opportunity to study the question. 
 
That is the attitude that some of the Members opposite have shown toward this whole business of 
nationalization. I think that the kinds of things that have been said by some Members of the Government 
opposite deserve time to be cleared up. I don't know why I am arguing for the Members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. When I wrote this down I wondered how I would justify this. But I really think that some of the 
Members opposite need time to get things cleared up, get the air cleared and an intersessional committee 
would give them a chance to do that. One of the Members opposite I am thinking of who needs to have 
the air cleared a little bit — I noticed in last night's Star-Phoenix that he tried — the Member for 
Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway). I noticed in an article, December 5, that the Saskatoon Centre NDP 
MLA went after the Saskatoon Board of Trade. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Again! 
 
MR. PENNER: — This was the time. I don't think he would ever do it again, but he did it on December 
5. He said a few things that I think indicate why I feel there should be some time given the Members 
opposite a chance to clear the air and why I think in this intersessional committee would allow some 
time for that to happen. It is not directly related, Mr. Speaker, but I think it is an indirect by-product that 
a committee of that sort might be able to provide for them. I quote from the Star-Phoenix, I expect the 
Member has memorized it: 
 

Saskatoon Centre MLA Paul Mostoway is calling for the Provincial Government to stop 
supporting the Saskatoon Board of Trade because of the Board's advertising campaign 
against the Government's potash policies. 

 
In a statement released Thursday, Mr. Mostoway described the ad campaign as 
irresponsible misrepresentation and outright dishonesty. 

 
The Board's ad campaign has homed in on arguments that the potash takeover plan would 
be a bad business deal for the province. By jumping onto the potash issue the Board is 
abrogating its responsibilities to its Members and to the public. 

 
The Saskatoon Centre MLA also said he disagreed with the one ad which suggested that 
several hundred million dollars collected in the Energy Development Fund could be used 
to lower provincial taxes rather than to purchase potash mines. This fund is to be used for 
resource expansion and exploration he said. Any 

 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1704 
 

attempt to use it for other purposes would be to contravene the Federal-Provincial 
agreement. However that opinion appears to contradict earlier statements by Provincial 
Government officials including Premier Allan Blakeney. 

 
Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, it is only fair that if in fact the Members opposite are so jumpy and nervous 
about this question, that when some organization comes out and opposes it, that they have to react as he 
did, then I think indeed there is need to clear the air. I think indeed there is a need for time to get some 
answers. I think I am a little concerned about what in fact is being hidden, what is being covered up. I 
don't know whether there is or not. Surely to goodness if this is as great a move as we are told it is, there 
wouldn't be any reason for Members opposite to get as jumpy and as nervous about some opposition to 
it as we have heard. 
 
The Attorney General got into the act a little bit too. He suggested that Saskatoon wasn't going to get the 
head office if the Board of Trade kept that up. Now that is not really the kind of thing I would expect the 
Attorney General to say. Why in the world are the Attorney General and the Member for Saskatoon 
Centre so nervous about this thing. Why are they concerned about the Board of Trade in Saskatoon 
going out and raising its money, using no money from memberships, no money from the province, no 
money from the city of Saskatoon in order to conduct a campaign about something it felt very strongly 
about. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No money from the potash companies! 
 
MR. PENNER: — That's right, no money from the potash companies, they raised it alone. Now the 
Attorney General smiles. I don't know whether that smile means he doesn't believe it, maybe it's part of 
that insensitivity, the cloistered feeling, not really knowing what is going on. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I don't like criticism. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I see, you don't like criticism of any kind or take criticism of any kind. Well, you 
know, I don't accept that. I think criticism is a great thing and when I think people are on the right course 
and when I think people know that what they are doing is right, they don't get jumpy and they don't get 
nervous about a little bit of criticism. They accept, they say okay, there has been some criticism, now 
here are the facts. They can counter them and they can counter them well, because they have got the 
story. They can go out and they can tell the people, they can convince the people. 
 
But has the Government opposite done that? Of course not. We still haven't even had questions 
answered as to why. We haven't had any questions yet about how much money, any answers. Yes, we 
have had $500 million to $1 billion. That's no answer to the cost, that doesn't tell us how much, how 
many mines, that doesn't tell us about the percentage, what it is going to be on the returns tax, or the 
interest rate. So I think we really need to provide a little bit of time and the intersessional committee 
would do that, Mr. Speaker. So that people like the Attorney General and the Member for Saskatoon 
Centre would have 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1705 
 

an opportunity to clear the air. 
 
You know there was an interesting little article about how some people in this case, one individual, 
reacted to what Mr. Mostoway said. Here is a little article in the letterbox of the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix: 
 

So Paul Mostoway wants the Provincial Government to stop paying its contribution to the 
Saskatoon Board of Trade. His reasoning behind the statement is that if the Board of 
Trade is critical of the Government's potash takeover plan then the Government should 
not support the Board of Trade. In short members should not have to support 
organizations they disagree with. Does that mean, Mr. Mostoway, that I, as a member of 
the taxpaying public should stop my financial support of the Provincial Government if I 
don't agree with its plans? I would be only too happy (the letter goes on to say) to inform 
the Provincial Department of Taxation that I will not be paying my provincial income tax 
next. Or should I forget my democratic right of self expression as Mr. Mostoway seems 
to want the Board of Trade to do? 

 
Now I know that Mr. Mostoway has written a letter back to the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. I think it was in 
last night's paper that there was a reply in which he attempted to clarify his point of view and attempted 
to say, now look, that's really not what I was saying and so on, you know. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . make it worse. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, no, I don't think it made it worse. But all my point is, Mr. Speaker, that we are 
in a situation now where I think we need to give these people time to allow the air to be cleared. 
 
Well, having given three reasons why I feel that this amendment is a good amendment and realizing I 
have ten to give I would like to get on to number four. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Before I give the reasons let's just review again where we are at. First of all I said 
the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to more information than we have got already. Secondly, the 
people of Saskatchewan are continually asking questions that are fundamental to the issue and they 
haven't had any answers yet. If we get more information we will obviously be able to answer the 
questions. Thirdly, the attitude of some Members opposite have been a bit jumpy, a bit nervous and I 
think there should be a little bit of time to allow the air to be cleared. Now if you don't want to agree 
with that particular reason I can understand that, because as I said before I don't really know why I 
should be concerned about the feelings of the Attorney General or the Member for Saskatoon Centre, it 
is just that they are both pretty good people, I know them pretty well, and I don't want them to be jumpy 
and nervous. I would like them to be able to get up and tell the people of Saskatoon. After all they are 
MLAs as I am from the city of Saskatoon, we have a collective responsibility to get the information to 
the people of Saskatoon, and I would like the people of Saskatoon to 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1706 
 

get the information and an intersessional committee would allow that because they might be able to get 
some information. 
 
Now let's go on to reason number four. We are talking about using the taxpayers' money in the Province 
of Saskatchewan to pay out to corporations who own potash mines, we are then going to take out money 
out of the Province of Saskatchewan, and are going to invest it in other mines either in Canada or in the 
United States, or in Thailand or in South America to get into the competitive market place, and I haven't 
seen any reason why that makes any sense. I haven't seen one iota of a reason why that makes any sense. 
Why I should take money out of my pocket as a taxpayer in Saskatchewan, pay it to a potash corporation 
— I wish it was only going to be a dime — it is going to be thousands and thousands of dollars every 
year for years to pay if off, so that they can go and be competitive with Saskatchewan. Now that really 
doesn't make very much sense. I don't know if anybody over there understand it but it is like saying and 
you know that I have had some people saying to me that I am not interested in misrepresenting anything. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — That would be different . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — Oh, my goodness. You know the Minister of Labour got up yesterday evening and 
he spoke in a reasonably intelligent way. I was really impressed that was the first time I ever heard him 
up, saying anything of any substance. I accept the fact that somebody probably prepared it for him. I 
wish I could get somebody to prepare my speeches for me, I have to do it all by myself. But the delivery 
— I am glad that makes the Premier happy, I'm delighted about that — but I felt, you know, now there is 
a pretty intelligent presentation. He got up, he read, he could be heard, he could be understood. I know it 
wasn't his thoughts, somebody else got them for him, but I thought he really knew where it was at. But 
when you make the kind of statement that you just did, then I've got to wonder. You know, you suggest, 
for example, that I am different from the others. I am not any different from the others, we are all trying 
to get some information. I am no different from the other people in Saskatchewan who are asking me 
these kind of questions. The only reason I am asking these kinds of questions is because they ask me 
these kinds of questions. 
 
The other day I had somebody come up to me and he said, you know, buying the potash industry in this 
province makes about as much sense as going out to buy some milk at the corner store when you already 
own the cow. Now that's a pretty simple analogy and I think it makes some sense. I had somebody else 
telephone me yesterday and it was a little bit different, it was an analogy like this one. He said, suppose 
there were to farmers. This is what this potash nationalization meant to him. Suppose there are two 
farmers, farmer A and farmer B. Farmer A has got a fair amount of land and he has got a quarter section 
of his land that is under water. It's swamp, it is no good and he can't use it for anything. Farmer B comes 
along and wants to buy it. Farmer A says okay you can have it, it's no good to me and I don't want it and 
he pays him for it. Now farmer B gets that land and he does a little bit of thinking about the land and 
about the problem he has got. He engages a couple of people who are experts in hydrology and they 
advise him that if he does this and this and this and gets that and does that, that he could drain that land. 
He finds out in 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1707 
 

addition that if he does drain the land it is pretty good land. He could use it for farming and so he goes 
out and reinvests. He gets the pumps and the pipes and all the other things that he needs and brings them 
back and he gets that land so that it really is good land. Do you know what happens after he has done all 
that? He has paid all the expense, he has got the land now so that it works, farmer A comes back and 
says, I want that land back. Now he used that kind of analogy to say that as far as he is concerned that's 
what the Provincial Government is doing with regard to the potash industry. 
 
Now these are just ordinary Saskatchewan people, just as I am an ordinary Saskatchewan person who 
can see that up until now we haven't had enough answers to be able to do anything intelligent about this 
potash industry. To indicate, as I said just a moment ago, that we are going to take money which is our 
money, we are going to invest it, we are going to give it to those people who already own the mines, and 
we are going to ask them to take our money as we paid for it over the years, take our money and go and 
develop competition against us. It doesn't make any sense up until now and I think we need an 
intersessional committee to see whether there is any sense in the matter of attempting to nationalize the 
potash industry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — You see these two people, the one who had the analogy about buying the cow, the 
one who had the analogy about the farm land, they recognized something that Members opposite haven't 
been saying very much about up until now and that is that with regard to the potash industry you can't 
very much longer hide behind a smoke screen of the big, bad multinationals. Because you already 
control the potash industry, you already control when the hole will be dug, where the hole will dug. You 
are already taxing the companies, taxed to a level of between 80 and 95 per cent, or somewhere in that 
position, you are already getting $130 million a year in revenue. We've used that figure many times and 
since you don't refute it I guess there has got to be some substance to it. Why, when you already control 
the industry the way you already control it, the tax rates you've got, already you've got prorationing, and 
I know you didn't bring that in. I know that when this side of the House was on that side and that side 
was on this side, that's when prorationing came in. I know that most people who know anything about 
the industry would say that that saved the industry in Saskatchewan. There are already substantial 
controls that you have over the potash industry. Now if we need to spend a billion dollars to get the little 
bit that's left there has to be some pretty darn good reasons why. You haven't told us what those reasons 
are. In four or five weeks up-to-date you haven't told the people of Saskatchewan what those reasons are 
and I think that maybe with an intersessional committee, maybe we might get some of the answers. I 
haven't had a reason given, except for the reason that I supposed earlier and I think the Member for 
Saskatoon-Mayfair (Mr. Dyck) understand this as well as I do, the reason that the Government opposite 
is fundamentally and philosophically committed to state control. Now if there is one other reason that 
makes any sense about why the 38 people on the other side of the House had decided earlier that they 
were going to ram through the biggest deal in the history of this province before Christmas and then 
underestimate the strength of this caucus by thinking 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1708 
 

you were going to ram through extended hours so that you could ram through the Bills before Christmas. 
Stay on a crash course as I said a little while ago, to disaster for this province, if there is any other reason 
other than state control., then please would somebody on the other side of the House, the Premier, or the 
Attorney General or the Minister of Finance, or the Minister of Municipal Affairs, tell us that there are 
other reasons than state control. 
 
Well, let me get on to the fifth reason why I think, Mr. Speaker, that we ought to have an intersessional 
committee. The fifth reason is that there have been significant comments from groups and from 
individuals who have published articles and been reported in the media who have very legitimate 
concerns and very intelligent questions and points of view to express. I should like to refer to just a 
couple of them. I didn't bring the entire file. I've just got four but I'm not going to read them all, at least 
I'm not going to read all of each. I am going to read all of one. Now here is a group that has expressed its 
view, expressed its view on December 24th, an article in the Star-Phoenix at the top of the third page 
and it says: 
 

Fertilizer Producers Attack Potash Takeover. 
 
Now I should like the intersessional committee to have an opportunity to examine what in fact this 
fertilizer industry has to say in detail about the potash takeover. I don't think that this House, and I don't 
think that the people of Saskatchewan should have to rely on an article in the newspaper to find out what 
an industry as important to the potash industry in Saskatchewan, that is the Fertilizer Producers of 
Canada, have to say about the nationalization takeover. Here is some of the things they say though: 
 

The Canadian Fertilizer Industry has added its voice to those criticizing the Saskatchewan 
Government's move to nationalize a substantial part of the province's potash industry. 
The CFI are active members of the major manufacturers of fertilizer products in Canada 
including all the potash companies in the country. The president of CFI in a recent press 
release called the planned takeover . . . 

 
And I think all Members but particularly the Member for Saskatoon-Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes), I think if 
he listens to this it might register. This is what this man calls the planned takeover. He says: 
 

It is an intolerable, intrusion into private enterprise and one which would destroy a 
healthy industry. 

 
Now, Mr. Neil said that Premier Allan Blakeney has misrepresented two vital facts in presenting his 
arguments in support of the move. Now there is a pretty significant challenge, Mr. Speaker. Here is the 
head of a national fertilizer company who says that the Premier of this province has misrepresented the 
facts. Well, I am not sure whether that's true or not but I think that the people of Saskatchewan that read 
that newspaper article are not likely to be sure or not whether he did. And I think we had better find out 
and I think it is another reason why we should refer the matter to an intersessional committee so that this 
man could be called under oath to testify, to tell how he 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1709 
 

feels that the Premier of this province has misrepresented the facts. I think that is a pretty serious charge. 
But this is what he says about how the Premier has misrepresented the facts. First, Mr. Neil said: 
 

The potash industry's investment in Saskatchewan is valued in dollar terms at close $2.5 
billion . . . 

 
Two and one-half billion, if we have already heard those figures of something between one-half million 
and a billion, now it is $2.5 billion. 
 

. . . or several times the asset value quoted by the Premier. This casts a great deal of doubt 
on the province's ability to buy out the companies at anywhere near their worth, Mr. Neil 
said. 

 
More important, here is the alleged reason for the takeover: 
 

Mr. Blakeney has accused the potash company of refusing to undertake expansion when 
it was his Government's tax on potash reserves which raised tax levels to a confiscatory 
90 per cent, killing any hope for further private investment. 

 
I had suggested earlier that the reason why the potash industry was being nationalized was because the 
Attorney General and his colleagues opposite were interested in state control in Saskatchewan. Now I 
have had it suggested here that maybe it's because the Members opposite have strangled the industry to 
the point where the industry can't expand and because the industry now can't expand the Government 
decides that it is going to take them over. Well, I think there is more than one reason why this 
nationalization is going to go forward, Mr. Speaker, that it should go to an intersessional committee so 
they can find out whether there is more than one reason why this nationalization is going to take place. 
 
Now the president elect of the Western Canadian Fertilizer Association was also interviewed in this 
article. His organization says it has contemplated conducting an advertising campaign against the move, 
but decided instead to help spread the views of the CFI as much as possible. An attempt has already 
been made, he said, to acquaint federal agricultural department officials with the opinions of the industry 
and as far as informing the public the fertilizer manufacturer would be giving moral support to the 
potash companies' efforts. 
 
The president said the potash companies and Canadian fertilizer manufacturing are closely related. 
Potash is as important as nitrogen and phosphate in the fertilizers used in Ontario, for example. And it is 
also necessary in British Columbia. Eventually, as crops use up the potash which is naturally available in 
prairie soils, potash will also have to applied here, he said. Potash is applied as it is shipped from the 
mine without requiring further processing and so on. 
 
Now I want to go into a second point. Remember now that I am talking about another reason why we 
ought to have an intersessional committee, because there are some pretty expert people, some pretty 
expert groups, who are asking a lot of questions and are not getting any answers. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1710 
 

Now, some of you, including the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) may have had an opportunity 
to read an article written by a professor from the Department of Geological Science at the University of 
Saskatchewan, Professor Stauffer and he simply entitles his little article, "Bad Business Deal". I think 
the intersessional committee should have a chance to look at whether in fact, it is. 
 
Prof. Stauffer makes the following points; he begins his article this way: 
 

Premier Allan Blakeney is trying to convince the citizens of this province that buying $1 
billion worth of potash mines is a good deal, that it makes sense. No, Mr. Blakeney, it is 
not a good business deal and it doesn't make sense. 

 
Now there is a professor and let us assume that he knows a little bit. He might know a little bit about 
geology, about geological formations, about the economics of those kinds of things. He might have a 
little bit to contribute to an intersessional committee, Mr. Speaker. You know it might be worthwhile to 
get a man of the intelligence, of the background of Professor Stauffer and I am sure there must be others 
at our universities in Regina and Saskatoon, at universities at other parts of Canada, experts in the fields 
of geology, experts in the fields of economics, experts in the field of marketing, who could come before 
that committee and give some expert opinions so that we could overcome the little concern, if nothing 
else, that was presented in a statement I made a little while ago about run by a bunch of amateurs. I have 
already indicated that it appears that this is another good reason why we ought to refer to a committee, 
because the Attorney General and his colleagues have been out now for one month and a half, offering a 
big salary, $60,000 or whatever it is, to hire someone to run the organization and they can't find 
anybody. 
 
Well, Prof. Stauffer goes on and I hope you are all getting this. I shall go slowly so that you can take it 
down if you want to and if you prefer to get the article and look at it afterwards, well that is fine. 
 

One billion dollars could buy five of the existing 10 potash mines. We now receive about 
$130 million a year total from the 10 mines whereas if we owned five of them we could 
get those mines' profits as well and the province would get about $170 million. 

 
Sounds good so far. 
 

But this depends on the market staying near the early 1975 levels. In all probability the 
world market will increase its need for potash even though the demand has dropped 25 
per cent in the last four months. The question is, who will supply this potash? 
Saskatchewan, or someone else? Saskatchewan does not have the monopoly on the 
potash markets of the world. Russia has nearly as much as we do and is starting to sell to 
countries that were our customers last year. Brazil is developing her potash and should be 
marketing it within two years. Companies, Mr. Blakeney eyes and buys out can use their 
new found moneys to build potash mines in Mexico or New Brunswick to compete with 
Saskatchewan. 

 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1711 
 

I have made that point two or three times already today. I think it is important to drive that point home 
again and again and again. 
 
It is extremely unlikely that Saskatchewan will be able to sell significantly more potash than we do 
already and it is highly possible that in five years our sales will drop considerably. 
 
Now this articles says that: 
 

It is highly likely. It is possible that the sales will drop. 
 
Well, I ask the Members opposite: Have they got some information to counter that? There is an expert in 
this field and he provides that kind of an opinion. Have you given consideration to what experts are 
saying? Can you counter? Can you table information? Can you tell this House the kinds of answers you 
have had to that kind of question? I invite the Member for Melfort (Mr. Vickar) if he hasn't already done 
so to ask the Minister in charge of the potash corporation. If he won't tell it to us surely they will tell it to 
you. Satisfy yourselves. Where are the studies? Are there marketing studies that have been done? Are 
there economic studies that have been done? What are the implications of the Bredenbury project which 
has been staffed and that information in those studies to the present attempt at state control. What are the 
answers to those kinds of questions? I think that it would be a great idea, Mr. Speaker, if the Member for 
Melfort would ask in caucus what the answers to those questions are. I think it would be great if the 
Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie) — he is a fellow who must ask a lot of questions. What are the 
answers to those questions? Have you seen the studies? Have you seen the analysis? 
 
I frankly think, Mr. Speaker, that Members opposite haven't seen the studies; they haven't seen the 
analysis, because, Mr. Speaker, I don't think there have been any studies, I don't think there has been any 
analysis. I think the Members who are sitting in the back benches on the other side if they haven't seen 
them, should be ashamed of the fact that they haven't seen them. How in the world can anybody, no 
matter what side of the House he wants to sit on, rest with his own conscience by supporting the biggest 
deal this province has ever undertaken, which many suggest is putting us on a crash course to disaster, 
without having seen something that will substantiate it that it even has a chance, a ghost of a chance, of 
succeeding. 
 
How can you justify the fact that we are going to spend one billion dollars, that we are going to double 
our debt? Double our debt, imagine! Double the debt of the Province of Saskatchewan! So that we can 
take money from our pockets, send it to people who don't live here; let them develop competition for our 
potash and at the same time not develop one new job in the Province of Saskatchewan. At the same time 
frighten investment that might be interested in coming into the Province of Saskatchewan. How is that 
supposed to help the Province of Saskatchewan grow and be healthy? 
 
Well, maybe, because I will tell you there haven't been any answers, Mr. Speaker, that have been 
provided in the House. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1712 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked about why this matter should be referred to committee. I am not sure that the 
Attorney General has heard them all, but I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when I am done I am prepared 
to recapitulate. One of the things that I learned when I was teaching school, and I am sure that the 
Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins), I am sure that the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski), the 
Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes), the Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway), the 
Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation (Mr. Messer) have all been at one time or another — and I 
am sure that they would all agree with me that one of things you want to try and do when you have made 
a point, if people haven't listened the first time then you make it again. You keep after it until finally 
they get it. I am prepared, if the Attorney General wishes and I may speak to him over lunch and he can 
tell me when I come back after lunch whether he wants me to recapitulate, because if he does I would be 
prepared to do that. Now if he thinks he has it all, we can wait until the test is written and find out, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I was suggesting that there are some experts in the province, some pretty sound minds in the 
province, who have asked some questions and I think an intersessional committee, if it was established, 
might get some answers that some of these people have and might be able to rest, maybe, some of the 
concerns that these people have. Certainly, the Government hasn't been able to put to rest any of those 
concerns and I think it might be a good idea if an intersessional committee had an opportunity to try. 
 
When the world potash situation is considered it is easy to see that the mine expansion promise, by Mr. 
Blakeney, is unlikely. There will be no new jobs for Saskatchewan people as a result of the takeover. In 
fact, jobs probably will be lost. Well, I have already made that point a moment ago. Saskatchewan will 
have to borrow most of the money it uses to buy the mines. An interest rate of 10 per cent for 20 years, I 
wonder if the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation would mind just listening to the economics 
provided here, so that when you get up and speak in this debate, if you ever do, you might be able to tell 
us whether this is right or not. 
 
Saskatchewan will have to borrow most of the money it uses to buy the mines and at an interest rate of 
10 per cent for 20 years on $1 billion. The province will be committed to $120 million a year repayment 
and this will take nearly all the money coming to the province from potash sales and most of what we 
will receive after the takeover if the market stays high. Should the market drop, this province would be 
in trouble. Now I am sure that you got that, Mr. Attorney General and if I may direct my remarks again 
through Mr. Speaker, to you, if the market stays high. All going well, however, we would own five 
mines in 20 years and during the 20 years the citizens of this province will have had the use of almost 
none of the profits from 10 mines as nearly all of the income would have gone to New York money 
lenders to repay the loan. And, that in fact, gets back to a question I asked earlier that the committee 
might take a look at, where in fact is the money coming from? 
 
This gentleman, Professor Stauffer is assuming that it is going to come from New York. Now, I don't 
know why he would make that assumption. The Premier was in New York to find out 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1713 
 

what the money market would be like down there, but it is also possible that the money could come from 
Great Britain or from Europe because it isn't so long ago that the Premier was over there testing the 
market. Anyway, the question is: Where is the money coming from? This particular individual says he 
thinks the money is coming from New York. 
 
Twenty years from now — how old would that make the Attorney General? Twenty years from now, if 
the market holds steady, we would receive approximately $170 million, our first real profit in over 20 
years. If we don't buy the mines we would have $130 million per year profit and 21 years from now we 
would have received a total of $2.73 billion from potash sales. 
 
Taking a longer view, 30 years from now we would have received a total of $3.9 billion without buying 
the mines and $2.9 billion if we buy five of them. In fact, we won't break even for 55 years. Of course 
we might not have to borrow the entire billion in which case the break-even time may be as low as 50 
years. Now that is really encouraging. Our loan may be a little older . . . well, I'm not likely to be 
around. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Your grandchildren will be sitting here. 
 
MR. PENNER: — No, because this is the kind of thing that will drive my grandchildren out of the 
province. They are not going to be able to stand to stay here, because the implications of the deal are 
such that they are not going to want to stay here. They are not going to want to live in a sterilized 
province, a province that isn't even interested in the kinds of investment that this province ought to be 
interested in. They are not going to want to stay around in a province that apparently has only got one 
reason, for going into this kind of a crash course to disaster — I have said that three or four times and I 
hope you are catching onto it. That reason being state control. They are not going to stay around. 
 
Now, I ask the Attorney General is it reasonable that we should expect that it is going to be 50 or 55 
years before the industry can break even? I hope that when the Attorney General gets up on his feet and 
speaks, whenever he does, and I assume sometime he will close debate. Is it going to take that long? I 
really want him to address himself to this question in a reasonable way. Will it take 50 years before we 
are going to break even? Now here is an intelligent person who makes that assumption. Do you know 
why he makes that assumption? For one of the reasons why we ought to have a committee, because 
maybe he hasn't got enough information in order to make his conclusions. Because the Government 
hasn't provided any information to this House and because an intersessional committee could get it. So I 
hope, Mr. Attorney General, I hope Mr. Minister in charge of the Power Corporation that you will 
address yourself to it and that you would like to have these figures that Prof. Stauffer used when you 
reply to tell us whether he is right or wrong; whether it is going to be 55 years, 50 or 40 years or 20 or 
60 years, you tell us. We should like to hear. Not only that we would like to have the information upon 
which you base your conclusions. 
 
Few of today's taxpayers will still be alive. That's what I said one minute ago. One could call this 
planning for the 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1714 
 

future if it were not for the fact that much better use could be made of the money for securing the future 
of the Province of Saskatchewan. Now we are starting to look for alternatives for that money. 
 
I would think that it is likely that the Attorney General and some of the Members opposite thought of 
some alternatives. Let us just review what kinds of things we might be able to do with the kind of money 
that we are talking about and that an intersessional committee would be studying. 
 
I should like to suggest some of the alternatives, some of the alternative ways that we could spend $130 
million we received from potash sales each year. First one is pure business, the others are resource 
oriented. 
 
So firstly the business one. If we invest $130 million next year in the money markets of the world we 
could receive $13 million profit from interest just like the money lenders that Mr. Blakeney wants to 
make considerably richer. Every year we would invest another $130 million from potash sales and 
reinvest the interest. In 20 years we would have invested about the same amount of money that Mr. 
Blakeney wants to spend on buying mines plus the reinvested interest. In 21 years we could, if we 
wanted, stop reinvesting the interest and we would have $7 billion invested and the income to the 
province each year would be $700 million, plus $130 million coming from potash sales. Just about as 
much as the present budget. You know, you should stop and think about that kind of an alternative. 
 
One of the things that I want the Attorney General to understand, I've really learned two lessons in this 
House. One is this one that I mentioned earlier about being insensitive . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — ... how many times . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — I wish Roy that you would just listen for just a minute. There are two things you 
have taught me in this House and I have only been here six weeks. One is that I'm never, when we form 
the government, going to be as insensitive as you people are. Never going to feel as cloistered as you 
people feel. And the other thing that I'm going to try never to do is only to speak to the gallery. Because 
what I'm saying is what I'm saying because that's important for me. It is important to the people of 
Saskatchewan and I really don't care whether there is one person sitting up there or there are 25 people 
sitting up there. I don't want to get into a situation — as I've said before, I'm far more interested and far 
more concerned with getting you to care a little bit about the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we were talking about a couple of alternatives before I digressed, Mr. Speaker, and I am sorry that 
I digressed because I think I did get away a little bit from the amendment. Anyway, I want to get back to 
the amendment. 
 
One of the things that this intersessional committee is to do is to look at some alternatives, because the 
amendment gives the committee some fairly wide powers. One of the alternatives is to go out and throw 
out $1 billion into the potash industry. All right, that's one alternative. Take that $1 billion and buy out 
the mines. Now there are other alternatives, like the one that Professor Stauffer has just suggested and 
the one that 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1715 
 

I'm sure that the Member for Quill Lakes has already memorized, and that is that we would take that 
money and we would invest that money over that same 20 year period, assumption being that it is going 
to take 20 years to pay off the debt. Then what kind of money have we got? We've still got the potash 
mines, mines that we already have a virtual control over now, and then we would also have the money 
coming in from the investment of all the money that we would be pouring in to just ordinary investment 
over that 20 year period. And instead of having a debt of $2 billion our debt would not be changed at all 
and we would be in a position of being able to recover substantial amounts of money every year that 
would be able to be used as revenue in the Province of Saskatchewan. Makes some pretty good sense. 
 
Now that's one alternative. Let's go on and look at some other alternatives. 
 
All that money amounts, if we were to use the example that Professor Stauffer has used, the one that you 
have memorized I think, to $830 million a year, nearly five times the income we will have a year if we 
use the money to buy potash mines. Of course, we would have to become businessmen and learn to run 
an investment business. The province can learn to run potash mines, I see no reason why it can't learn 
how to invest some money. As a matter of fact it might even have a better chance of being successful at 
that than it would have at being successful in running some potash mines. 
 
I might suggest that we try to lend this money to large multinational corporations. Anyway, it's an idea 
and we are talking about alternatives. We are talking about the kinds of ideas that maybe could be put 
before an intersessional committee. 
 
Multinational oil companies to be used for petroleum exploration in the Arctic, where it costs an average 
of nearly $5 million to drill a single exploration hole. By doing this we might not only make money but 
help assure petroleum reserves for Canada's future. Now that's not a bad constructive suggestion, as an 
alternative to going out and nationalizing the potash industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Speaking of oil, he goes on: 
 

It costs an average of about $80,000 to drill an exploration hole in southern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Therefore, $130 million would pay for 163 holes, over three-quarters of the number of holes drilled in 
'74. We might consider trying to assure Saskatchewan's future reserves by stepping up exploration in the 
province. Or $1 billion would build a coal gasification plant near Estevan. Here's another alternative, 
Mr. Member for Quill Lakes. Two or three alternatives already that might be used, that might be a good 
deal wiser than that course of action upon which you people see destined to take the Province of 
Saskatchewan. A billion dollars, and maybe the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) might consider 
whether this is really a fair estimate that this professor has used or not. He says: 
 

A billion dollars would build a coal gasification plant near Estevan. 
 
Is that close? 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1716 
 

MR. LARTER: — Yes. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Okay, that's a reasonable kind of suggestion. That might even help the province. 
That might even bring some people into Saskatchewan. That might even create some jobs. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — A committee could study a proposal. 
 
MR. PENNER: — That's right. A committee could study the proposal if we could get a committee. Are 
we prepared to support a committee? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Absolutely. Without any question we are prepared to support a committee. 
Alternately we could begin such exploration for uranium in hopes of developing energy reserves our 
civilization is going to require, if it is to survive much past the year 2000. We could even step up 
exploration for other metals that are coming into short supply, such as, copper. Now those are some 
suggestions. They seem to me to be pretty practical suggestions. I don't know how the Attorney General 
feels about that. Maybe we are going to do all of that at the same time that we are going to take a billion 
dollars out of the taxpayers' pockets to buy potash. I hope that if the Attorney General, I hope that if the 
people on the other side of the House have some plans to do something constructive for Saskatchewan 
that we are soon going to hear about them. 
 
Let's hear what another person has to say about the question of state ownership. Here's somebody who 
has already said that we are involved in state ownership. This is an article that was in the Leader-Post. 
Some of you may have read it. An article written by Mr. Morris Shumiatcher. Now you may not agree 
with everything that he said, I don't know. I think you have to agree that he's got a pretty sharp mind. I'm 
glad the Attorney General doesn't find the name to be a strange name. I should like to read just a little 
bit. We want it all brought out. We would like the committee to give an opportunity for anybody who 
has any expertise, any thoughts on the matter to be able to come before the committee and provide them 
with those ideas, provide them with those suggestions, provide them with expertise and give the 
Government an opportunity to provide the committee and the people of Saskatchewan the studies, the 
marketing analysis, the economic analysis that have been done and indicate to them that the potash 
takeover is a realistic move. Because we haven't as yet had any of that kind of information. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Shumiatcher, he makes a few points and I should like to relate some of them to you. He 
says: 
 

The proposed potash takeover reminds me of the first years of CCF rule in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I have to rely on the expertise of a man like Mr. Shumiatcher to tell me about the first years 
because I wasn't old enough at that time to be able to remember. But he says it reminds him of that time. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1717 
 

The socialists in 1944 and 1945 would be keen to apply the Regina Manifesto to the most 
visible of capitalist enterprises of the day, the brewing industry. 

 
Ah! The brewing industry. Now you know it brings out this question of the Regina Manifesto. Brings up 
again the question of state control. Brings up again the reason why people in Saskatchewan are 
concerned about the move that the present Government is taking. 
 

Now the prohibitionists among them rejoiced at the prospect of nationalizing the brewers 
since this would accelerate the building of the new Jerusalem, the drier the better. The 
more strident socialist can covet the industry counting the riches beyond the dreams of 
avarice that the provincial government would amass and ultimately apply to good works 
and high moral objectives. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It means greed. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Does it! Is that what it means? I think that's what it means. 
 

And so it was, that delegations from the constituencies attended upon Mr. Fines, who 
then was provincial treasurer and the Minister in charge of the Liquor Board, each 
entreating him to act with dispatch. If he were unwilling to do it at once, drain the 
vice-ridden vats, he should at least purge the brewery barons of their sin and relieve them 
of their nefarious machines and their unconscionable profits. 
 
Now I witnessed them, and I remember now the reasoned and absolute resistance that 
Clarence Fines put up to their demands. He pointed out that there was no need for the 
province to lay out millions in money to buy or expropriate the breweries. The province 
has the power to fix the price at which all beer would be sold to the liquor board. That the 
price which the public would pay for that beer when they bought it at the hotel and at the 
Government Liquor Stores, and the profits of the brewers and vendors and the hoteliers 
would be whatever the government decided and the profits themselves could and would 
be taxed. The province was capable of skimming off all the suds it wished and all the 
money too without spending a dime for brewing pots, buildings or beer bottles. 

 
And the objectives of the most doctrinaire socialist would be accomplished through the 
legislative process with no need for the trauma and the drama of nationalization. 

 
And so it was. Now what Mr. Fines was saying in 1944-45 with regard to the brewing industry, is quite 
simple. He said, we already control it, so why should we go out and invest all kinds of money when we 
already control it? Now I think that the same argument applies to the present Government 30 years later 
in Saskatchewan. Why is it that you are embarked on a course that is going to take between $500 million 
and $1 billion the Premier says. Probably $2 billion or $3 billion is closer to 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1718 
 

the truth, out of our pockets, to buy an industry which you already control? And for those Members who 
aren't aware of it, let me enumerate again, where you drill, when you drill and almost why you drill, 
when there are prorationing regulations on the books. You are already taxing the industry something 
between 80 and 95 per cent. Why is that when you have all of that control now you're prepared to go out 
and risk large sums of money for virtually nothing? No new jobs, no new investment. As a matter of fact 
you are going to scare off investment. Why not go back, (the Attorney General is great in debate) to talk 
about the past. He says it's never too far back to use it as a lesson. Well why don't you go back and 
review the situation in 1944-45? The same arguments apply. Is it because the Regina Manifesto means a 
little more now than it did then? Is it because state control is really the aim? Have you got other reasons? 
If you do, I hope that for a change we might get some Minister of the Crown up and speaking to the 
issue. I should like to hear the Premier, and I wouldn't mind hearing again the Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Snyder). If somebody will write him a speech he can get up and deliver it pretty well. I think we should 
hear what you people have to say. We talk about this House being a place of debate. The Attorney 
General got up this morning in answer to a question from my colleague from Regina South and when 
asked if he was interested in going out debating around the province and he said, 'oh no, we are not 
going out and debate around the province, we are going to debate right here'. Well I advise him to get up 
and do it some time. We'd love to hear Cabinet Ministers get up and debate it. We are getting a little bit 
tired as a matter of fact, having to stand up here day after day and ask the same questions, simply 
because we are not getting any answers. I think if we sat down, I think that if we took the course that the 
Conservatives are taking, and I say this will all respect to my friends in the Conservative caucus, that we 
would be relinquishing our responsibilities as elected Members, that we would be relinquishing our 
responsibilities towards a democratic process, because I think that the responsibility of the Opposition is 
to get some answers to some questions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I want to continue to ask the kinds of questions that the people of Saskatchewan, 
some of them, some of them in my constituency are asking me. And I think they need to know the 
answers. And I think that they need to have some confidence in what the Government is doing because 
obviously, obviously the Government has no confidence in the people. If they did they would take it to 
the people. If they had any confidence in the fact that the people of Saskatchewan would go for the 
potash nationalization, you'd have asked about it in the last election campaign and you know it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed at 12:30 p.m. until 2:30 p.m. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker,. Having been involved in education for as long as I have 
been I know that when new information and ideas are presented to people, there is a tendency for the 
recall to drop off pretty sharply in the first hour or so after people have heard it, and I think that that fact 
along with the fact that across the way we have some people who weren't 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1719 
 

here this morning. I should quickly review some of the reasons that I gave this morning why this matter 
ought to be put to an intersessional committee and why this study of the potash bill should be handled by 
that committee. 
 
Members opposite will recall that I began by mentioning a reason that had been brought to my attention 
this morning about the need for more time by Members opposite to find expertise to handle the industry. 
The group that has been out looking for a manager for the Potash Corporation, has been working for a 
long time and hasn't been able to find anybody yet. I think we ought to be able to provide some time for 
the Attorney General and his colleagues. That was the reason that I suggested. Then I mentioned the 
business about the people of Saskatchewan entitled to more information. And I commented for a 
moment or two about market studies and economic studies, feasibility studies of any sort that the 
Government has done and would be able to table before this House. Since they haven't done that that 
they should at least then be able to table them before the intersessional committee. I went on to point out 
that there are many people in the province who are asking questions about the potash nationalization, 
questions like why and where is the money coming from, and what interest rate is going to be paid? 
 
The fact that I have received a number of letters. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to 
note, I had a couple of letters over the noon hour that I think maybe Members opposite might be 
interested in hearing. It gets back to the question of why again and questions that are being asked. There 
is one letter here that is addressed to the Attorney General. This particular individual says first of all that 
the potash takeover is morally wrong; secondly, that even a person with a simple mind can see it is a 
poor business deal if it is explained to them and they take time to think about it. Thirdly, this person says 
that energy is our number one crisis and if we must borrow money to develop something why not 
borrow it to develop energy. Potash has already been developed. This individual says. Fourth, this 
person says that he knows of people who are dying because we don't have enough kidney machines. 
There is a waiting list for old age residences and nursing homes. Education budgets are suggested to be 
cut. Fifthly, did you know the Russians are entering the potash market as well as others? And I think as 
far as that particular point is concerned we would have to concede that Members opposite do know 
about that. Certainly if they didn't know about it before we brought it to their attention, they know about 
it now. 
 
Well, there is just another example, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of questions that people are asking, the 
kinds of questions that an intersessional committee should have an opportunity to answer. Another letter 
that came in over the noon hour is to the Premier. I don't know whether he has had an opportunity to 
read it, but anyway this particular individual says that he is disturbed at the Saskatchewan NDP 
Government passing legislation to take effective control of the potash industry. It goes on: 
 

Mr. Blakeney, your Government's philosophy and policy have created a situation to make 
it economically impossible for the potash industry to expand. Now that the potash 
companies have stalled their expansion your Government is moving in quickly to take 
over the industry and telling the people of this province that you 

 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1720 
 

are going to do what the potash industry has failed to do. Your Government was the 
cause of all this and you know it, the people of the province know it. If an election would 
be called on this back issue your Government would go down to defeat like the Barrett 
Government did in British Columbia for playing similar tactics. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — This is a letter that came in at noon today and it goes on: 
 

Each individual in this province has enough imagination, desire and ambition to get 
things done on their own whether they are farmers, businessmen, professionals, 
tradesmen or whatever. They have a sense of responsibility, efficiency, productivity more 
than any government ever put together. Mr. Blakeney, your Government's proposal is 
absolutely unfair and unjustified, from a business point of view a very poor economical 
proposal, it will not be efficient and you know that. Most of all you are destroying the 
initiative of the people of this province and of future investment coming into this 
province. The question in most people's minds now is, who is next? Is your hunger for 
power so great that you are giving it priority over the future potential of each individual? 
Think about it. 

 
That's the way that particular letter ends. Well, there are a number of questions as I pointed out this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, and that was the second reason why I felt that this matter should be referred to an 
intersessional committee. 
 
Continuing, in review the third reason I put forward was that some of the Members opposite obviously 
required a little bit of time to clarify positions, they have been a bit jumpy, they have been a bit nervous, 
and while I pointed out this morning that maybe I'm not the one who should be arguing that, I have at 
least put it forward. It was argued the other day, you know, that there were gentlemen in the House and I 
am prepared to be gentlemanly in this respect. If you need some time to get over the jumpiness and I 
think that having the matter referred to an intersessional committee would allow that. 
 
I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that we were concluding prior to the lunch break the fourth reason that all 
money which would be used for the purchase of these mines is really money that is in effect going to go 
out and become competition for Saskatchewan's potash industry. I pointed out how absolutely senseless 
that was since we have had no reasons given by the Government in the last four or five weeks about why 
this whole move is being taken. I think again it points out the need for an intersessional committee. An 
intersessional committee to look at the entire economic question and find out what the economic 
implications really are. 
 
Then I went on, Mr. Speaker, to point out that there are a number of groups in Saskatchewan, I talked 
about individuals earlier, a number of groups and a number of rather learned people in the province who 
are raising questions about the nationalization takeover, asking questions that you would have 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1721 
 

thought up until now that there would have been some answers to. I referred to a letter from a professor 
on the campus of the University of Saskatchewan that appeared in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix in 
December and I had been in the process just as 12:30 was called of referring to an article by Mr. 
Shumiatcher, a Regina lawyer, that appeared in the Regina Leader-Post. I don't recall just how far I got. 
I wonder if the Members opposite recall how far I was in going through this article. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . Crown corporations. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Oh, yes, that's right. About the lesson that was taught 30 years ago with regard to 
Crown corporations in which the Government opposite has obviously forgotten all about in the 
intervening period of time. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I think it was something about Clarence Fines, about an honest man in 
government. 
 
MR. PENNER: — What I was really doing was trying to point out that there was a thought in 1944 and 
1945 that in order to control the brewing industry in this province that you had to nationalize it and it 
was pointed out, Mr. Fines and others at that time indicated to the government of the day and the people 
of Saskatchewan of that day, that when you already controlled something why would you have to take it 
over and nationalize it. And the parallel that existed between that particular situation in 1944-45 and the 
situation that exists to some degree today. I noticed that my friend, the Member for Arm River (Mr. 
Faris) winced a bit, but there are some parallels. Because in the potash industry today there are some 
pretty significant controls that the Government already has. I think I mentioned them this morning. If I 
didn't I would just like to review. The Government now controls where the holes are going to be dug, 
when they are going to be dug, has control over production through the prorationing scheme and already 
has a significant take in terms of taxation, something between 80 and 90 per cent, depending upon the 
mine. Having the heaviest taxed industry of any in this province and in the dominion, bringing in 
something in the order of $130 million or so per year and with all of that information they are going to 
go out and risk a billion dollars or two or three, of the taxpayers' money in order to get the last little bit. 
Or paraphrasing or paralleling the example of 1944-45, 'the suds on the top'. 
 

After the fanfare of expropriation died down . . . 
 
This article goes on . . . 
 

... the owner was paid more than twice the true value and the government paid the 
workers more than twice their true earnings. The province lost many times over their 
purported value that the thirty odd employees gained. 

 
Now that particular paragraph gets into the question of something that happened some time ago about a 
shoe factory or something. I think probably Members opposite are quite familiar with that and there will 
be no need for me to get into that in any more detail. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1722 
 

The article goes on: 
 

The present government's purchase of 45 per cent of the shares of Intercon, more than 
$10 million is still current history. The avowed object was to support livestock producers, 
to stabilize the packing industry, to expand the agri-industrial base of the province. No 
one has been able to suggest how this sizeable outlay of public funds has benefitted a 
single person in the Province of Saskatchewan with the exception of course of the vendor 
of those shares of Intercontinental Packers, Fred Mendel, who took his money and with a 
grin on his face ran to the bank and ended up building and providing jobs for people in 
the Province of Alberta. 

 
Our money but providing jobs for somebody else. The same thing is likely to happen in this potash 
nationalization, our money going out to other international corporations. You are going to take our 
money and are going to invest it in other places and provide jobs for other people. That is a great idea 
for a government that is supposed to be concerned and interested with development in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. He says: 
 

I am one among a growing number who believe that we ought to let brewers brew our 
beer. Let the John Mitchells build our boxes. Let the Fred Mendels pack our meat and let 
the potash companies who discovered the mineral deposits they are working, continue to 
mine and market potash. 

 
And I have a feel that maybe that's not a bad idea. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: 
 

There is an old adage that a cobbler should stick to his last. It is one that applies to 
governments just as it applies to shoemakers. It is also a thought that sparks a host of 
memories of great expectations fostered by unrealistic promises of the socialists in 1944 
who claimed they could produce cheaper shoes than anyone else with hides bought from 
Saskatchewan farmers at higher prices than anyone else paid for them. Naturally it all 
ended up in the celebrated failure of a government shoe factory and a government 
tannery. 

 
The article goes on and it says: 
 

In the past few weeks beleaguered yet thoughtful citizens in three commonwealth 
jurisdictions, British Columbia, Australia and New Zealand have made decisions to call a 
halt to the foolish policies and practices of socialist politicians. 

 
Now I have a suggestion to make to the Members opposite. The suggestion is that if we were to call an 
election today on the issue of nationalization of the potash industry that the same fate that happened in 
British Columbia to the socialists there and in New Zealand and Australia would occur insofar as you 
people on the other side of the House is concerned. I think that there is a simple reason for that and the 
reason is that you haven't levelled with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1723 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — You didn't level with the people of Saskatchewan in June. I said in an earlier debate, 
Mr. Speaker, that I didn't think that this Government could possibly have dreamed this whole scheme up 
since June. Now there are some who argue with me and say, yes they could have. I doubt it, I think they 
had this in mind and have had it in mind for some time but they didn't tell the people of Saskatchewan 
what they had in mind, because they didn't have any faith in the people of Saskatchewan. Because they 
knew just as well as they are sitting where they are sitting and doing what they are doing that had they 
indicated in June that they wanted a mandate to nationalize the potash industry, that a very few of them 
might be sitting on this side of the House but there wouldn't be one of them sitting over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Yes, it is the amendment that I am speaking to. You know I am glad that the 
Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) is back. This morning I became a little disconcerted 
because he was taking notes so faithfully and asking me to keep him on track and then I looked up and 
he was gone and I felt a little badly, but I am glad he is back. 
 
Reason No. 6 is that there are significant developments occurring in the potash industry which have 
recently come to light that have a direct bearing on the Government's move to nationalize the industry. 
Some pretty significant things that have happened since the Government announced in the Throne 
Speech on November 12 that it intended to take over the potash industry. One of them came out in a 
news article before Christmas when we saw a news report on one of the television networks of a mine 
that is being dug, south of the international boundary, just into Montana. Now I think that that article 
indicated that they are looking for potash and I have a feeling that the reason they are looking for potash 
there is because they don't have very much faith in the development opportunities that exist in this 
province any more after what the NDP have done by trying to nationalize the industry. And particularly 
after it was that same government, or at least a cousin of that government under former Premier T.C. 
Douglas, which had given a number of assurances that the potash industry was not going t be 
nationalized and that there were to be some pretty fair tax measures applied. When they found out that 
there weren't going to be very many fair tax measures, when they found out that there was going to be 
nationalization anyway, these companies aren't interested in developing in Saskatchewan and I don't 
blame them for one minute. Because if I were involved in a company whether it was a potash company 
or an oil company or any other company I'll tell you this is the last place where I would want to invest a 
cent. I'd be like the fellow from Alberta who announced just a few days after the Throne Speech who 
was going to come in and was going to invest $100,000 in Saskatchewan, I'd be thanking the Premier 
very much too and saying thanks for telling me fellows because now I am not interested anymore. 
 
So here we have a company then which has been involved in potash in this province, which has now 
gone across the border and is digging a mine there. I wonder what the implications 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1724 
 

of that may be if that happens with other companies too, as it will. And again I remind Members 
opposite that when these do it after we have taken them over, it is going to be our money that is going to 
do it. Now I don't suppose that anybody on the other side of the House is surprised that a company 
happened to find potash across the border. If you take a look at this booklet called, "Facts on Potash", 
produced by the Department of Mineral Resources in the Province of Saskatchewan, we can see that this 
booklet indicates, it has maps in it, it tells where the potash is. It shows that the famed bed of potash that 
exists under Saskatoon and Esterhazy and other places also exists across the border. This is a rather 
interesting book, Mr. Speaker, and it has a number of things in it that I think any intersessional 
committee out to have an opportunity to look at. 
 
There is a statement on one of the pages in the introduction, Mr. Speaker, that says this: "Saskatchewan's 
failure to expand its potash industry can be linked to recent political developments." Now what an 
understatement that is. "Saskatchewan's failure to expand its potash industry can be linked to recent 
political developments." And how! Of course it has been related to recent political developments. It is 
too bad that there isn't one more sentence in there to clarify it and say, that the recent political 
development has been the strangulation of the potash industry by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now really I don't want to read this whole book. I had some notes about the pages that I want to refer to. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You should have. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Oh, I have read it all. Is the Member inviting me to read this entire book? Well now 
that gives me an opportunity to say something that I had intended to say a little while ago. You know I 
sometimes wonder about the priorities of the Government opposite. We were in the House prior to the 
Christmas break and a great effort was being made by Members opposite to get a Bill, called Bill 16, 
through the House. Oh, it was important to get it through. We have got to get it through. There are 
people out in Saskatchewan who are waiting to find out what this thing means. And I agree with that and 
Members of our caucus agree with that and we felt that that Bill should go through before Christmas and 
we came back after Christmas thinking that that would likely be one of the top priorities of the 
Government. And the Attorney General who calls the orders of what's going to go on in the House, and 
everybody knows that, has now for the third day in a row, well actually the second, because he couldn't 
do anything about it on Private Member's Day yesterday, called Bills other than Bill 16. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don't like to keep reminding the Member that he is addressing himself to the 
Resolution which is before us, namely reference to a special committee and should confine his remarks 
to that. His remarks should have nothing to do with the order of the business in the House unless it 
specifically relates to this. It may be a temporary deviation. I am sure the Member regrets it on reflection 
and will desist from any other deflections. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1725 
 

MR. PENNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for drawing that to my attention. I might point out that had 
it not been that someone suggested that this whole book should be read, I don't think I would have even 
thought of the question of the priorities of the House. I will go back to the sections here that I had 
intended to put on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Discussing the question of the history of potash, Mr. Speaker, this particular statement is made. It says: 
 

Between 90 and 95 per cent of world potash production is used as fertilizer. In the trade 
potash is graded on the basis of its potassium oxide equivalent. Potassium oxide is neither 
a natural mineral nor a manufactured product but provides standard of comparison for 
potassium compounds. 

 
Now Members may have difficulty relating why I am discussing this. You will recall that earlier I 
pointed out an article that had been reported in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix about the Fertilizer Company 
of Canada and their concern. I am merely pointing out that there is some co-operation here between 
what the fertilizer industry in Canada is saying and what is in this book. And again point out that it is 
groups like this and expertise like this that an intersessional committee really ought to have the 
opportunity to study and to question. I think for that reason we ought to have an intersessional 
committee. 
 
On page 19 of this particular report, Mr. Speaker, the short paragraphs here that I should like to draw to 
the attention of the House. 
 

The principal method of potash mining in Saskatchewan involves the sinking of shafts to 
ore deposits and mining the deposits by men and equipment. 

 
In Saskatchewan the sinking of a shaft is complicated by an underground formation known as the 
Blairmore, a 200 to 500 foot thick layer of quicksand deep in the ground. Pressures from the Blairmore 
run from 400 to 800 pounds per square inch, 24 pounds of pressure in tires can lift a 4,000 pound car off 
the ground. So you can imagine the pressures involved in the Blairmore require specially engineered 
shafts. 
 

The first three attempts at shaft mining potash in Saskatchewan encountered serious 
problems in penetrating the Blairmore and one of the attempts was abandoned. 
Eventually a method of lining the mine shaft with heavy steel walls was developed and 
development accelerated. 

 
I go back to the point that I made this morning, Mr. Speaker, about the farmer who had land to sell but 
the land was covered with water and was from an agricultural point of view absolutely of no value. 
Farmer B came along and asked him if he could have it and farmer A said yes. He went out and 
developed the technical expertise to go ahead. After he had done that, expended a good deal of time, 
energy and money, huge amounts of money farmer A came back and took it away from him. I make the 
point that I did about the kind of technical difficulties they have had in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to 
complete the parallel 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1726 
 

because they too and that is contained right in the report. There is nothing to hide, everybody knows it. 
 
The potash companies came in here and risked millions and millions of dollars and brought in expertise 
and solved the problems and were just getting to the point where their operation on a long-term basis 
was to become viable and our power hungry friends across the way decided they are going to nationalize 
the industry. I say again, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, why? What is the reason? Is there any other 
reason than the fact that you are interested in state control? Since no reason has been given in the House 
and since Members of the Cabinet and Members of the back benches opposite have not got up and said 
anything in the House, I think it is incumbent upon all of us, Mr. Speaker, to refer the matter to an 
intersessional committee so that we can get some of the answers that the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to get. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that another reason why this matter ought to be referred to an 
intersessional committee is because there are some pretty specific questions that are being asked about 
the marketing situation. We have asked for the marketing studies and the Government has refused to 
table them in the House. 
 
An intersessional committee, Mr. Speaker, I think could get at the marketing situation, because there is a 
bit of controversy about it. I think that as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, if they are 
going to be asked to pay the tune, they should have an opportunity to find out exactly what the situation 
is. I am referring, Mr. Speaker, to this question of the marketing situation to an article that I saw in the 
Star-Phoenix on Saturday, December 13, entitled, "Potash Official Claims World Demand Lagging." It 
begins this way: 
 

High inventories and lagging demand are causing the bottom to fall out of the world 
market for potash. 

 
Well now, as a citizen of Saskatchewan I have just heard my government saying what a great idea it is to 
buy up all the potash in this province. Then I sit down on a Sunday afternoon and pick up this paper and 
I read that particular paragraph. I have as a citizen of this province to start scratching my head and think 
what in the world is going on? The government says this whole thing is a great idea and yet I hear an 
expert in the field make this statement, "High inventories and lagging demand are causing the bottom to 
fall out of the world market for potash." That's my money that is buying that potash. As a citizen of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that I then have a right to some answers because that puts some 
questions in my mind. 
 
The article goes on: 
 

As a result potash firms are offering buyers extended payment periods and offering cash 
discounts for early payment the spokesman said. He said in a telephone interview from 
Toronto the agency which handles all offshore export sales of potash is forecasting a 

 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1727 
 

serious decline in demand for potash in this fertilizer year from June 1, 1976 to June 30, 
1977. 

 
Well, it may be that the Members opposite are aware of that, it may be that the Government knew that. 
We can't prove that they know it because they haven't tabled any studies in this House to tell us, which 
again, Mr. Speaker, points to the need for an intersessional committee to analyze the entire question. I 
say again as I said at the outset, that an intersessional committee to me is a very clear commonsense 
approach to a question that is in the minds of hundreds of thousands of Saskatchewan citizens. If it is as 
great a deal as Members opposite say it is, then that great deal should be explained and if it is that good, 
people are going to accept it. Therefore Members opposite have no reason in the world why they ought 
to be afraid of having the matter referred to an intersessional committee. I quote again: 
 

Sylvite's program intended to spur sales which will allow purchasers who normally have 
a 30-day period in which to remit payment to wait until March 31 before repayment is 
made. The Sylvite incentive plan will be offered to December purchasers only. 

 
And the article goes on and on. I want to say again, Sir, that here are some experts in the industry and 
they are saying the potash demand in the world is lagging. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, my seventh reason for seeing this matter referred to an intersessional committee 
is a very valid reason. We ought to know exactly what the market situation in the world is. Not only that 
we should have some idea, the writer pointed out to me in the letter I read earlier this afternoon, what is 
the effect going to be of the potash industry from Russia moving onto the American scene? I should like 
to see the figures that the Attorney General and his colleagues have with regard to that, I think they 
should be before this House, I think they should have been before this House long ago. Since they 
haven't been, I think the matter should be referred to an intersessional committee. 
 
Well I should like then, Mr. Speaker, to give another reason why I think that this matter ought to be 
referred to an intersessional committee. I think the people of the province are entitled to an answer to the 
question; what is the effect of the potash nationalization going to be on the future development of the 
Province of Saskatchewan? I will repeat it for some Members who maybe didn't get it the first time: 
what is the effect going to be on the future development of Saskatchewan ? I have one article here that I 
should like Members of the House to refer to, it is an article that was taken from the Leader-Post of 
November 14, very early on, these kinds of questions were being asked, a couple of days after the 
announcement. November 14, 1975 . . . 
 
MR. BYERS: — We asked them all . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well if you did, I would appreciate it very much if you would, instead of sitting 
there, so piously when we ask the questions, bring us some answers. We would be delighted if you 
would get up on your feet and tell us the answers to the questions you have already asked. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1728 
 

Again, you see, it is a question of openness, it is a question of frankness, it is a question of being honest 
I guess. I am not in any way suggesting that the Member is not honest but I think he has an obligation to 
show to the people of Saskatchewan that in fact this information is available. I find it very difficult why 
Members opposite if they know all the answers to the questions that I am raising today haven't told us 
the answers. I would appreciate some Member when I am finished standing up and telling me what the 
answers are and putting the package together so that it makes some sense. The biggest economic 
problem this province has ever faced and we haven't had any answers yet that make any sense. I think it 
is about time that we did. 
 
Here is what is said by one group about the possible future difficulties that this province can face, it is 
from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. I expect that all Members opposite have it in their file. 
 

The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has condemned the Provincial Government's 
proposed takeover of the potash industry and rejected Premier Allan Blakeney's reasons 
for making the move. In a statement today the Chamber's executive council, it views with 
great alarm the government plan to control the potash industry and fears the Government 
may move to expropriate the entire resource industry along with other areas of free 
enterprise such as agriculture, insurance, banking, retail industries and the professions. 

 
Now you have heard that concern expressed in other statements that I have made today as well, in effect 
the question that people are asking around the province is: what is next? Is it going to be business? Is it 
going to be uranium? Is it going to be farming, in a greater way than it is already indicated? What is 
next? 
 

There are many resource industries to be explored in this province and the risk capital 
needed for discoveries will not be forthcoming if the Government of Saskatchewan 
continues to dishonor prior contracts the Chamber said. Confiscating profitable 
operations is one thing but discovery, development and efficient operation of a resource 
industry is another. 

 
Then it gets back to the question of expertise: 
 

The Chamber estimates the potash takeover would cost $2 to $3 billion, that's probably a 
reasonably close estimate. It is immoral the Chamber said. 

 
You have heard that before haven't you? I have had prominent leaders in communities in this province 
say to me, "Glen among all other things, sure it is a bad business deal, it is a bad everything else, but 
above all else they have said it is immoral." Now here is the Chamber of Commerce that says the same 
thing. 
 

It is immoral for the Government to say that it supports curtailment of government 
expenditures to control inflation then commit Saskatchewan to the cost of financing the 
potash takeover. It is to be remembered that this expenditure is to acquire an industry 
developing a resource which is already 

 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1729 
 

providing millions of dollars annually without any risk or obligation. 
 

The Premier tried to emphasize that the cost of financing this expenditure would not 
result in any tax burden to the residents of the province. 

 
No, no more a tax burden, we already have a debt of just under $900 million. Now we add another 
billion or two or whatever it is, a horrendous debt in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Then this particular group went on and I wish that the Members opposite would pay attention to this 
little bit. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We're listening. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Good, that's great. That makes me feel better. I will tell you, this particular group 
has done what we have done, they took a look at your track record, when it comes to taking over 
industry. I should like to tell you what the article said and I am particularly concerned about the Member 
for Quill Lakes, I hope he is listening. 
 

The Chamber cited three cases where the Government of Saskatchewan has taken over 
industries in the past and they closed with substantial deficits. The examples included a 
Moose Jaw wool mill, a leather tannery, (You have heard about that one before) and a 
box manufacturing plant. The Chamber said it supports abolition of the potash reserve tax 
in favor of a reasonable tax on profits earned by the potash industry. 

 
Here is a group that is concerned about the question of the future development of Saskatchewan. A 
legitimate question it seems to me and the kind of question that an intersessional committee ought to 
have an opportunity to examine. 
 
I want to go back to the meat of the particular article again and re-emphasize it. It talks about risk 
capital. 
 

Risk capital needed for such discoveries will not be forthcoming if the Government of 
Saskatchewan continues to dishonor prior contracts. 

 
I don't know how many Members opposite have experience in business. I know that the Member for 
Melfort has experience in business and I think all he needs to do is stop and think for a minute as a 
businessman with the attitude of the present government is taking, what kind of future would he feel 
existed in the Province of Saskatchewan with the Government taking the kind of position that this 
Government has taken with regard to the potash nationalization. Remember that there are many people 
who might have been interested in investing in this province who are going to find it a little difficult to 
be able to swallow it because they are concerned about what their future could be. The handwriting, if 
what is happening in the potash industry is any example, the handwriting is on the wall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another reason why we ought to, and for those of you who are keeping track, this is 
number nine. I think what we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is take time to allow people to digest the kind of 
statements that have been made in the 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1730 
 

advertising that the Government has put forward. It is a rather interesting campaign that I think that the 
intersessional committee should have an opportunity to evaluate. There has been a very concentrated 
effort in the newspapers and on the radio to try to brainwash the people of Saskatchewan into thinking 
that without any facts at all, without any real analysis that this move is a good move. I think that an 
intersessional committee would have an opportunity to examine some of the kinds of statements that the 
Government is making about how great a move this really is. 
 
I have one ad here but I don't remember which paper it was cut out of, Mr. Speaker. It would have to be 
the Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post, they are the only two . . . 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Maybe the Commonwealth. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, no it's too big. It's got to be one of the two dailies. 
 
It goes through a number of points. It says the demand is up, but I have already referred to an article that 
indicates that the market is down. Now what are the people of Saskatchewan really supposed to believe. 
I think an intersessional committee could sort that one out, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand the 
Government says the market is up and it hasn't got any studies to back it up and experts in the industry 
are writing and saying that the market is down. Now I wonder which is really right. I wonder which, as 
far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned we are supposed to believe. I know that they would like 
to be able to believe those who are across the way, Members of the Government. I'd like to be able to 
believe that too as a citizen of this province, but I haven't seen anything yet that shows that the 
Government really understands what the market situation is. Then it goes on and says expansion is 
needed. 
 
Well, I would have thought in reading that headline, Expansion is Needed, that then it would tell the 
people of Saskatchewan exactly why there hasn't been any expansion. That can be done in a couple of 
sentences. Expansion is needed but there hasn't been any in this province because as a government we 
have attempted to strangle the corporations which supply the potash so that they couldn't expand. Now 
that we have done that and we've put them in a position where they can't expand, now we are going to 
accuse them of not being able to expand and we are going to take it over. 
 
But you know when I read what's in there, that's not what is there at all. Doesn't say that at all. Just says, 
that, boy! we really should be expanding the potash industry! Well, nobody is going to argue with that 
but let's get down to the reasons why there hasn't been any expansion. Let's lay the reasons why there 
hasn't been any expansion out before the people of Saskatchewan so that they understand it and they 
know what it's all about. 
 
Now we have tried in a number of different ways to get the message out to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We have suggested one amendment that was defeated, we got this amendment, I doubt that it's going to 
pass. We have challenged the people in the Cabinet to a debate to get the story out, on an equal basis. 
They refused it. They won't get up in the House and talk about 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1731 
 

it. 
 
MR. McNEILL: — How can we. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, I think that there are all kinds of ways in which you can and I think the 
Member who said that knows it. 
 
Then it goes into the same reasons that were in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I'm sure you remember 
those. We could back down, you know, makes the Government look like the Toronto Maple Leafs might 
look if they were playing against the Soviet Army team, a pretty bad mismatch, the Leafs would win. 
You know, those great big multinational giants out there, they are awful people! Didn't talk about the 
fact that the people who work there are our neighbors. People who are managers in those mines are our 
neighbors. We see them every day, we work with them every day. Somehow it's easy to hide behind that 
skirt and say we'll back down. Gives you the underdog image. 
 
The Member for Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy) knows what it is to be an underdog. He's been involved 
in sporting activities all his life. He played hockey, he played ball, he knew the advantage that there is if 
you are the underdog. Everybody roots for the underdog. 
 
It goes on and it says we could do nothing. I frankly think, Mr. Speaker, that I wish they had done 
nothing. We would have been far better off. One time if a government had done nothing they would 
have at least been allowing progress to be made, but they are doing something and so there is no way 
that there is going to be any progress in this field, no progress for a long time and we are going to be 
saddled with a debt for years and maybe generations. We are speculating on how long that debt is going 
to be there, Mr. Speaker, but an intersessional committee might be able to find out. 
 
Members opposite aren't telling us what the information is. An intersessional committee given the 
powers that an intersessional committee should have is likely to be able to find out. 
 
Then it says it's a sound investment. You know that sounds like a television ad. That sounds like an 
investment company coming in and saying, come on, boys, this is a sound investment. Well if Members 
of the House have any business sense at all, when they go to invest their money, they do a little checking 
into the investment company to find out whether it is a sound investment or not. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking, is this really a sound investment? There is nothing to indicate that it's a sound 
investment at all. Nothing whatsoever. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — It's as close to false advertising as I've ever seen. A sound investment! On what 
basis is it said that this is a sound investment. I invite the Members opposite if they know it is a sound 
investment, if they can show the economic studies that indicate that this is a sound investment to please 
get your Cabinet colleagues to get them on the floor of the House and show us and show the people of 
Saskatchewan it's a sound investment. But don't go peddling this kind of two bit stuff in newspapers 
saying it's a sound investment unless you can show 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1732 
 

that it's a sound investment. 
 
Then it goes on in the article and it says it's a reasonable decision. It says, and those are the facts. Well, I 
read the article again when I came to that to look for some facts. No facts. No facts at all. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Faith. 
 
MR. PENNER: — That's right, faith. Accept it on faith. I heard the Attorney General get up in this 
House and say he wasn't going to take anything on faith. He said we are not going to bring the potash 
industries in and have them tell us what the economic situation is and just take it on faith. They wanted 
some facts. They wanted to see exactly what the situation was. I had difficulty arguing with that point of 
view because I think as a government there is a responsibility to know what the situation is. They ought 
to know what the situation is and if they don't they are in trouble. But if they know what the situation is, 
then I say, Mr. Speaker, that they then have a responsibility to tell us what that situation is. They have a 
greater responsibility to tell the people of Saskatchewan what that situation is, and what those facts are. 
 
You know it would have taken the wind out of anything I wanted to say or any of us would have wanted 
to say except to debate the matter on a question of philosophical difference, if there had been some facts 
for us to look at. Not only then is there a philosophical difference between the attitude of those opposite 
and us, but there is a question that they don't have any information to show us that indicates that it's 
anything like a good business deal or anything like what this ad says. Sound investment, baloney. There 
is nothing to indicate that it's a sound investment at all. 
 
A reasonable decision. How in the world would anybody know? There have been no reasons given why 
it's a reasonable decision at all. 
 
Well, that's one ad, that's the ad that says, The Potash Decision Some Facts You Should Know. I say the 
potash decision, some facts I wish they had presented. 
 
Then there is another one, Mr. Speaker, and it says, Head Office Saskatchewan, It Makes Good Sense. 
There is a nice little picture here, people sitting around the table and I think that an intersessional 
committee should have the opportunity to assess the validity of this ad too. 
 
Says the market is there. Doesn't mention anything about the implications of the Russian move into the 
North American market. No, it doesn't mention anything about that and you know it doesn't mention 
anything either about the fact that situated where we are, while we have a tremendous potash bed 
underneath us, we have some pretty significant difficulties financially in getting that product to market. 
 
You know, all you have to do is take a look at the map of North America and you pinpoint 
Saskatchewan and you draw some straight lines to the sea ports, that's a long way. Yet there are other 
places where this potash can be developed and it gets back again to the spiral. The money that is going 
to come out of 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1733 
 

my pocket and your pocket and every other citizen of Saskatchewan's pocket is going to go to 
companies which are going to develop mines in order to supply potash and they are going to be closer to 
the waterways of the world than ours is. What impact is that going to have? What in fact is that impact 
on the market situation? Oh yes, the market is there, but it's another situation where you see half the 
story. 
 
Says we have what is needed. Well we've got the potash, but I think you need a little more than potash in 
order to be able to make a marketable commodity. To what extent in fact do you really have what is 
needed? 
 
Again, where are your feasibility studies? Or have you done any? 
 
Then it says your reputation is good and I wrote afterwards, where? Where? I don't know where your 
reputation is good. It says, financially speaking, it's better than nearly every other province. Well, tell us 
a little bit about where you are going to get your money. We'd like to know that and I'm sure the people 
of Saskatchewan would like to know that. I expect it's going to be that big bad American money that you 
don't like. It might be Arab money, it might be European money. Terrible stuff. But your reputation is 
good. Your reputation is about as good as former Premier Barrett's reputation is in British Columbia. 
 
If we want to talk about how good reputation is in the Province of Saskatchewan I would invite the 
Attorney General, the other day he was talking about some time there would be an election and in a 
kibitzing way said, "what about '76, fellows." That would be a great idea. Let's go to the people. I don't 
remember just how many days The Election Act says you have to have to go to the people. Today is the 
7th of January, Wednesdays are good days to have elections. We could have an election I think about the 
4th of February or the 11th. Let's find out what your reputation really is. If you are back on the other 
side of the House afterwards, I'll tell you I'll have to be pretty quiet. But I rather doubt that that would be 
the situation. 
 
Then you say in this ad, Mr. Speaker, this ad goes on and I think that the intersessional committee 
should have an opportunity assess this about the experience. We've got the experience. I thought they 
were going to say yes, we have the experience of the shoe business and we have the experience of 
Intercon. You know they flopped. But no, I don't know of any experience that you have. I'm not sure that 
you have had any success whatever in recruiting in order to make this Potash Corporation go. The 
Attorney General indicated this morning and I think, Mr. Speaker, I referred to this this morning, and 
I'm going to refer to it again. He said, this morning, in answer to a question that, yes, we've got people 
hired to go out and find us a manager. They haven't got one yet. Paying big money, but they don't have 
one yet. Says we have the experience. Well, I don't think they have the experience. I don't think they 
have the expertise. I think that most of the people of Saskatchewan understand that and I think we 
should have an intersessional committee as well, Mr. Speaker, in order to determine whether that in fact 
is so. Whether in fact there is the experience, whether in fact there is the expertise. If it is it hasn't been 
made available in any way, any indication of it at all to Members 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1734 
 

of this House. 
 
Then it says, it makes sense. I hope the Attorney General doesn't leave right now because this really gets 
to it. It says, we're going to bring the head offices from wherever they are, home to Saskatchewan. I was 
wishing there that he might have told us a little bit about the succession duties and the estate taxes that 
they brought in a few years ago and how they drove the head offices of other industries out of 
Saskatchewan because they couldn't afford to stay. Those were the small businesses though. 
 
I suppose it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that Members opposite don't really care about them. The fact that 
we had head offices in Saskatoon and head offices in Regina and head offices in other places in 
Saskatchewan and because of actions of the Government opposite they drove them out. Forced them out. 
Put them in Alberta. Put them in Manitoba because they couldn't afford to stay here. But the committee 
could study that. 
 
But I have a difficult time, Mr. Speaker, understanding an ad that says, Head Office Saskatchewan It 
Makes Sense, when within the last three or four years we have had deliberate action taken by the 
Government opposite to drive head offices out of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — And so I have today that I really wonder about their credibility, Mr. Speaker. I 
wonder about the credibility of these ads. I wonder about the credibility of the whole manoeuvre 
because I haven't seen anything yet in five weeks that shows that the Government has anything that 
shows any degree of credibility in this nationalization move at all. 
 
Well, there's another ad, Mr. Speaker. What Makes Potash Different? That's a heck of a good question. 
What makes potash different? It goes on to talk about a number of things like it can help us and others 
and we have potash for the future and there is no substitute, it's our biggest mineral resource and there is 
needed expansion. It gets at that expansion thing again. I thought that in that one they might have told a 
little bit about why there's been no expansion. I know that the Member for Saskatoon Centre knows why 
there has been no expansion. He's lived in a community very close to a mine. He knows that they can't 
afford to expand. He knows that there was a mine within 12 miles east of Saskatoon that was all ready to 
expand and because of the taxation situation had to close down, had to quit, couldn't go ahead and 
expand. 
 
Now we all know there is no substitute. We all know it's our biggest mineral resource. We all know we 
have potash for the future. I think that potash facts thing indicates that we have potash for 5,000 years. 
That's no secret. It's a bit of a motherhood ad. But I was interested in what makes potash different and I 
concluded, Mr. Speaker, that the answer to that probably is, potash isn't any different. It's only the first 
that's all. But in terms of industry in this province potash is nationalized first, then it will probably be 
uranium second and then it probably will be copper or some other third. In the final analysis there will 
be no difference. They will all be nationalized. The only significant thing about that ad is, 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1735 
 

what makes potash different? Well we can say it's first. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, reason No. 10. Why I believe that this question should be referred to an 
intersessional committee of this Legislature in order to study the matter. That is that we do not know the 
position this nationalization will place us in vis-a-vis the Federal Government. 
 
Now again, there have been a couple of statements made and there has been no clarification in this 
House though maybe there will be. I suggest that there is no more clarification here than there has been 
with any other. But there could be clarification insofar as an intersessional committee is concerned. That 
is what in fact is the position of the Federal Government with regard to the protection of the tax position 
insofar as they are concerned. 
 
I'd like to refer Members of the House to show how this is still a pretty fundamental issue that has not 
yet been resolved. Or at least if it has where it hasn't been resolved as far as we are concerned. There has 
been no mention of it. 
 
Here's an article I picked out of the Star Phoenix. It says: 
 

The Saskatchewan Government could find itself in court in the next few years doing what 
the potash industry has been doing in the recent past, that is claiming that attacks on 
potash revenues is unconstitutional. In hypothetical discussions (this article goes on) held 
by the Federal Cabinet some time ago it was agreed we would have to indicate we would 
tax a provincial Crown owned operation equally with a privately owned one and it was 
our view of the constitution that we could do so. 

 
That's a quotation from the Hon. Mr. Lang. 
 
Now whether that's true or not again, I really am in no position to say because I am not a constitutional 
expert but as I said when I began, Mr. Speaker, I am here, I am trying to represent the views of the 
people of my constituency and the views of the people in this province and I think that that is the 
question that needs to be resolved. I think we need to get some answers to that question and I think that 
an intersessional committee would have some opportunity get the answers to that question. 
 
Now the article goes on, you see, it shows you the conflict that exists just on the one point. It goes on to 
say: 
 

Provincial Attorney General Roy Romanow has said Section 125 of the BNA Act, which 
states lands and property owned by government may not be taxed by another government, 
will protect the Crown potash company from federal corporation taxes. The Attorney 
General has admitted Ottawa could attempt to protect its tax position by slapping on an 
export charge on the more than 95 per cent of potash production which leaves Canada. 
But Mr. Lang says Ottawa will not have to levy an export charge, federal legal experts 
have advised that losses of taxation of Crown corporation profits would not be 
unconstitutional. 

 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1736 
 

Well there are some different views but I think it has some kind of an impact on the economics of the 
potash takeover. Now what in fact is the story? The story hasn't been answered as far as I am concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that Members opposite have a responsibility to see to it that that story is told. 
There are two fairly credible politicians, one at the federal level and one at the provincial level who have 
different points of view on this point. Now what, Mr. Speaker, since the Attorney General has not 
answered that kind of question to date, I think that an intersessional committee ought to be struck in 
order to get the answers. I think that that particular point is reinforced, Mr. Speaker, in a statement again 
in the Star-Phoenix, that very credible newspaper in which the Minister of Finance, the federal Minister 
of Finance is quoted with regard to the question. He said this: 
 

There should be no misunderstanding that the principle which we apply to oil will also 
apply to potash. The Saskatchewan Government has announced that it intends to take 
over effective control of the province's potash through ownership of at least half of the 
industry. Under current tax structures provincial Crown corporations are not taxed by the 
Federal Government. Government owned potash mines would be placed under the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan exempting income taxation currently paid by private 
owners. 

 
What is our position going to be with regard to the taxation question at the federal level? Mr. Speaker, I 
have asked that question in the House and I haven't been given an answer and I have now spent a few 
minutes of the House's time going through a number of reasons why I think that this matter ought to be 
referred to an intersessional committee in line with the amendment which has been put before this 
House. Ten reasons which I had put together prior to today and an eleventh reason that was given this 
morning by the Attorney General and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in concluding my remarks that I urge 
every Member to give their earnest consideration to the amendment and to support it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — As with my colleague I participate in this debate for the last 
time, having spoken to the Bill itself at some length and having spoken as well to the earlier amendment 
which the Government defeated. The earlier amendment being the one to refer the potash question to an 
independent commission for public hearings. Now we come to a second proposal which we have made 
in respect of this question and that is to refer the matter to an intersessional committee so that it can 
study the question and assess the information that is available; to call witnesses and conduct hearings; to 
take the question in a sense to the people to give them the information which we as their representatives 
can't seem to get; and in turn to give them the opportunity to give to this House and to Members of the 
Assembly their views and their concerns with respect to this question which is the largest one, most 
people believe, in the history of the province in terms of what we are asking the people to do. 
 
I want to take this occasion to stand back a little bit from the fray and to look in a fundamental and basic 
way again 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1737 
 

at what we are doing in this process because we have now been here since the 12th of November and 
have in that period of time directed our attention in the main to this potash question. Despite the fact that 
we have been here virtually two months and despite the fact that we are staring in the face a government 
decision which is larger than any other that any government has undertaken in this province, we still find 
ourselves groping for the most elementary kind of information. We are not talking about questions of 
intricacy and all the myriad of delicate kinds of questions which this proposal raises, I am talking about 
a basic elementary kind of information which we still don't have. 
 
I was thinking to myself this morning as I saw the Member for Regina Victoria (Mr. Baker) take his 
seat, and I thought of his inaugural address to city council last night and I visualized this situation. I saw 
him coming to city council, because he is a reasonable man, and saying to the city council, gentlemen 
there are 10 or 12 highrise apartment buildings, in the city of Regina. They cost about $100 million or 
$400 million each or $200 million and I think we should buy one or all of these highrise office 
buildings. He said, I should like you gentlemen to consider that and then one of the aldermen would ask 
him, how many of these highrise office buildings would you buy, Mr. Mayor? He said, Oh, perhaps one 
or perhaps 12 or maybe six or maybe eight or maybe seven. You can imagine the consternation and the 
shock that would be on the faces of the aldermen to whom he said that. They would say, well, surely, 
Mr. Mayor, if you want to buy 10 or 12 of these highrise office buildings you should indicate whether 
we are looking at one or whether we are looking at 10 or 12, that is the most basic of all questions. He 
would say, no I am not prepared to say, the best I am prepared to say is that we should buy one or some 
or all. He is saying, in effect, I don't want to tell you at this stage whether it should be one or 10 or 12. 
Then another alderman would venture forward, I suppose, with a question and he would say, well, tell 
us, Mr. Mayor, what is the cost if we undertook this venture you are suggesting? The Mayor would say, 
well, I don't want to say, I don't think that would be in the public interest but it could be $500 million or 
it could be $1 billion. Some estimates would put it at $2 billion and some at $3 billion. Again, of course 
there would be enormous consternation and shock and they would say to him, well, surely to goodness, 
Mr. Mayor, that is the most basic kind of information. The second most basic question. The first one 
being, how many? One, 10 or 12? He says, I am not prepared to say. The second most basic question, 
how much? Oh, he says, I am not prepared to say. I don't want to tell you that, he would say. Well, I 
suppose a third alderman might say, well tell us what one of these highrise office buildings could cost 
us, just one? He would say, well, I am not prepared to tell you that either. We have done some estimates. 
I have some figures in my back pocket but I can't tell you what those are. The third most basic question. 
No, he says, I might tip my hand if I did that. I am sorry I can't give you that information. 
 
Well, another alderman might say, well, Mr. Mayor, where are you going to get the money from? 
Suppose you bought even only one at $300 million, where do we get the money? He'd say well, we have 
a little reserve here and we have a little reserve there and we have another little reserve over here but I 
really don't know. I really don't know. I might have to go to New York, I may have to go to the Arabs, I 
may have to go God knows where, to rob little piggy banks here, little piggy banks there, 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1738 
 

little reserve accounts here, some there. I don't know. But they say, suppose you wanted to buy the 12 
office buildings you talk about instead of the one, where then would you get the money if you are 
looking at $2 billion or $3 billion? I don't know, he would say, or if I know, gentlemen, I am sorry, I 
can't tell you where it is going to come from. Well, how many years do you think it will take us to repay 
this if we buy these office buildings Oh, I am not prepared to say. What would be the interest rate? Sorry 
I can't tell you that I don't want to tip my hand. 
 
Again, I can imagine the shock of the aldermen in the city of Regina if the Member for Regina Victoria 
in his capacity as mayor should put that kind of a situation before them. Of course, the Mayor of Regina 
would no sooner do that in respect of his problems than one would think a Premier of Saskatchewan 
would do in respect to his. But, interestingly enough, what the Member for Regina Victoria would never 
do in his capacity as mayor with respect to problems not near the magnitude we here deal with, the 
Premier does that very kind of thing with no response to the basic kind of questions we have been 
asking, information of this elementary kind that we have been seeking for virtually two months. Then I 
suppose in this whole process one of the aldermen might say, well, are we going to buy one or six or 
seven or maybe 10 or 12 of these buildings, he won't tell us how may, he won't tell us the cost or where 
the money is going to come from, but suppose, it's ridiculous to suppose that we would do this, but 
suppose we did, suppose we said, sure, go ahead. Now what's the interest rate on the money going to be? 
He said, oh, seven per cent perhaps to 15 per cent, that's the usual commercial rate, somewhere in that 
neighborhood. The alderman might say, well it makes quite a difference whether it is seven per cent or 
ten or 15 or 12. How much cash are you going to pay? It is an important question to find out how much 
we have to borrow. Oh, I don't know, the answer is in my back pocket but of course it is not in 
anybody's interest to know. You can imagine how long that discussion would go on. That council 
meeting wouldn't last five minutes and that mayor wouldn't last 15 minutes. And of course here we are 
now going two months with a government that presumably is going to last another three years, asking us 
in that basic kind of way to make a similar kind of decision not having given us that kind of basic 
elementary information. 
 
Of course, if the Mayor had last night at his inaugural address, I am sure if he had put that kind of 
question to them, one of them would have said, well, Mr. Mayor, maybe the sensible thing here to do is 
to refer your proposal to a committee of the aldermen. Let them have a look at it. Maybe you can give 
them some of the information on the questions we have been asking about. Let them assess it and then 
come back to council and tell us what it is all about. I expect full well that that kind of proposition would 
be accepted by them and would be accepted by the Mayor. 
 
Now I draw that parallel and I think it is a reasonably fair parallel because what happens in the process 
here is that we have got caught up in the middle of the forest, so to speak, and we lose our perspective. 
We get in the middle of the trees and we lose sight of the forest. We get so involved in the debate and 
the fine points and in the information we are trying to seek and the points that we are trying to make, 
that we often lose sight of what we are doing. But in that basic parallel 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1739 
 

kind of way that's the same process we are engaged in. Now that mayor would never undertake a project 
of that kind without giving that kind of information asked. Why, as I say, with a much larger question 
and issue, does this Government not give us this information? I don't know what sort of an attitude it has 
towards this House or the Members of the House, or, indeed, even for its own Members. I look 
occasionally at the faces opposite and I ask myself, I wonder what these people know of this gigantic 
proposal the Government is undertaking, standing in the neighborhood of a billion dollars or two billion 
dollars? Do you know that our deficit in Saskatchewan at the moment, our debt load in this province is 
$900 million. Even if we went the modest route which $500 million or $1 billion would produce and 
that is a very conservative figure the Premier gave us for only a very modest proposal, we would have a 
debt load in this province of some $2 billion. If we went further than the two or three mines which that 
$1 billion or $500 million would produce, we would have a debt load in this province of $3 billion or $4 
billion. There is no question whatever about it. Even a modest advance on the Government's proposal 
would leave us with the heaviest debt load in the entire Dominion of Canada. We would have a debt 
load I would venture to say larger than any other government in the North American continent, relative 
to our size and population. Not that that necessarily is bad, what I say is that that is the enormity and 
magnitude of the question we are looking at yet we have this paucity of information with which to make 
a decision. 
 
What we have been trying to do with this amendment and the other amendment and some of our other 
proposals, including the debate proposal, is to bring the Government back to basics in respect to these 
questions. Back to discussing with us in a reasonable fashion and in a genuine way what it is proposing 
here except in the most elementary terms in which they have been doing. And to try to draw to the 
attention of the people of Saskatchewan the enormity of the decision that they are being asked to take 
and how we keep getting nothing in return. Nothing. 
 
The committee idea I think is not as good a one as would be an independent commission holding public 
hearings around the province and making some independent assessments but at least a committee of the 
Members of the House is perhaps the next best thing. I remind Members opposite who have patterned 
themselves and their economic nationalization provisions after the British experience, that in those years 
1945, '46, '47, '48 and the '50s, when the nationalization program was being undertaken by the labor 
counterparts in Britain of the Members opposite, each one of those nationalizations was preceded by an 
in-depth, independent kind of study. They assessed the thing in the most minute detail, looking at the 
problems in their smallest and most infinite variety. Those studies were in each case made public and in 
each case the government founded its legislative measures based upon those studies. It laid the studies 
before the House of Commons, before the people of Britain. We can't begin to get any information of 
that kind. It is our hope that if we went forward with a committee of this kind, the committee would 
have the power to summon witnesses, to call forward materials, the studies, and, as my friend said 
earlier, to call in municipal officials and begin little by little to piece this thing together so that we would 
begin to understand better what we are really here about. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1740 
 

There's a whole variety of things that that commission would ask in terms of questions and a whole 
variety of information which that commission could provide. 
 
Why do we suggest that we should refer it to a committee of the Members? Well, we say first because of 
the enormity of the decision, the enormity of the undertaking. Secondly, because of the tremendous risks 
involved for the province and there are very real risks in respect to this issue. We say thirdly, it should 
be referred to that committee because on the surface at least, it appears as though it's a needless measure 
which is being put before us. I'll have more to say on that in a few minutes. We say as a fourth reason, a 
fourth reason why, why are we suggesting this kind of committee is to provide people themselves, the 
province, the opportunity to participate in the decision and to better understand them, because in the end 
it isn't only the seventeen people sitting opposite that have made this decision, who are going to live or 
die with it. It's the 900,000 people in the province that are going to live or die with it. If any one of the 
Members opposite thinks that there isn't an enormous risk inherent in this proposal, then they haven't 
even begun to look at it. 
 
It's all very well to have an industry which in terms of its investment with some $700 million several 
years ago and which may now be worth $2 billion or $3 billion, we really don't know; it's all very well 
to talk about taking over that kind of a business when potash prices are high and demand is strong. 
 
When you talk to rural people, farmers in particular, about this proposal, what they will tell you is that 
they see in it, many of the aspects of the grain industry. We have had two or three very good years. We 
have prices of $4 and $5 a bushel. Demand has been very strong. We can sell everything we have. All 
the while though costs have been rising enormously. Their greatest fear is that if grain prices went back 
to $2 a bushel they could in the process be wiped out. They say that's the most serious problem facing 
us. They say, you know the potash takeover is something like it. It's all very well to get into the potash 
business in that big way so long as prices are $70 or $80 a ton and projected, according to one piece of 
information I saw provided by the Government, a very sketchy projection again, but it's all we have got, 
that it will go up to $100 a ton. 
 
But it wasn't very many years ago when that product was selling for $12 and $15 a ton. Between the 
time it was selling for $15 and $20 a ton and today the costs of course have escalated like everything 
else. If those potash prices went back again to the level of $20 and $15 and $12 a ton, it would produce 
an effect not unlike wheat prices going back to $1.98 or $2 a bushel. 
 
What would bankrupt the farmer would in turn virtually bankrupt, if not bankrupt, this province if we 
had a downturn in the potash markets and in the potash industry in that same way. Anyone who says 
there isn't risk, an enormous risk involved in this venture is either totally ignorant and remaining 
deliberately ignorant or alternatively glossing over something, not being entirely fair, misrepresenting 
the position or as the Premier does, to concede some risk, but to underestimate the enormity of it. 
 
We think that this commission of Members could begin to 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1741 
 

assess the risk involved and the benefit weighed against that risk. One surely never undertakes a risk 
without which there is not, in the event of success, a benefit that will overshadow the risk, in the event 
of failure, a serious liability. 
 
We think there is a fifth reason why it makes sense to refer this matter to a sessional or intersessional 
committee of Members. That is to use this Legislature to a greater extent than what we have been doing 
in the past. Members of the House of Commons sit in that parliament about ten or occasionally eleven 
months a year. Members of Parliament are full time at their work. We in the Legislature have been 
sitting with respect or with the exception of this particular period on an average of about three months 
per year. Members of the Legislature are not being used by any means to their full capacity. Seventeen 
of the Members opposite are full time, the Members of the Cabinet and the Premier. The balance of 
them are not. The balance of them apart from doing their constituency work spend about three months a 
year here. Many of them are very able people. Those people should be put to work as MLAs far more 
extensively than what they are. 
 
As the Resolution suggests there should be Mr. Kowalchuk, a former Minister. I think he'd be of value 
on the committee with his experience. It suggests Mr. Thibault who has participated in the past in these 
kinds of intersessional and sessional committees and from the information I have does a very, very good 
job, and pursues the questions referred to with vigor and interest and genuine concern. He has enjoyed I 
understand his experiences with these kinds of commissions. We suggested Mr. Lange, Mr. Pepper, Mr. 
Feschuk, Mr. Mostoway, I am sure he'd be interested, Mr. Larson, who again has something in genuine 
terms to offer and Mr. Dyck. Well there is Mr. Lane, it also suggests. I know Mr. Lane could add 
enormously in terms of his experience as an individual and as a Member of the House to a study of this 
kind of question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Now we made an omission which we readily conceded and that is we overlooked 
the Conservatives when we drafted the Resolution. Someone said that was understandable because we 
hear so little of them we occasionally forget they are actually there. But we are quite prepared to 
entertain an amendment to our motion to have at least Messrs Larter and Bailey added to the committee. 
These two Members are active and no doubt would like to be a whole lot more active if they only had 
the opportunity to do it. 
 
We would even consider as a matter of fact adding the Member for Nipawin to the committee. Because 
while he wouldn't be particularly concerned about the substance of the question, at least he would be 
concerned about the way in which the committee conducts itself. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — That's of value too. So we would be prepared to have Messrs Larter and Bailey 
sit on the committee in terms of the addition that they could make to the substance of the question and 
we would be prepared to have the Member for Nipawin sit on 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1742 
 

the committee in terms of the way in which it proceeds and its points or order and those kinds of things. 
 
Now the question is, what are we asking this committee to do? We say in the Resolution that it ought to 
investigate the effects of the purchase by the Government, among others, of potash mines. We say it 
should examine the effects on the potash markets that the industry has built up over the course of the last 
few years. We say it should assess the effects on our relationship with other Canadians. Once again there 
are very genuine and real questions arising there. We say it should assess the effects on the investment 
climate in the province. It would look at the need in this province for capital. Where the capital will 
come from. The short term needs as well as the long term needs. Where will the capital be needed? 
 
That brings me to another piece of information which I know is in the possession of the Government and 
it is yet a third instance of information that they have available but which they are not making available 
to us, which I have seen in the last couple of days. 
 
The first is the Bredenbury study and the assessment in respect of constructing their own mine. Mr. 
Speaker, what's in that Bredenbury study that the Government is so secretive about? As Members know 
they undertook not very long ago to hire an engineering firm as well as other experts in the area to study 
the feasibility of the Government of Saskatchewan building its own mine in the Bredenbury district. A 
whole lot of engineering went into that study. Our information is that it was conducted by Kilborn 
Engineering which is a Toronto engineering firm. There were other studies done as well as to the 
economics and the financing. 
 
We have been trying and I tell Members opposite we are continuing to try to get the information of those 
feasibility studies. We are getting little by little closer and closer. There is some most interesting 
information in that Bredenbury study. We are told, although we haven't yet seen the documents, that to 
build a mine of 3.8 million capacity would cost the Government $300 million. A mine of larger capacity 
would have cost $600 million. We are told that that study was given to Dominion Securities in Toronto 
the bonding agents to have a look at and to assess the financial end or the financial feasibility of it. Now 
these are pieces of information that we have been able to put together. We don't know whether it's 
accurate or inaccurate. One day we hope to find out by trying to get the study. 
 
If the information we have is accurate, that that mine would have cost the province $300 million on the 
short side or $600 million on the long side, then it is very clear that when they are talking in terms of 
$500 million or a billion dollars they are only talking in terms of one or two mines. This is one of the 
significant points of that study. This is to say this. Clearly it took $700 million to come into this 
province and develop the mines which we have which took place several years ago. With the effect of 
inflation, firstly, since the period of construction of those mines, obviously that figure is much higher 
than $700 million. Some people will say it is now more like $1 billion. For the investment alone, that is 
only for the investment, to build the mine and to purchase the equipment. Secondly, add to that the fact 
that the companies have been 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1743 
 

successful in what they have done. The value of what they have is very much different had they failed 
than had they succeeded and the fact is they have succeeded and I suggest the value, therefore, is more 
than the $700 million invested. As a matter of fact with the demand having been so strong and the price 
having risen so enormously over the last two or three years, it is a fair bet to say that that $700 million is 
very much higher because of inflation and because the thing was a success and they now have markets 
and have a source of income, which has added again appreciably o the investment base of $700 million. 
If the Bredenbury study showed that it would cost the Government $300 million to $600 million to build 
one mine, their mine, very clearly adding all that up we are talking about something much larger than 
$500 million to $1 billion, unless we intend only to purchase one mine or perhaps two mines. 
 
Surely to goodness there is nothing so basic in way of information and those studies and the amount of 
money that we are going to spend and where the money is going to come from, that ought to be given to 
the Members of this House. Little by little we are trying to piece together. We have been doing that for 
two months. We think in the course of the two months we have developed a lot of information, but 
actually we are only scratching the surface as to what lies behind it. 
 
Those Bredenbury studies would be extremely revealing. The second bit of information, I said that I had 
an example of a third one a moment ago. This is the second bit information, not directly related to 
potash, but again, is an example of the kind of information which isn't given to the House and which we 
ought to have and that is the studies which were done with respect to the gas purchase the Minister 
announced the other day. 
 
Again, he said there was a study and we think there were two studies. Our information is that there were 
two and there were some conflicting questions. Again, we can't get them; he told us they weren't in the 
public interest to give us. The kind of information as I say is of such a basic kind which Members of the 
House, not only should have as a matter of commonsense and reason, they ought to have it as matter of 
right, because each one of us sitting here represent 10,000 people in the province. We have a right to 
have that kind of information. If we aren't able to get it as we haven't been able to do in the two months 
that we have been here, we say turn it over to a committee with the power to subpoena and we will 
blessed well get it. 
 
I expect what is going to happen is that the Government Members will stand up with their 18 Cabinet 
Ministers and vote down the amendment. Why, I am not sure, because it is the very kind of thing they, 
too, ought to be asking for. Because I suspect that many of them actually have less information than we. 
I don't think they have been told any more than we have been told in the House. We have had to get out 
and try to dig for what we have. The Hon. Members opposite, that is the backbenchers, of course, don't 
have the same inclination to do this because they are in a different position. So I suspect many of them 
actually have less information than we. It would be in their own best interests, too, to set up a committee 
of Members of this kind so that they themselves could subpoena, so that they had the power to subpoena 
under law to compel some of these studies to be brought forward, some of this information 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1744 
 

to be given to us. 
 
We should like the committee to take a look at the relative efficiency of the operation of the mines, 
either by government, by a mix of government and private ownership or alternatively by the private 
industry itself. Again, we are told there are two or three very efficient mines; we are told that some of 
the older ones are no longer so efficient. The experience in other jurisdictions with public ownership and 
with a mix of private ownership and public ownership has been well considered in respect of industries 
very much like this. The coal mining industry in Great Britain is a prime example, where they began 
with a mix of public-private ownership and eventually went to full ownership route and then came back 
or are now in the process of coming back to a mixed public private ownership of the coal mining 
industry. 
 
The essential question there has been efficiency. We think the committee could take a good look at that 
question of under what circumstances and under what particular way would it be most efficient. We 
would like to see a pretty through investigation of that kind of mix. We would give this committee say, 
the same power to hold hearings throughout the province, to travel from centre to centre. It might travel 
to those seven centres, the very centres that we challenged the Government to debate in. Those are seven 
major centres. Then two or three days in each one of those centres holding public hearings, giving to the 
public the information it has and in turn getting from the public the information that the public has. 
Despite the attitude of the Members of the Government, that is the 17 of them who make these kinds of 
decisions, those people out in rural Saskatchewan may very well have a great deal to offer in terms of 
wisdom and commonsense. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — We should like to see the committee have the power to subpoena and examine 
some accountants, accountants from industry, private accountants might even engage a chartered 
accountant or two of its own to assess the financial figures, the various statements that come before it. 
We see it summoning management of the various potash companies, questioning them as to their 
markets, and all those kinds of associated questions. 
 
How interesting it would be if we could bring under oath, before us this afternoon, the manager of a 
potash mine and ask him questions under oath as to his operations. How revealing, I think, that may be 
in many respects. Ask him about the markets; ask him about the price, how much is produced, how 
much they are capable of producing and why are they not producing more; what they foresee themselves 
in terms of market development for their own companies. And we wouldn't overlook, this committee 
summoning some government officials. It would be a most interesting exercise, as a matter of fact, if a 
committee of this kind should have the power to summon, which I think it would have and is quite 
proper. Other jurisdictions do it. Parliament does it all the time — to actually summon the Minster, Mr. 
Cowley, to come before it with his information. He isn't prepared to give to us in this House, and he 
hasn't been prepared for two months to give us in this House the basic elementary kind of information I 
asked for. How interesting it would be for us, as elected Members, to have him before us under oath 
answering 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1745 
 

our questions. We would ask him how much here; where is the money coming from there, what contacts 
have you made for money over here. What is the interest rate? What sort of response are you getting? 
Very, very revealing questions, for sure. To ask questions of the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) in 
the same variety. We heard the Premier telling us one day that he had a series of discussions with elected 
and non-elected officials of the Federal Government with respect to a variety of federal-provincial 
questions. Again, no indication of what the result of those discussions was, no idea, whatever, what 
response the Federal Government may take in these many respects we have been talking about. It is very 
interesting, indeed, to get that kind of information before us. 
 
As I say there is no question but what we see in respect of this proposal, only the tip of the iceberg. All 
of it lies beneath the water. And believe me it is very, very difficult for 15 private Members to try to dig 
below the surface and get it. You get little hints there and you get little pieces of information here and 
you get a little lead there and you follow it up and eventually you come to the point where they climb up 
out of fear to give you any more. 
 
How interesting it would be if we could have these people before us and we could examine them under 
oath to get the information. We would have marketing experts come before us, too. We don't even have 
this kind of basic information. You can't get all this kind of information from the companies, at least we 
can't, they are hesitant to tell us. Where are you selling your product? We know where Central Canadian 
Potash sell theirs. Their contract is with the farmers group, the co-operative group in the United States is 
a fairly open thing. We know how much they sell; we know to whom they sell. We know that it is for a 
guaranteed period, until 1981 or 1987 — I have forgotten precisely. We don't know the details of the 
other markets of the other mines. What the long-term future for those mines is. What the likely price is 
going to be. Again, questions of the most fundamental kind, not questions involving a whole lot of 
detail, but the most fundamental basic kind of information. 
 
We would like to see this committee look at alternatives. I talked about assessing a number of questions, 
the effects, various respects, the kinds of powers that we would invest this committee with and how it 
would get the Members of the House working. Then we would ask them to look at a number of 
alternatives. We would say, consider this question. Government has said this to us. The potash industry 
has not been paying its fair share of tax revenue to Saskatchewan in the past. The Government took two 
moves in that respect — it increased the taxes and the reserve taxes of prorationing and we have a very 
complex tax system with respect to potash as the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) 
pointed out the other day. We would ask them to take a look at that tax system; take a look at the effect 
of the Government decision to insist having half of the expansion of the province. And to ask if there is 
any alternative to that. What is the alternative? The Government says that the bind we are in, is that 
under the reserve tax which is being challenged, it is conceivable that in three or four years or five years 
down the road when the Supreme Court finally answers that question, it is conceivable we could have to 
pay back $4 or $5 million, which would put us in a very, very difficult financial bind. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1746 
 

That reminds me to ask the Attorney General, as I one day asked the Premier, and I hope that he will 
take the question and I hope when he speaks in connection with this that he will give us the answer. 
Why did you levy the reserve tax which you either knew or ought to have known was going to be of 
questionable constitutionality. Did you know that under the power you have under the Constitutional 
Questions Act, you can take your tax system and refer it directly to the Court of Appeal as you have a 
right to do for a decision. That decision would have been made by a Court of Appeal probably within 
three or four months, at most six months. If there were a further appeal it could go directly to the 
Supreme Court and that entire constitutional question, under the reserve tax could have been cleaned up 
inside of six or eight months. 
 
We think the Government has that option with its reserve tax. I asked the Premier one day why he didn't 
do it and he wasn't entirely certain because the Attorney General was out at the time and I intended to 
ask him that question. I want to ask him that question because I doubt whether he will have the chance 
on this committee although it is another question the committee would ask. 
 
You see when you set up the reserve tax system you put to the potash companies a tax system which 
obviously they were chafing under, a level of taxation and a system of taxation, not geared to profits, 
that you knew the potash companies were going to oppose. Having done that, knowing that they were 
going to oppose it, why did you run the risk of implementing the tax, having them sue, having them tie 
up for four years, so that ultimately if they succeeded at the end of the line you would have to pay back 
four or five hundred million dollars. 
 
Let's pause then, Mr. Speaker, and look at that in perspective. I said that the information we have 
showed that the Bredenbury Study indicated that it may cost the Government $300 million or $600 
million to build the mine. Set that over in compartment A for the time being. Compartment B is the 
Government institutes a reserve tax system. It is challenged. If the companies succeed ultimately in their 
challenge and the reserve tax system is set aside, what's the consequence? The Government of 
Saskatchewan may have to repay $400 or $500 million. That is compartment B. 
 
Now looking on the one hand on the enormous cost to build only one mine of their own and looking at 
the risk of having to pay back $400 or $500 million down the road you begin to see a little more clearly 
what is going on here. Why the Government is bringing forward a Bill of this kind which is designed, 
very deliberately to get a voluntary sale over an expropriation. It is the club, there is no question about 
that. It begins to make a little more sense as to what they are doing. 
 
The alternative, which we would ask the committee to examine is to back off and take another look at it 
and say to the potash companies — all right what kind of tax system can we devise that may be 
agreeable? We can get, perhaps, virtually as much revenue without killing the goose with a proper tax 
system. If we couldn't agree with the potash companies we would then say, very well here is the kind of 
system that we foresee and recommend to the Government that once we devise that tax system, if taken 
to the Court of Appeal directly under the Constitutional Questions Act, ask the Court of Appeal, is this a 
valid tax system? Court 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1747 
 

of Appeal could have that answer back to us very shortly. If someone was interested they could appeal it 
to the Supreme Court of Canada and the answer, again, would be back very shortly and we would have 
avoided the possibility of four or five years down the road having to pay back $500 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very disappointed that the Government rejected our suggestion to have an 
independent commission to hold public hearings and, secondly, the Premier gave us an indication the 
day before yesterday, that he would not have this matter referred to an intersessional committee. He said 
also, and he rejected completely and out of hand the suggestion that we have public forum discussions 
around the province, to which Government spokesmen and industry spokesmen and some of us might be 
invited to attend, to discuss and that was rejected. We, as a last resort, said to the Government yesterday, 
all right let us debate you two on two, as a last resource to try to get this question to the people more 
directly and to permit them some participation. The Attorney General dismissed that one on two fronts. 
(1) He used the absolutely oldest ploy in the world for not wanting to meet somebody in debate, and I 
was a bit surprised at that as I would have thought that he would have been able to devise something a 
little fresher — and that was, we don't want to build a forum for you. 
 
Of course, that is the oldest one in existence, when someone is challenged to debate and say I don't want 
to build a forum for you. It is so readily transparent, too, and that is why so many people have rejected 
that as a response to these kinds of debates and they now give more sophisticated responses when they 
want to avoid something. Because not only would he be giving us a forum, he would himself have a 
forum. In those seven debates in the seven major centres of the province, which we proposed on two 
nights, Thursday and Friday of next week, we would have a forum for half an hour, fifteen minutes each. 
They, too, would have a forum, half an hour, fifteen minutes each. Then we proposed to give each side 
five minutes to clean up with a neutral chairman and parliamentary rules. 
 
Take Yorkton as an example. My seatmate the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) and I were 
scheduled to debate the Attorney General and the Minister of Education in Yorkton next Friday evening 
on January 16, at 7: 30 p.m. The Attorney General would have the opportunity to speak for 15 minutes 
and the Minister of Education for 15 minutes, my seatmate and I each 15 minutes as well, each given 
five minutes to clean up. 
 
My guess is that had the Attorney General and the Minister of Education agreed to that, Yorkton would 
probably had one of the largest public meetings it has seen in many years. The people of Yorkton and 
the people in the surrounding area would have had an opportunity to hear first hand both sides of the 
question. As we said we would invite the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) as an observer or 
alternatively he was welcome to come along and participate if he had changed his strategy and wanted to 
get into the debate. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — How about as a referee? 
 
MR. CAMERON: — As referee. This reminds me of something my friend the Member for Regina 
Lakeview used to tell me about the Member 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1748 
 

of the Legislature for Last Mountain-Touchwood, who I understand used to be an umpire. He was an 
umpire of some renown in his area and given the experience we had in the House yesterday, when we 
were just about at the point where a private Bill was about to be passed and get on, the Member rose on 
his feet and didn't demonstrate the usual discretion that good umpires demonstrate. I understand that 
having been in Government now as long as he has been I can understand why his discretion has left him 
and having been out of touch with the common person I can understand too why that sense of discretion 
has left him. 
 
I said that we should have this committee weighing risks against the likely benefits of this measure. I 
said, too, that we would have the committee take a look at whether or not this kind of proposal was 
really necessary. 
 
I remember some years ago the first references to potash that I ever heard were along the line that potash 
could do for Saskatchewan what oil was then doing for Alberta and goodness knows we need a lot done 
for Saskatchewan. Since that time we have had the 10, 11 or 12 mines developed; we got to the point 
where that industry is, today, putting in something like $200,000 or $300,000 a day in the provincial 
coffers. So yesterday I think they have paid in equivalent of $100,000 or $250,000, they did it today 
again. As a matter of fact of each of the 32 days that we have been sitting here, they have been paying in 
some $200,000 or $250,000 a day into the provincial treasury. That is an enormous amount of money 
which this industry has contributed. It is contributing to the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don't know nor does any reasonable person that I have talked to, again it is the kind of a question that 
one would like to put to government and get a genuine answer, is how much better do you think we can 
do than the $200,000 or $300,000 a day out of the interest rate by actually owing it? 
 
Another thing the Bredenbury study said apparently — maybe Members opposite would confirm this, 
those who know about the Bredenbury study — was that in terms of finances it was folly because it 
wouldn't return any more to the Government than what the current reserve taxes were returning. Pause 
and reflect on that for a moment! Our information about the Bredenbury study is that it said that it would 
be financial folly because that mine wouldn't return any more to the Government than what a private 
mine would do under the reserve tax. So why spend $300 million to $600 million to get what you 
already can get without having to spend a penny? I don't know whether that is true, I don't know, but I 
have been told that by three or four sources whom I consider to be reliable and they are in the dark as 
well as I am. They are guessing, for from information they have heard and from rumors they have had 
from various people in the industry. That study has gone to various people including, as I said, 
Dominion Securities in Toronto; other people have had access to it. I understand though that every time 
it is hauled out Mr. Dombowsky is very careful not to leave any copies around and always takes it right 
back. It is always treated with the utmost secrecy. The most fundamental piece of information that we 
should have, not available, all we can do is speculate on it. 
 
This committee would have a most interesting time looking at those studies, looking at the question of 
whether or not as 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1749 
 

those studies apparently indicate, it is a needless move. We have heard much about the need for 
government to control this industry in some more effective way. My seatmate referred to that at some 
length — and I don't mean to go into it at any length — but, again, in basic way, what nonsense and 
folly is that to stand and tell us you need more control over this industry? You have problems with it, 
you say, controlling it. What this committee would do is that they would say, all right, let us have a look 
at what kind of control the Government has got. How much does a company produce? As much as the 
Government allows it. When does the company produce? When the Government tells it. Environmental 
questions — designs the mines; habits of the companies in terms of the effect on the environment are all 
controlled by the Provincial Government. Questions of waste, waste of the product and conservation of 
the product; decisions made by government; questions about disposal of by-products, salt water and salt 
alike; decisions made by the Government. Even the level of employment and the level of monetary 
reward to the employees is to some extent influenced by government. How much these companies pay 
of their revenue over the province, controlled by government. 
 
You can't in commonsense, in reason, find any more items of control except that they already have. It is 
such utter nonsense to put to us the proposition, we need this measure to have further control. We would 
like the committee to look at that although we think we know the answer to that one pretty clearly 
because we don't have to rely on the Government for the information. We can get that information. We 
can see how utterly totally controlled these industries already are with the powers the Government has. 
It can take anywhere from 0 to 100 per cent of its profit. It can control its environmental activities. It can 
control how much it produces, when to produce, virtually to whom it sells it and even price levels under 
the prorationing scheme. 
 
As I say how much more control? I can't even conceive of more kinds of control than that. But 
nonetheless we would like to have the committee look at that and see whether the Government is being 
fair in putting forward that proposition to us. 
 
Then the question that arises out of this is, what is there to gain from having ownership? Why should we 
go out on the limb for one billion, two billion or three billion if we gain so little from it? It is a question 
which is a genuine one which I tell you we cannot understand. We go away and have private discussions 
over coffee in the caucus room or at home in the evenings occasionally and we get talking about potash 
again, and we ask some basic questions, the answers don't come back in any logical reasonable way. 
And in a very real sense we keep feeling impotent because we don't have basic information and because 
what information we have and the common sense we can bring to bear on the question, leads us to 
illogical conclusions. It defies understanding and defies logic and that committee could have a look at 
that. To try and understand really what is at the root of this. You know what we are always driven back 
to, because the answer always defies you in terms of logic and rational application of common sense and 
intelligence to it, is we are always driven to the conclusion that it is not a logical, reasonable economic 
decision the Government is making, it is making either a dogmatic decision based upon a socialist 
philosophy or alternatively, it has been made because of pique as we have suggested before. It got 
angered with the industry and then made the decision. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1750 
 

We cannot find, having searched, and I tell you this genuinely, having searched as long as we have done 
to try and find the rationale if there be one for this decision. The only conclusion it always leads you to 
is the two I have mentioned. And yet the Government has said that is not so. The Premier has said, as 
Allan Blakeney, former lawyer, speaking as the Premier of the province, has told us that this is not a 
dogmatic, socialist decision. That is what he said. He also said it wasn't a decision that was taken out of 
anger or frustration with the potash industry, it wasn't a question of pique. He said it made economic 
sense. What he has told us and that is all the information that we have, that it is a rational, logical 
decision based upon cool, hard, economic facts. I tell you that it completely escapes us. I don't say that 
in any political partisan sense or philosophical bias against a Crown corporation doing it. It is just that it 
does not add up. I can't think apart from an independent commission of the kind we suggested a better 
group of people to take a look at some of these questions that this kind of committee we suggest. 
 
Again, I ask some Members opposite how much they really know of this kind of decision. Sometimes 
we feel that they sort of go along and rise when they are told to rise and told to say nay. We would like 
to see them become a little more active and begin to ask the kinds of questions that we have been asking; 
to begin to search for the kind of information we have been searching for. Apart from the politics of the 
situation, they too have a very real responsibility to the people they represent. If they are going to 
participate in the decision the fundamental is that they ought to insist on having the facts. 
 
Let me ask the Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie) has he ever asked the Provincial Secretary if he 
can have a look at the Bredenbury study? Has he been told it is not in the public interest to disclose it? If 
I were he and I were told that, I tell you I would have a word to say about that Minister when I had my 
next caucus. If I were the other private Members over on that side I would be asking the same kinds of 
questions. And if I wasn't getting the responses, the caucus room would be a pretty hot one. Because that 
is a basic fundamental responsibility which they have. It is one thing not to give it to us, it is quite 
another not to give them, and I will bet you they don't have it. I would guess that some of the Cabinet 
has not seen that study. That is the most basic fundamental piece of valuable information to have on this 
whole question. 
 
Members opposite seem to think that we exaggerate when we say there is some unease in the province 
about this decision, and their suspicion about the connection of the wisdom of it. There really is. If you 
talk to the average man about potash he doesn't begin to understand the enormity of a billion dollars or 
two billion dollars. He knows that. He is not even philosophically so much opposed to the fact that the 
Government wants to buy a mine or two; that isn't what bothers him. What bothers him is that in his own 
commonsense way he can't understand the logic of the thing either. He understands the risk, particularly 
farmers as I said earlier, looking at grain prices which may go back to where they were some years and 
they see it on those terms. They get a pretty good handle on it in a rather interesting commonsense kind 
of way. They may not be all that boisterous about it. Some of them are. And I tell the Attorney General I 
had one the other day who had an NDP membership and he will 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1751 
 

never buy another because of the potash takeover. The Attorney General keeps saying he has got a 
certain number of letters. Well, I tell you I would like to be a member of this committee and have the 
Attorney General come before us under oath and tell us how many people have talked to him and his 
colleagues about potash and what the proportion is and how much — the only question I put to you was 
that there was a certain unease in the province and a certain suspicion and an appreciation in pretty 
fundamental commonsense terms of the risk involved. Asking why the government is asking us to 
undertake this enormous risk. They are not prepared to burn flags, prepared to march, it is not that kind 
of issue. It is the kind of issue that they look at in terms of commonsense and see the answers aren't 
there. We think we have been misled. It is an enormous risk and we don't think we are prepared to take 
it. We can't do very much about it but we will remember. That is all we can do. They will remember. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What does the Prime Minister say about this? 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The Attorney General says what does the Prime Minister say about this. We have 
been asking you that question for five weeks. Your Premier talked to the Prime Minister and we said 
what did he say? He says, I am not prepared to say, it is not in the public interest. We ask you what did 
the Prime Minister tell your Premier. The Attorney General thinks the people are following him, he 
thinks he is leading the people of Saskatchewan in this decision. The fact is they are not following him, 
Mr. Speaker, they will soon be chasing him. 
 
We would like to have a committee of this kind also assess the tax position with respect to this proposal. 
My colleague, the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) has referred to an article in which the 
former federal Minister of Justice said that the Federal Government has the power to tax the 
Saskatchewan Potash Corporation if it goes ahead with its nationalization plan. The Attorney General 
has said they don't but we all know, and even he agrees that what you couldn't do with income tax you 
can do with an export tax. 
 
The potash companies in the figures that they have given us have indicated about 25 per cent of their 
take goes to pay federal taxes. The figures they have given us is that up until June 1974, the Federal 
Government was taking about 21 per cent before tax profit in the way of federal tax. The Provincial 
Government was taking 19.8 per cent. Then with the federal budget that came shortly after that, they 
indicate the Provincial Government takes 24.8 per cent and the Federal Government 25 per cent. Then 
the effect of both federal and provincial taxes, I am talking now about the stage three the reserve tax and 
the prorationing fee, federal tax was at 25 per cent, provincial tax at 62.6 per cent. What is interesting 
there is that throughout that period the federal tax remained at or about the 25 per cent level. I don't 
know how much money that has come to each year, I see estimates of $50 million over the course of 
some time. 
 
Another question I should like to ask the government, how much has that been? The importance of that 
would be is that that is the amount which the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation is going to have to pay 
to the Federal Government one way or 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1752 
 

another. That is the minimum amount. The Federal Government has made it very clear that they are not 
going to have their tax base eroded by this nationalization move. 
 
Let me quote from the statement by the former Minister of Justice, the Minister of Transport. He was 
asked this question. 
 

The Saskatchewan Government's potash takeover plans seem to erode the Federal 
Government's tax base in the resource industry. Will the National Government allow this 
to happen? 

 
The answer was, No. 
 

The Federal Government has not taxed provincial government corporations in the past 
but this does not mean it cannot do so. In my view the Federal Government has the 
constitutional power to tax Crown corporations. It has a right to protect its share of 
revenue from industry. If it failed to tax a regular commercial activity in one province 
just because the province owned it, that would pressure other provinces to take over 
ownership to avoid taxation. The Finance Minister, Donald Macdonald indicated the 
same thing, that it will not have its federal tax base eroded. 

 
So the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation is likely going to have to pay some 25 per cent of almost 100 
per cent of what it makes to the Federal Government, according to the figures given to us by the 
industry. I don't know whether those figures are accurate or not. Again it is information which we cannot 
get, except from the people opposite who will not give it to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said the position of our Members on this Resolution is that we would have 
preferred to have the Government set up an independent commission with a short tenure to take a look at 
these things in an expert kind of way and report back to us with the kind of information that we ought to 
have before we are called upon to make this decision. Having rejected that, we then asked for a 
committee of this kind, which as I said earlier, is probably the second best thing, to get the Members 
themselves to look at these questions and to get the information. I expect the Government will say, No, 
as the Premier has already indicated, they are not prepared to do it. 
 
We asked thirdly, as I said earlier for the debate. The Attorney General on behalf of the Government has 
said no to that as well. 
 
Now, I go back to the example I used at the beginning of the Member for Regina Victoria. I go back to 
that little meeting he was having last night with his aldermen. When one of the aldermen said, we are 
not prepared to accept this. We have asked how many do you want to buy, you said we are not prepared 
to tell you. We said how much does one cost, he said, we are not prepared to tell you. What if you buy 
all of them, where are you going to get the money? I am not prepared to say. How much money is it 
going to be? I don't know, I am not prepared to disclose it. What interest rate? Not prepared to say. 
Where are you going to get the money? Not prepared to say, none of this is in the public interest. Have 
you done some studies? Yes. Where are they? We are not prepared to say. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1753 
 

It is not in the public interest. 
 
In other words, treat you with complete utter contempt in respect of a very large decision. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CAMERON: — That alderman finally said, well, then isn't the sensible thing to do is get a 
committee of two or three aldermen together and take a look at this and come back with some 
information, before we are asked to make a decision like that? The Mayor said, No, I am not prepared to 
do that either. What you are going to have to do my friends is take it on faith. If I tell you believe it. You 
don't have to see the studies, where the money is going to come from, how much it is going to cost, what 
we are going to do. We are not prepared to say. 
 
As a very minimum then maybe the Government would do this. Invite the committee to what we 
understand is its little war room which is set up in respect to the takeover of the potash industry, where 
they have charts on the walls, showing the critical flow paths of the potash companies they want to take 
over. We don't know the list of priorities but we understand it is there, with a telephone complex 
connected and planning sessions going. They are determining mine by mine when they have the 
meetings how much they are prepared to pay. Which mine they want to take over now, which they are 
deferring until later, where the money is coming from and so on. We are told there is a little room set 
aside some place either in this building or some other building in the basement which is called the war 
room in connection with the potash takeover where all these critical path things have been plotted on 
charts on the walls. Maybe as a minimum they might invite us to have a look at that place and look at 
the charts and perhaps give us a little bit of that information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the Members opposite, not the 18 who made the decision on their behalf and are 
making the decision on behalf of the 550,000 voters in the province who minds are closed, obviously, 
they are not going to accept it. I asked the Members, whose minds may still be open to take a look at 
sitting on a committee of this kind. Take three or four months, delve into some of these questions. Get 
the information which you ought to have. And for that reason I urge you to support this Resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in rising to speak to the amendment to Bill 
1, I would certainly say that I believe that an investigation committee made up of Members of this 
House is of very great importance. After 30 days or so of sitting in this House, we have asked 
continually for information. Today we had a Member tell us that, should have watched television last 
night or we should have read the papers. I believe it is an insult to the House, an insult to the Opposition 
to tell us that we can sit and watch and ask you for 30 days you tell us we should watch television and 
read papers to pick up the information we need. This I believe proves the necessity of an investigation 
committee to get information that is needed, very necessary information, to the Assembly and to the 
people of this 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1754 
 

province. 
 
We are being asked to pass a Bill with absolutely no information except what has been put out on 
television and the papers, if we have had time enough to watch it. How do you expect us to decide the 
merits or the demerits of the proposed potash takeover? I believe that the studies that must be taken 
before we can consider a step of this sort are the type of studies that must go before a committee. They 
are detailed, I think, outside expertise must be called in, outside opinion must be expressed and to do 
this the only logical way is to have a committee set up with the powers, as I said, to examine witnesses 
under oath and draw our opinions. 
 
The feasibility studies we requested should be brought before the House by experts in different things 
such as marketing, in development, in finance and they should be examined by a committee and that 
committee digest those reports and bring them back. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — We would find out the truth then. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Well at least we would find out enough of the truth and we could make a good 
decision. 
 
The investigation could go further into the future markets, we could get market analysis of whether we 
can expect the prices to stay up, or whether we can expect the markets to hold — many of the markets of 
these mines are closed markets for two of them sell most of the product to themselves. They bring it 
right on through. If we buy these mines, do we have guarantees that they will continue to buy the 
product from the Government owned mines or will they take the money and go down to New 
Brunswick, North Africa, where costs are lower, develop mines and then supply their market from that 
mine? We should know what agreements have been made before we can even digest the concept 
whether it is good or bad for the province. I feel that the only way of doing this is under a committee 
setup. By the list I see there are good men, men that I have respect for, that will sit on that committee. I 
trust their judgment and I think their report would be very interesting, if they would gather such a 
committee where they could call in under oath information from even Cabinet Ministers who have 
refused us any information which they have refused to state to this House and to divulge any 
information of what studies, if any, they have done. 
 
Another thing I think the committee would find very interesting to study is the effect such a program 
would have if we are going to lose these markets on the capacity of the Government's budget to carry 
other needed programs. Will the enormous debt load and debt repayment load cause other programs that 
are very needed in social services, municipal services and what not, what happens if potash drops, to 
prices or markets? We still have to pay our bills and it will just cut into our others. This is something a 
committee could, as I say draw in expertise, collate the findings and allow us to make an intelligent 
decision as to whether it is a good or a bad deal for the people of this province. 
 
Other implications should be studied, they have not been 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1755 
 

mentioned, how will this affect the total tax structure of the Crown corporations? Are we setting a 
dangerous precedent or are we not? We could call in people who are knowledgeable in federal or 
provincial jurisdiction to see that, if in doing this, we are going to force all Crown corporations to a tax 
position; if we are going to destroy a concept that has been set up that they are not taxable when they are 
in the service fields. This is something that I believe a committee must study. I believe it would be a 
time consuming study because there are many fields to study. 
 
A committee would also have to study the effects that this legislation by its nationalization could have 
on the investment climate of this province. They could have witnesses tell them what effect this has had 
on other countries that have nationalized industries; how this has affected their ability to attract 
investment in other fields; how it has affected their relations with other countries; how this has affected, 
not only the effect in investment field but the affect in trade fields. Quite often when other countries 
have nationalized they have had trade restrictions set up against them by the countries they have 
nationalized the businesses of. This in some cases has destroyed the economy of these countries. This is 
something I think should be studied, we should know if this will have the same effect here. We have had 
rumblings from the United States that if this happens they may restrict potash imports from Canada. 
They may restrict other imports, they may restrict investment and trade. I think when we look at some of 
the South American countries that have gone through nationalization we realize that it can be very 
detrimental to the economy. We don't know if any studies or any decisions or if any agreements have 
been made. I think this should be known before we take a step as large as the nationalization of the 
potash industry. 
 
They have studies which have been made that they have refused to table. There is the Bredenbury study. 
Well, there we know a study has been made but they refuse to table it. The Government says we have it 
but you can't see it to help you make your decision. A committee could, under oath, request this 
information. A committee certainly wouldn't make it public information so it couldn't be said it is 
against Government interest. It would be able to study it and bring a report back to the Legislature 
without divulging information that would be detrimental to any dealings. The study, as I say, of the 
Bredenbury Mine is there but we can't see it and we have no information from the Government that tells 
us that they have actually made studies. I certainly hope they have, if they haven't blindly gone ahead 
hoping that it will all work out in the end, that we'll buy it and it will work. I certainly hope that they are 
not that bad businessmen but if they are . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . credibility, Sonny. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Don't worry about our credibility. After all it is Christmas, Roy, everybody 
believes. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — ... some of the lawyers over there. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Well, it is true on both sides of the House with lawyers, Roy, but then that's a 
fault that they have, and you 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1756 
 

can't do anything about it. 
 
The Bredenbury study, as I say, we haven't received any information from it. They haven't admitted it. If 
they haven't this committee should have been set up long ago. I would say that the first thing that should 
have been done is that a committee should have been set up to study and make a report before the Bill 
was put before this House. I do believe that after 30 some days of not receiving any information from 
this House, information that we have requested, we have given arguments why we did, why the people 
need it before we reach such a decision. 
 
I believe a committee could serve another important use, this committee could make these studies 
without tying up this House that has 10 other Bills, 12 in total on the Order Paper, important Bills that 
need debate, such as Bill 16, and other ones that need debate. Rather than tying 61 MLAs up, we could 
tie this committee up in an intersessional period and during the session it would free the House to put 
these other Bills on the Order Paper. I do believe it's a shame to the people of this province that if no 
studies have been made, no information is there, to come and tie us up in a futile exercise when we have 
other important Bills, I would say it shows a lack of concern for the people of this province by this 
Government, a lack of the concept of the need for legislation. Why tie us up in the House if we have no 
studies, you haven't brought them out and you certainly don't expect the people of this province and you 
certainly don't expect the responsible Members of the Opposition to pass the Bill without any 
information. Bills of much less magnitude would never be passed without information of some sort. You 
bring a Bill in that is one of the most far-reaching and will probably have the most drastic effect on this 
province than any other Bill ever passed will have or has had, and you haven't produced one iota of 
information. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I think deterrent fees were the most far-reaching . . . 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Oh, certainly, Roy. I can see where you set your priorities now. 
 
The effect is that while you have now a chance to go on to those other Bills bypassing this and putting it 
before a committee, a committee that can sit concurrently with the House and after, if needed. Also a 
very important effect this committee would have, would be to receive representations from the general 
public to gather the feelings of the people to find out what their concerns are, to find out what questions 
they feel need to be asked because — let's face it — it is their money that we are talking about, not ours. 
 
I believe the amendment has been proposed in good faith. I believe the need for a committee has more 
than amply been proved and as I say I am quite surprised it hasn't been here before. I am sure that the 
Members opposite if they have the information, I cannot understand not tabling it before this House or 
presenting it, therefore I say that a committee is very necessary, that it will serve a very useful purpose 
and I would urge you to support this amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1757 
 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to speak on 
this amendment in the House because as has been pointed out by my colleagues before me we have been 
disturbed by the distinct lack of information that the Members opposite seem to provide us with. In 
particular we have been annoyed by the fact that they have virtually to a man been unreceptive to the 
idea of legislative debate on the subject to the point where I am sure many of us on both sides of the 
House wonder if some of the more articulate master minds behind the great potash takeover may have 
even changed their minds since the legislation was initially introduced. I wouldn't be surprised about 
that considering the quality of suggestions put forward from Members on this side of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I wouldn't be surprised if perhaps the Premier was having some second thoughts 
about his potash legislation and certainly we aren't aware of it if he is or not because he hasn't stood up 
in this House to give us some indication about his own personal feelings about it. 
 
We don't either know what the feelings of the Minister who will be in charge of the potash corporation 
are now. We have no idea. I am sure he has taken many of the points raised on this side of the House 
very seriously. We aren't aware either what the feelings are of the Minister of Finance, he in fact may be 
opposed to it as well. I am sure a more obvious example of a change of heart would be the Member for 
Melfort (Mr. Vickar), who may have given some consideration to the Government's position on this Bill 
when it was first introduced or have enough confidence in this open-minded approach to business 
situations to find that he has probably changed his mind considerably since Bills 1 and 2 were 
introduced. There is good reason for this House to support that amendment. I point out, as people on this 
side of the House have pointed out before me, because of the lack of debate in the Legislature. It has 
been particularly frustrating for new Members who would enjoy entering into some kind of discussion 
with Ministers responsible for legislation of this magnitude. Perhaps some of these Ministers have some 
of the answers we have requested. I suspect if they did they would have tabled them in this House before 
this time but I give them the benefit of the doubt. Perhaps they have some of the information we have 
requested. I, as a new Member of this House and I am sure the new Members feel the same way, we 
would like to see the information. Maybe it will change our minds. Maybe it will change the minds of 
the vast majority of the people in this province who are opposed to Bill 1 and 2. 
 
The legislation was introduced in a hasty manner. An attempt was made to run it through this House 
before Christmas in the fall Session that was established strictly to introduce legislation. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — We would never do that. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You have renewed my confidence in you, Mr. Attorney General. I am sure you 
will never do it again, I will grant you that concession. The lesson you learned from this one may be a 
little more permanent than you would like it to be though. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1758 
 

There are some real dangers involved, I suspect, in introducing legislation that has been hastily 
composed by Members of the Government and when an attempt is made to push it through the House in 
a hasty manner. That is another one of the reasons why we have introduced an amendment calling for a 
committee to give people a little time to study legislation that we certainly sincerely feel has been done 
in too great a haste. We have examples in this province of legislation that was introduced under those 
circumstances. Legislation that, and I have pointed this out in three of my speeches, the Members 
opposite have taken a second look at. And the Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) opened his mouth for 
the first time in a long time, he should know better than anyone what happens when you introduce 
legislation in this House too hastily and you have the cloud of Bill 42 hanging over your head. Now we 
have a new Minister in charge of Mineral Resources who is attempting to some degree to clean that Act 
up. An Act that I suggest could have been avoided had this Legislature established a committee to 
investigate the implications of that legislation. That legislation did not have nearly as serious 
implications for the people of Saskatchewan as Bills 1 and 2 do. You people are well aware of that. Oil 
and petroleum resources in Saskatchewan will not have the same impact on the economy of this 
province as potash has the potential to do. It was bad enough when Bill 42 was introduced in haste, a 
tacit admission by yourselves that Bill 42 was a failure and I suggest that you look at it sincerely and 
you will realize part of the failure was the fact that you were too hasty abut it. Now with legislation that 
will affect our secondary resource, I say, because I consider agriculture our primary resource, legislation 
that will radically change every aspect of potash production in Saskatchewan and in the world is being 
introduced in haste. We assume, because this Government did not make any announcement before the 
last provincial election that prior to June 11 they had no immediate desire, or weren't even seriously 
considering expropriation legislation or a companion Bill to establish the financial arrangements for 
expropriating the legislation. If we assume that, and I don't hear any of the Members on the opposite 
side of the House disagreeing with that, then it is only natural that we have to assume that that 
legislation was drawn up within four or five months from the time the Government Members returned to 
Regina after the last provincial election until the time that legislation was introduced in the House. 
 
Now I suggest that that is a little hasty for legislation of this magnitude involving perhaps capital 
expenditures of $1 billion or $2 billion or $3 billion, that affects the lives of thousands of workers in this 
province, affects fertilizer production all over the world, not just in eastern Canada and the United States 
and ultimately affects food production all over the world, I suggest this Government has done it in too 
great a haste. I would be surprised if the Attorney General would agree with me but I think the vast 
majority of the people of this province agree with me. We feel that the vast majority of the people of this 
province would like the opportunity to peruse this legislation in a little more depth and certainly to study 
some of the implications it will have in a little more depth. There is one reason and one reason only that 
we are still discussing Bills 1 and 2 after the Christmas break and that was because there were enough 
people outside of this Legislature who were seriously concerned to give their support to Members who 
wanted to take a closer look at it. I suggest the vast majority of the population of Saskatchewan was that 
concerned. Your 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1759 
 

letters 8-2 in favor, as I pointed out to you, your hopes for the NDP leadership convention in 1980 aren't 
dead yet. 
 
However, before I was so rudely interrupted by the Member for Biggar, I was going to explain to you 
one specific reason why it would be in everyone's best judgment to delay this legislation for two or three 
months while a committee composed of representatives of the people of Saskatchewan took a serious 
look at it. The single reason I feel and is one of the most important reasons why this Government should 
hesitate about going ahead with the legislation, is the question of your markets. A question I believe, a 
situation I believe, that has radically changed since June 11 when you decided to proceed with your 
potash legislation. 
 
The entire success of a potash takeover in Saskatchewan and a potash company of Saskatchewan 
depends on the ability of potash producers to dispose of their products at reasonable price levels. You 
are well aware, as are most people in Saskatchewan that in the past ten years people in the potash 
industry, experts in marketing and mining, have had a good deal of difficulty in disposing of potash 
products. In fact, they have had so much difficulty they have lost money seven out of 10 years and the 
Government in Saskatchewan was forced to introduce prorationing to enable them to maintain any 
potash production at all. 
 
It has been serious in the past. Now seven years out of 10 years the experts in the potash industry had a 
good deal of trouble disposing of their product. The last three years they have met with relative success. 
Thanks to many reasons, one of which is the increased demand for potash products in the world. 
Another is the developments, the high degree of development of marketing expertise by the potash 
companies themselves. In effect, however, potash marketing is subject to a basic supply and demand 
market. It is beyond the control of the potash companies themselves and certainly will be beyond the 
control of any provincial government in the Dominion of Canada. So, Members on that side of the 
House should be seriously considering the implications of potash demand trends in the world, and 
particularly in light of the amount of money you are willing to spend to get into the potash business. I 
suggest you haven't done any surveys or marketing, or if you have, to any degree, you certainly don't 
understand them. You may have done marketing analysis for a mine that you were proposing to build at 
a time when market strength was relatively high. However, you don't seem to have the courage to table 
that survey in the House to allow Members on both sides of the House to peruse it. 
 
I have a commentary here in the magazine called "Investment Outlook, 1976". It's the year-end issue, 
dated December 29, 1975. And this is the kind of thing I think those of you, the architects of the potash 
expropriation legislation, should be seriously considering in light of your hopeful success in potash 
marketing. This deals with Russia, "A new realism in trade with Russia", it's called. Russia has the 
largest amount of potash reserves in the world. Saskatchewan apparently has second as far as the amount 
of productive potash reserves goes. This analysis describes very briefly some of the things that we on 
this side of the House have been concerned about, and certainly one of the things that those Members on 
the Government side of the House should be extremely concerned about. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1760 
 

That's Russia's projected trade balance over the next few years. In other words, what direction are they 
headed as far as potash production goes? Believe me they can preempt Saskatchewan potash from the 
market in one blasted hurry if they decide to. We have seen it happen in wheat markets of the world. In 
short this commentary says: 
 

The draft of Russia's 1976 to 1980 plan released last weekend calls for foreign trade 
growth 30 per cent to 35 per cent during the period. 

 
It says: 
 

In this area the Soviets have far exceeded their advertised target, pushing up trade with 
other nations at an annual rate of 13 per cent in recent years. 

 
They expect to exceed that. Now that tells me a lot. When they are talking about increasing their balance 
of trade, or their trade growth, 30 to 35 per cent in the period of four years, they are talking about a lot of 
production in a lot of different areas. Certainly one of them, according to the article, is grain trade. The 
other, I suspect, is trade of manufactured goods. But certainly one of the most significant trading items 
that this Government should be concerned about is Russian trade in potash. They have the capability of 
being the biggest potash producer in the world. They certainly have the technology and they certainly 
have the manpower. They state right here that they are going looking for the markets. 
 
Now I'm not sure, but I would suspect that Members on the opposite side of the House weren't aware of 
these developments when they decided to go ahead and introduce legislation to get into the potash 
industry. We suggest that perhaps this situation in itself should be reason enough for the Government to 
stop and reflect on what it is doing. We say the best vehicle you have to reflect on the direction you are 
moving in the resource development, and certainly specifically in potash, and on the probable success of 
your venture into the potash industry, is through the vehicle of committee. We ask you to establish a 
committee and in the next two or three months call in people who are knowledgeable in marketing. Ask 
them what effect it would have on Saskatchewan potash production if the Russians plan to increase their 
trade balance 30 to 35 per cent. I suggest from this article that it may have disastrous effects. You people 
will have the opportunity to find that out if you establish a committee. The way that committee will 
operate has been pointed out by Members of the House before me. The value such a committee could 
have for the people of Saskatchewan in both the short and long run has also been proven by Members on 
this side of the House. The fact that you seem to totally reject any suggestion that you should pause for 
reflection in this, I find particularly disgraceful. 
 
I am well aware of the fact that it may be considered a loss of face for the Government at least to slow 
down in the midst of this introduction of legislation, and I suspect reflects the major principle involved 
with Members on the far side of the House. 
 
However, we have asked Members on that side of the House to consider this amendment seriously. We 
have been sincere in our efforts to get you to slow down with your proposed legislation. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1761 
 

We feel that to go ahead rapidly with this legislation at this time is definitely not in the best interest of 
the people of Saskatchewan. It certainly is not in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan from a 
financial aspect and I suggest that the sociological implications of going ahead with the high-risk 
venture like this are probably in the long run just as severe as those that we continually elude to and that 
is the financial risk. 
 
For those reasons, because I think we have reached a stage where we must stop and reflect on the 
implications of this legislation, that I will be supporting the amendment and urge all Members of this 
House to do so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD: — I did want an opportunity to give you a few words. I'm afraid I shall go 
over the time limit, but you can look forward to hearing me again tomorrow. As this is Christmas for 
some people, I'm sure it will be a special treat. 
 
I have listened carefully this afternoon to the number of reasons that have been given for having this 
intersessional committee and if you have been listening carefully and trying to pick them out, which was 
not very difficult, I'm sure that you see that we are very sincere and that we have done a lot of thinking 
on this matter, because we have given you a number of reasons. Whether or not you feel that our reasons 
have been all totally valid, I'm sure that even you can see that they are sincere efforts and we feel this 
legislation is necessary. 
 
I had an experience at lunch today. I was talking to one of your NDP Members and he was saying 'how 
long do you think the debate is going to continue, Linda?' I said, "Well I don't know, I have a little while 
to speak yet and it will take some time". He said, "I've always found that an Opposition Member works 
very hard, perhaps harder than a Government Member because you get more chances to speak". Well, as 
you can see, we have been speaking long on this amendment, and on the Motion. But it is for one 
reason, and one reason only. And that is because we feel that the people of Saskatchewan have a right to 
say what they think should be done regarding these two Bills. This is why we will continue to talk, to 
speak on this amendment as long as we possibly can. 
 
I think the first question that we have to ask . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — We're not in any rush! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — We are running out. But never fear, we'll find another way. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — As I say, we're not in any rush. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Good. Yes! You have been here a long time. It will take a little longer. Enjoy it 
while you can. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if I can get on to the point here, I think we need to consider whether or not there is 
a need 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1762 
 

for this committee for obtaining the facts that the people would like to know. They would like to know 
the cost of the expansion, the cost to the people of Saskatchewan in relation to our budget. What will we 
have to pay in the future? How it relates to markets. You know, I come from a rural area and listening 
today to the Attorney General's comments that the rural areas are not saying anything that they aren't 
really opposed to this expropriation. I think he said that — this is the impression that I got at any rate. 
He said — I've been there. Well, I've been to the rural area too, this is where I come from. And they are 
concerned and the reason why they are concerned is because in the rural area you know you live from 
season to season because markets, as you well know, you can't depend on any markets. So they are 
asking, well, can you depend on the potash markets? I think that any one of you over there can agree, no, 
you can't depend on grain markets, you can't depend on potash markets, so perhaps this should be a 
concern. They would like to know what you have to say why you feel this is a good investment. This is 
why they would like to listen to us. And I feel that this committee could answer their questions. They 
could call you and other people who have been listed, professors, university professors, economists to 
give you the information that they are requesting. 
 
You know, it was mentioned briefly the other day that I had a relative who was sitting on your side of 
the House (a distant one), and I have another relative who comes from Moose Jaw, and she swears by 
the Members for Moose Jaw. I have a number of NDP relatives, I'm converting them slowly. But he 
says, 'they are reasonable men'. They listen. You can contact them at any time. This is a problem which I 
think reasonable people will listen to and they will offer reasonable solutions and vote for reasonable 
solutions. All we are asking for is for you to be reasonable and to let the people have their say. It was 
mentioned earlier, fine, maybe you can change their minds if you give them the facts, but the thing is 
that we want them to have their say and this is why we are asking for this committee. Now we are ready 
to take our lumps and if we are wrong, fine, but we want the people of Saskatchewan to say yes, they 
think this is a good deal, or no, we think it's a bad deal. 
 
You may be interested to know that I did a small (and I am not trying to exaggerate), but I did a small 
telephone survey in one of the seats, and it wasn't my seat by the way, it was one of your seats. So 
maybe in the next while you can figure out which one it was. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Whose seat? 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Oh no, I'm not telling that one. If you come individually and ask me, I'll let you 
know which seat it was. You're in trouble there. But anyway, the survey was taken in regard to this 
issue. And it wasn't a biased question. I didn't say, "Are you against the Government". Obviously if it's 
an NDP seat they are not against the Government. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — How many did you call? 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — The question was: "Are you in favor of taking over the potash industry?" I think 
that's a very neutral question. The majority of them were not in favor. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1763 
 

MR. ROLFES: — Were they all relatives? 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — No, I didn't call my relatives either. Not like some of the letters that the 
Attorney General is getting — the eight letters that you have gotten. 
 
The point I am trying to get across is that there is concern and the people want to give an opinion, 
whether they are for you or against you. And I think that they should have the opportunity. 
 
Now we have asked for this intersessional committee and I have been trying to figure out why, the 
number of reasons why you will not support this. I suppose you have your reasons. Maybe you don't 
want to hear what the people have to say. This has been suggested. But perhaps, instead, maybe you've 
become such a bureaucracy that you don't want to listen to people any more. And I'm afraid that perhaps 
this is the reason. It could be. We were elected to represent the people so why not listen to them. Are we 
listening or have you become deaf to what they are trying to say? 
 
Let's just for a minute read a definition of what a bureaucrat is, and although I don't like to be termed 
one, perhaps anyone sitting in this Legislature is a bureaucrat. It says: 
 

Bureaucracy has been made into a new variety of sin in many people's minds. But 
bureaucrats doing their jobs conscientiously are on the side of all good men and true. 

 
And I think that's why we are elected. I would hope that we were elected to be on the side of the people. 
 

Bureaucracy is a way of doing business. A way without which we could not carry on 
today's complex affairs. 

 
And I am sure that you would all agree with this that in this Legislature we are trying to do the best for 
the people and to carry on the business of the province. But are we being caught up in not listening 
because we are in this House. Are we forgetting what the people are saying? All we are doing with this 
amendment, is to get them to give their opinions and listen to what they are saying. It goes on to say: 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We are listening! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — I'm glad you are listening, because I found this article interesting and I don't 
think it's a biased article. It's just on bureaucracy and we could be falling into it in not letting anybody 
know. It says: 
 

There are people in office who claim supreme authority in all matters, merely because 
government is supreme or their business complex is so powerful. It may be that such 
people try to cover their personal deficiencies by arrogance. The self-sure among us are 
as dogmatic as time tables, brooking no criticism. 

 
These are personal defects, not part of the system. 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1764 
 

Can we not accept criticism? If this caucus is wrong after what we have been talking about, it is not 
going to be any harder for us or for you to come back and sit after the public opinion has been given 
than it is for us. Because we are the ones that have been sitting for 30 days, now saying, look the people 
want to speak. I am sorry, 31 days. 
 
If we are wrong we are going to sit and take the criticism too, and I don't think that taking criticism from 
the public is wrong because this is what we are here for, we are here to listen. It goes on to say. 
 

Bureaucracy hurts itself most when it becomes ingrown, (is this what is happening?) 
When it becomes its own advisor, actor, approver or justifier. 

 
Are we trying to justify something that perhaps the people of Saskatchewan do not agree with? I am just 
putting these questions to you. I don't want to be sitting here thinking that perhaps this is the answer. 
Again, I say, maybe I am wrong, but I want the people to tell me. It goes on to say: 
 

Some sectors seal themselves off from the world to brood in their cloisters amid loyalties 
and group agreements, shielded from the disturbances of the spacious world. 

 
Are we shielding ourselves from what the people are saying? It is not hard to be sitting here in Regina 
and not know what is going on. I think this is the thing we have to consider, this is why a committee that 
we are proposing would indeed be a realistic and a fair way to judge this question. There have been a lot 
of comments that the potash companies maybe aren't doing the best for Saskatchewan. Why not get a 
neutral arbitrator, a committee to judge who is right? If you are right you have nothing to be afraid of, if 
they are right, you will find out about it. It goes on to say: 
 

Bureaucracy hurts itself too when it claims its people are a special sort of first among 
equals when it defines its humility by saying I do not think myself half so important as I 
really am. 

 
Do we begin when we are sitting here to think we are more important than we really are? Are we more 
important than the people in Saskatchewan? Do we know the answers and is not it time now that we 
listened, quit thinking that we have all the right answers. I am not standing up here saying I have the 
right answers, but I think that maybe the people in Saskatchewan will be able to tell me what I should be 
doing. Is this too little to ask, this is all this amendment entails. It is not a condemnation of the 
Government, it is not saying, "Hurrah the Liberals are right", it is just saying, "Look, let the people tell 
us". This is all we are asking. 
 

It is tempting to even the smallest business or government service to close themselves to 
the importance of attaching to the system he helps to administer seeking to impress on 
those who need its services the sense of dependence upon the agent who renders them. 

 
Are we trying to impress the dependence of the people by 
 



 
January 7, 1976 

 

1765 
 

saying we have the control now that we are government, let's do this? Is that fair? Such people remind 
us of the Sergeant-at-Arms, in T.H. White's story, the "Once and Future King", which became the basis 
for the movie, Camelot. He took great pains to keep his stomach in and often tripped over his feet, 
because he could not see them for his chest. Is this what we are doing? Are we becoming blind to what 
is going on? 
 
Bureaucrats, and again I mean bureaucrats not as government bureaucrats or as opposition bureaucrats, I 
am using it as legislators, people that are here. Are we becoming closed-minded? This is all I am asking, 
this is all this Motion is asking, to say, let's remove it from the partisan area, let's bring it to the people, 
let's figure out what they want. 
 

Bureaucrats are subject to the infirmities of all mankind. King Arthur is reported to have 
said "A knight with a silver suit of armour would immediately call himself a have-not if 
he met a knight with a golden one." 

 
That we made a potash company that has given 80 per cent or 75 per cent or maybe 60 per cent in taxes, 
but the potash mines say 80 per cent of their profits, now we want to have a gold suit, we really want to 
have all their profits, no matter the risks we have to take or no matter what ability they have to pay. Is 
this fair? I think it is time that we give the public through this committee a chance to decide whether it is 
fair or not, or whether this is a good business deal. 
 

If one is a bureaucrat the thing to do is to avoid developing the unpleasant and inefficient 
traits. It is part of a bureaucrat's business to have an orderly mind. But this orderliness 
must not be allowed to become a chief aim in life. 

 
Are you letting part of your philosophy such as socialism take over and begin to control our life whether 
it is good or not? 
 

When a bureaucrat exercises spontaneity in his dealings with people and develops the 
instinct for realizing what people are thinking, he becomes not only a more efficient 
worker but a happier worker, he gets more enjoyment out of life. 

 
Again what we are reiterating, if this is the right thing for the people of Saskatchewan, you could go on 
with this Bill fulfilling that, Yes, I know the people are behind me. You may think that now, which is 
fine, but you may not be right. I think all we are doing is asking for them to give their opinion. I think 
without their opinion even you must have some doubt as to whether this is anywhere near 100 per cent 
correct. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No doubt about it! 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — You don't have any doubts? I sure am glad that someone over there has got all 
the answers to every question. Believe me you will be my lawyer if I ever get into trouble, because this 
is what I need. I didn't think anyone in Saskatchewan has all the answers. Least of all, you, but I am 
afraid I have 
 



 
January 7, 1976 
 

1766 
 

a lawyer back here picked ahead of you. 
 
He goes on to say. This is a good article. I am not trying to waste your time, I just feel that this is the 
reason why we are presenting this committee. I would hate to start something that I couldn't finish so 
that you would forget the thrust of the effort. 
 

A cult of secrecy has been growing. Some bureaucratic officers regard themselves as 
belonging to an exclusive intellectual body. 

 
Does that sound familiar? There is no one over there who would know all the answers. 
 

Lock themselves in their ivory towers, never let their precious documents be seen on the 
pretext that they are too secret or maybe not in the public interest and carefully file them 
away in a safe. 

 
The public wants to know why and in understandable terms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is why we are proposing this amendment. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 
 


