
























































Hansard: January 28, 1976


 
 

3009 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

46th Day 
 

Wednesday, January 28, 1976. 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

FURTHER EXPROPRIATION OF 3,000 ACRES IN CORONACH AREA 
 
Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question of the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Messer). Sometime ago I asked a question of 
the Minister and the Premier answered it. He said that in the Coronach area there had been some friendly 
expropriation going on. My question is, is there further expropriation to the tune of some 3,000 acres in 
progress at the present time in the Coronach area having to do with the Poplar River Power Plant? 
 
Hon. J. Messer (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware at the present 
time of any further expropriation. I think that there is certainly a plan in place in regard to the acquisition 
of a significant or a large amount of land, whether or not that is going to have to be by expropriation or 
not, is I think at this point in time too early for me to respond to. 
 
We have had some discussions with the organization in Poplar River in regard to the acquisition of land. 
I had a meeting with Mr. Elder and some of the executive of that association. I have since sent them a 
letter proposing to them a means that may be acceptable to both parties in the transfer or the acquisition 
of that land. We have not yet come to a final conclusion, as to whether that is acceptable to both parties. 
 
Mr. Nelson: — I certainly would ask the Hon. Member that he not have the trend go to expropriation 
until there has been more serious negotiations and fair negotiations carried on. 
 
Mr. Messer: — I can assure the Member that we are not wanting to pursue the expropriation procedure. 
I would hope that we would be able to find some other means that would be satisfactory and fair to both 
parties in the acquisition of that land. It is because of that that I have met on a number of occasions with 
Mr. Elder and met with some of the farmers who may be affected in seeking a proposal that would be 
acceptable and hopefully advantageous and fair to themselves. 
 
Mr. Nelson: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Hon. Member would be able to 
check and see and tell me if expropriation has begun on these same 3,000 acres. He doesn’t know now 
and I appreciate that, if he would be able to get me an answer. 
 



 
January 28, 1976 
 

3010 
 

Mr. Messer: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will look into the matter. 
 

HOW MUCH MONEY DID MANFRED SWAROVSKI INVEST IN CANISPHERE 
 

Mr. S. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
Friday last, you weren’t here and I asked the Premier a number of questions about a company in Moose 
Jaw by name of Canisphere Industries and Manfred Swarovski. I understand that since that time in view 
of the information I gave the Premier, has been given to you. Can you tell me how much money 
Manfred Swarovski put into the project under the name of Canisphere Industries in Moose Jaw? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I received a memo from the Premier, attached to it was a 
rather lengthy letter from the Member asking a number of questions. I have just now directed my staff to 
compile the information that the Member will agree that it would perhaps be best for me to first provide 
you with the information that you sought from the Premier in the letter and if that is not satisfactory we 
could undertake to pursue the matter further at that time. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Perhaps I might be permitted, Mr. Speaker, to ask the Minister to treat the matter 
with some urgency. I am most anxious to have some of the answers I’ve asked and I have some 
additional questions to ask of you as well. But I think where we have to start in connection with it, is 
with the question I have already asked. Can I ask you to give it some urgency, I think it has been five 
days now. 
 

CUPE CERTIFICATION MODIFIED 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). I wonder if he is aware of the fact that an application was made to the 
Labour Relations Board by the Saskatchewan Association of Medical Laboratory Technologists to have 
a CUPE certification modified, I assume under Section 5(a) of the Act and at the same time they applied 
on behalf of this Association of Technologists, applied as I understand it, if my information is correct, 
for a certification of their own under Section 5(a), (b) and (c). I wonder if the Minister would agree with 
me that Section 3 touchstone of The Labour Relations Act which says that the workers may choose a 
union of their own choice, and that though 85 per cent of the people in that association want this 
changed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think the Member is making a debate rather than asking a question. I 
think if the Member is to reflect on it, you could come to the point of the question much quicker. 
 
Hon. G. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — I appreciate the question directed to me by the Member for 
Regina Wascana. I expect he has upon his desk the 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3011 
 

same press release that I have this morning, released by the Saskatchewan Association of Medical 
Laboratory Technologists. 
 
The Member makes reference, Mr. Speaker, to Section 3 which says in essence, that workers shall have 
the opportunity and have the right to choose a union of their own selection. I believe that principle 
cannot be considered to stand on its own without some qualification, and that is that the Labour 
Relations Board . . . have you got something to say. 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Yes, they have got to be friends of yours. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — Let’s be a little bit realistic, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. That is hardly the question 
and you may chatter away like a chipmunk if you wish, but the fact still remains, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Labour Relations Board is charged with the responsibility of determining the appropriate unit. Otherwise 
you could see the very real possibility of fragmenting the whole collective agreement in one institution 
for example where the kitchen workers might for some reason of their own not wish to be associated 
with CUPE. There may be another group that, such as white jackets, and who perform another service, 
separate and apart from that service provided by another group of workers, fundamentally with the same 
objective in mind, wishing to fragment and be part of another unit. I think you would find our whole 
collective bargaining system in complete disarray if the Labour Relations Board were not allowed to 
have the kind of authority to determine what shall be the appropriate unit. I am not prepared to make 
judgment because I don’t understand nor have I had the opportunity determine all of the facts 
surrounding this application for departure from the Canadian Union of Public Employees, but I do 
expect that it they should ask that a written reason be provided that the Labour Relations Board as in the 
past will provide that service as a courtesy to the group that made the application for certification or 
decertification. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, the press release to which the Hon. Member refers makes reference to 
bias and I wonder if the Minister would agree with me that the fact that Jack Ingram sat on that – I 
assume Jack Ingram sat on that panel – the press release says a CUPE member – a former CUPE 
organizer, that would have to be Jack Ingram. Would the Minister not agree with me that the appearance 
of bias to any group would be enough justification for the Minister to give some directions to the Labour 
Relations Board to do something about that. I have in mind perhaps disqualifying oneself when an 
application comes before it. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — It is my information that on all circumstances when the Labour Relations Board is 
dealing with the matter which is related to the Canadian Union of Public Employees, Mr. Ingram on 
each and every occasion steps down and does not vote under those circumstances. This is the 
information that has been provided to me. I trust that this is the case and was the case in this particular 
instance. I don’t think there is any reference in the release that suggests that Mr. Ingram played a part in 
this. But reference is made to the fact that 
 



 
January 28, 1976 
 

3012 
 

one of the members of the Labour Relations Board is a former CUPE member, no longer active in 
CUPE, but formerly out of the Canadian Union of Public Employees organization. My impression, the 
information that has been left with me is that Mr. Ingram disqualifies himself and steps down on each 
occasion when CUPE is involved in an application for certification or decertification. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly not as familiar with the backgrounds of the various 
members as the Hon. Member, but as far as I know no alternate or a member other than Mr. Ingram is a 
CUPE member and the press release specifically makes reference, and I wonder whether the Minister 
would not agree that this – if he did sit – and that is what the press release implies, that that is in a class 
with perhaps Harry Haskins who works for IPSCO sitting on an IPSCO case, that clearly a bias and 
disqualification kind of problem would arise. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — I would think that if the United Steel Workers of America and IPSCO were in dispute 
with respect to an unfair labour practice or certification or decertification application, I would expect 
that Mr. Haskins would in those set of circumstances disqualify himself. I expect that in this set of 
circumstances that Mr. Ingram did disqualify himself. I think you and I are then discussing this thing in 
a vacuum, not knowing whether Mr. Ingram did play a part in this proceeding. I will check on it but I 
believe it to be the case, I believe he would have disqualified himself as has been the case consistently 
over the last number of years. 
 

STUDY OF SHOPPING PATTERNS OF NORTHERN PEOPLE 
 

Mr. E. Anderson (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should like to direct a 
question to Mr. Bowerman, but he is not here. Has the DNS been conducting a study of shopping 
patterns of the people in the North and has the study shown that the people in the North are shopping 
outside the DNS area. 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will have to answer that I will take notice of 
the question on behalf of the Government. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

BILL NO. 2 – AN ACT RESPECTING THE POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, before we proceed further I believe there was 
a highly technical amendment which was moved the other day changing the date of the Bill from 1975 
to 1976, I would beg to withdraw that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Agreed. 
 
Section 1 
 
Mr. E. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Attorney General, before we wound down 
last night I was asking you why the Government was not 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 
 

3013 
 

prepared to put a borrowing limit into this statute which is common to all other statutes that I am aware 
of setting up a Crown corporation. He replied, citing the example of Saskoil and I think the Member for 
Regina South (Mr. Cameron) pretty effectively destroyed your arguments in connection with Saskoil as 
he pointed out to you that that Act provided that there had to be legislative approval for any spending of 
money. 
 
The Premier may days ago, when I first raised this point, indicated that he was going to come in at a 
later time and point out to me other statutes where this has occurred. I note that he isn’t here today. I 
wonder, has he communicated this information to you as to what other statutes there are in 
Saskatchewan that have a wide open borrowing power, that is, not a limit on it? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have not been in communication with the Premier on this particular 
point. I have asked people in my Department to check if there are any other Crown corporation statutes 
and apart from the Saskoil one, and this one, I believe that there probably are not any others. I am not 
absolutely certain on that. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Can you point to a statute in any other jurisdiction that follows the Parliamentary 
system, the British Parliamentary system that has such a statute? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I say again, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know. I haven’t gone to the British Parliamentary 
system, and quite frankly, I don’t intend to check the British Parliamentary system to know whether it is 
a precedent or not. There is one in Saskoil which is a precedent of 1973 and the Member for Regina 
South’s comments take away form that point. Because really he is talking about appropriation by the 
Legislature and those can be explainable from different statutes. The key we are talking about still is the 
ceiling on borrowing power which is common to both of the Members opposite. I don’t think it is 
particularly relevant as to what the impact of the effect is in the rest of the British Commonwealth. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Again, I think that you will agree though that the Member for Regina South pointed out 
that the Saskoil statutes provide specifically for an appropriation by the Legislature and nowhere in Bill 
2 is there any such wording. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, because, Mr. Chairman, under any statutes where there is an authorization of a 
statutory advance of money which is the case here, there is no need to include in the legislation monies 
appropriated to the Legislature. And that is the situation that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, so 
it is a point but it is not a precedent to be used. The simple fact of the matter is that under whatever the 
section number is in the Bill, I think it is Section 14, there is a statutory advance which is set out and that 
is the situation. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I will come to that in a minute. Are you saying that there is no necessity to set out in 
this statute a statutory limit for borrowing? Is that your position? 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3014 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, there is no statutory authority I don’t believe at all for this, for the setting out of 
borrowing limitations. Again, subject to comments on it and for the policy reasons that I tried to 
enumerate the other day, I don’t think it would be desirable to either. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I will come to the statutory part of it in one minute. Let me read you the common law 
part. I hope you will pay attention, Mr. Minister, I am reading from Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms, page 198, paragraph 233: 
 

It is one of the old standing principles of our constitution that the House of Commons control the 
finances of the country. That is the right, privilege and duty of the House. It is achieved by means of 
struggle lasting through centuries beginning from the 14th century down to the 17th century when it 
was fully confirmed. And since then it has never been disputed. 
 
The cardinal principle on which the whole of our financial system is based is that of parliamentary 
control and by this is understood, not the control of parliament in its constitutional sense, but 
controlled by the Commons alone. 
 
Upon this fundamental principle laid down at the very outset of English parliamentary history and 
secured by 300 years of mingled conflict with the Crown and peaceful growth is grounded the whole 
of finance and consequently the whole of the British Constitution. 

 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that unless you put a borrowing limit in this Bill what you in effect are 
doing is returning this Legislature to the 14th century. You are ignoring all of parliamentary tradition 
from the 14th century to date, unless you put a borrowing limit in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I hear the quotation that the Member has given which has been read 
before, but I say again, I don’t want to make this statement because I can’t really back it up because I 
haven’t done the research on it, but I am almost sure that if one could take the time to research the 
British Parliamentary experience, that statement as made would most certainly be qualified by the 
practice of these days. Again, that is not a very strong statement I admit because I haven’t researched it 
but that is neither here nor there because when you come to the Saskatchewan experience we did have 
this provision with respect to Saskoil and the situation on Saskoil on the limitation of borrowing powers 
is a good one, I think, and it is the same here. I am not trying to throw it back onto the Opposition that 
they didn’t complain in 1973, when we had no borrowing limit on Saskoil, because the reasons 
advanced at that time were pretty good. 
 
I simply repeat this again with respect to Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. The Member can read 
quotations about 14th or 18th century, I don’t believe that this is the case with respect to this Bill. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3015 
 

Mr. Malone: — Well, we have taken the trouble to do some research, Mr. Minister, and we can’t find 
one single Bill anywhere of this nature, not in this province and not in any other place in Canada. So 
when you say you think that this has happened before, I am saying, where? I suggest to you that it hasn’t 
happened before and even with your Saskoil example, there is provision there for the Legislature to 
appropriate money, which is not in this Act. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Member says that the caucus has researched this and I am 
interested to hear that because, again, I don’t think that it would take me too long out of my own 
recollection, which in the days I have been here could very well be faulty, could indicate . . . I am of the 
opinion of the recollection, of my own personal recollection. You have done the research so tell me 
whether Canada Development Corporation has a limitation on borrowing power. And I bet you a dime 
to your dollar that it doesn’t have. Take Air Canada Corporation and this is the one that I thought I had 
kicking around on my desk this morning, but I must have filed it, because I remember I was thinking of 
using it in rebuttal, in Bill 2. Air Canada doesn’t have a limitation on borrowing power. That is a Crown 
corporation as well. 
 
Again, you people did the research and correct me if I am wrong, but I don’t think that I am. 
 
Mr. Malone: — My advice is that you are wrong and I didn’t personally do the research. 
 
If you are not prepared to follow parliamentary tradition, which I have indicated has grown up since the 
14th century, perhaps you would be prepared to follow the law of the province of Saskatchewan. You 
refer to Section 14 of Bill 2 and I refer to you that. 
 
Section 14(3) says that any sum of money that is to be raised pursuant to the Bill “must be raised in 
accordance with The Saskatchewan Loans Act.” 
 
So I cite to you The Saskatchewan Loans Act, Section 2. The Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council etc.: 
 

By way of loan upon the credit of the province is provided in Section 3, such sums of money as may 
be deemed expedient and, as may from time to time be appropriated by the Legislature. 

 
Section 3 of the Act again refers to the same provision. The last section of the Act, Section 18: 
 

This Act applies to all loans heretofore or hereafter authorized under any Act of the Legislature. 
 

So you must comply with The Saskatchewan Loans Act and to comply with it you must let us 
appropriate the money and we cannot appropriate the money unless you give us a sum to appropriate. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman. I realize the argument that has been advanced and I think it was 
advanced in Question Period by a Member and the Premier addressed himself to this 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3016 
 

at the time. Really the Member’s interpretation, in my view, is not correct in this area. This subsection of 
The Loans Act creates two circumstances where the province may borrow i.e. to obtain sums deemed 
expedient or to make appropriation obligations. Both needs need not be present. 
 
Mr. Malone: — “and” . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, no, because it says “and” but the simple fact of the matter is that the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, for example, has borrowed moneys without ever having to come back 
to the Legislature for appropriation in years, and if I am wrong go to the period from 1964 to 1971 
where there are many capital borrowings the Saskatchewan Power Corporation did not have to get the 
appropriations. So that is the situation because there is no other way that you could have worked it if it 
had been interpreted as “and” you would have to come back to the Legislature on every capital 
borrowing that Sask Power would undertake. 
 
What I am saying, the borrowing authority generally is to be found in the specific Crown corporation 
legislation and the methods of raising for funds are found in The Saskatchewan Loans Act. And if you 
read the section the way that it has been practised then the Member’s argument doesn’t hold water. So I 
don’t agree with the interpretation. 
 
Mr. Malone: — You’ll agree with my argument by saying that it is in the SPC Act and it is and that Act 
has been changed many times in amendments and amended to put up an upper limit on the borrowing 
powers. Sure you go back to 1952, I think, and every few years it is amended to increase the borrowing 
power. I say to you: — how do you get around the provision to Section 18 of The Saskatchewan Loans 
Act which says it applies to any Act of the Legislature? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The Member opposite makes this point, that Section 18 is the application of the Act. 
That is correct, Section 18 is there. Mr. Holtzman has stepped out, he has been Legislative Counsel for 
years and he is coming back in a moment. We are going to find that business about the limitation on the 
Federal CDC and Air Canada so we will come back on this, because I should like to see the Liberal 
Party take the same principle position towards Mr. Lang. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Oh, we certainly will. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Good. And communicate that the ex-Minister of Justice does the same thing. What I 
am saying here to the issue is that this is a general section, the applicability of the section, but you have 
to read the specific sections of the Bill, the specific sections of the Act. 
 
And what the Members are trying to argue is this, in a nutshell, they are saying that The Saskatchewan 
Loans Act is a bar to any activities of borrowing by a Crown corporation if that Crown corporation by 
statute does not have a ceiling on it. Then if that is not the case then what is the substance of your 
argument? 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3017 
 

Mr. Malone: — I think you will agree with me that Bill 2 can be described as a money Bill, that is, in 
the Bill there is provision for borrowing. I don’t think you would dispute that. Thee are two ways of 
borrowing, one, by a Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council borrowing, two, by the potash corporation 
borrowing with the permission of the Minister of Finance. 
 
We say to you that it is a money Bill; that it should have a provision in there that the money must be 
appropriated by the Legislature and if you have such a provision in there you have to have an outside 
limit. That is you can’t say that you can borrow anything you want. You have to have an outside limit. 
Firstly, it has to be appropriated by the Legislature. Secondly, there must be an outside limit. Now if you 
exceed the outside limit in any given year then you can come back to the Legislature and have us 
appropriate the money again, or if you haven’t exceeded it but think that you are going to, again, you 
can come back to the Legislature and ask us to increase that outside limit. Just as you do with SPC, Sask 
Tel and all the other Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, what the Member is saying is that there has to be an appropriation 
and as a consequence of the appropriation there has to be a ceiling. I don’t for the moment accept that 
totally but you have to go back one step further to ask whether or not indeed there has to be an 
appropriation in the Bill. And my argument to the Member is that there does not have to be an 
appropriation in the Bill and if that is true then the consequence of the borrowing ceiling limit is also 
equally applicable. 
 
For example, I have said to the Member, that we don’t have to appropriate, why? Because I say that 
where a statute authorizes an advance, a statutory advance, that it is not necessary to include an authority 
for appropriation under the Legislature. In fact, appropriation by the Legislature, in statute, is only an 
alternate way for the authorization of advances. There can be an authorization for advances by pure 
statutory authority written in the Bill, saying that there shall be a statutory advance. 
 
I also want to point out that if funds are appropriated there is no need for authority to pay in this 
legislation. The Appropriation Act is the only authority which really may be required. So that in some 
areas there is an appropriation in Crown corporations Acts. And some areas – well even if there is in all 
areas, even if there is an area of appropriation by statute in Saskoil to follow the Member’s argument, it 
would follow by logic that the Saskoil Act should have a ceiling on borrowing and it doesn’t. All I’m 
saying to the member is that I understand the point he makes and I think that there is merit in the legal 
argument he advances. I’m by no means trying to say that it’s an argument that has no legal merit to it. 
I’m only simply saying that on balance, the best of the legal advice and authority that we have is that (a) 
we do not need appropriation where there is an alternate means for funding by way of statutory advance, 
which this Bill has and (b) there is no need for a ceiling in that type of a case and even if appropriation is 
required, there is obviously no need for a ceiling, e.g. the Saskoil operation. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3018 
 

Now, the Member can make other arguments that there should be a borrowing limit to show the public 
what your parameters are and all that. That I think puts the argument on a different basis, but on a 
strictly legal basis, your argument at best, I think, is questionable and in my judgment, the legal lawyers 
that advise me, ours is probably the better of the two legal positions. 
 
Mr. Malone: — You speak of a legal basis. I suppose you are right, but it’s legal in the broadest sense. 
What we are talking about is parliamentary tradition and the constitution, and The Saskatchewan Loans 
Act. Now I suppose that’s legal but it’s certainly not legal in the sense of nitpicking or court related 
items. 
 
You talk about putting a limit in the Bill and saying you don’t need it. How can you possibly appropriate 
money without knowing the outside limit? You have to have something in the Bill to say that the 
Cabinet or the potash company is authorized by the Legislature to appropriate or to borrow money t a 
certain limit. You’ve got to have some outside limit in there and the proof of what I’m saying is all the 
other statutes. 
 
Now, let me put this to you. This is a Bill asking us to vote for money. It’s just like the budget. If you 
follow your line of thinking to the logical conclusion, we could see a scene where the Minister of 
Finance can come in here next March and present a budget, but not say how much he’s going to spend. 
In the Estimates he could say, well, the Department of Health figures we need a couple more hospitals 
and we have to do this, and that and the other thing, but we don’t know how much it is. So we’re not 
going to put any limit in the Estimates, we’re just going to leave it open. And the same for every other 
department. They plan on doing just that and the other thing, but we’re not sure just how much they are 
going to require. Now if the price might go up, it might go down and we’re not going to commit 
ourselves now. Surely you can’t suggest that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Just before the Hon. Member replies. Again, I’m afraid I’m going to 
have to draw to the attention of the House that there is too much talking and discussion going on in the 
Assembly here and I’m speaking of the Members who are not participating in the debate. You may have 
something very important to discuss, but might I remind you that we are also dealing with a very 
important piece of legislation. I think in all fairness if you have to discuss or talk, keep it down to a 
whisper and I find it very difficult, sitting even where I am to follow the procedures. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again the argument is getting convoluted and very complicated all 
the time. It’s tough enough for me to understand, but I’m sure it must be tough for some other Members 
to understand and the press as well. 
 
I think the arguments have to be separated, if I may say so with all due respect. One argument is, should 
the Legislature pass a Bill which does not have a borrowing ceiling on it? On which one can argue, 
policy politics or any other points that one wants to argue. Not totally black and white, 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3019 
 

there are some principles of law that are tied into that, but basically that’s the case. That’s one argument. 
I’ve already spoken to that about our policy reasons and the Member has inferentially spoken as to his 
reasons. 
 
There is another argument at another level and that is, is it valid in the sense of legally valid, keeping in 
mind The Saskatchewan Loans Act, keeping in mind the Appropriation Act and so forth. That’s another 
argument. 
 
Now what the Member is trying to argue inferentially to the first point as to the policy is that under the 
second point that it is not legal or he is suggesting that it may not be legal, as for this it’s under some 
doubt. He bases his argument along these lines. That there is an appropriation requirement. As a 
consequence there must be a ceiling or limitation and that as a general proposition for that authority The 
Saskatchewan Loans Act is the basis for it. Because essentially those are two different functions. 
 
Now, the Member can say to me, then why don’t you come back with an appropriation? Because we 
have an alternative method of financing which is available to us, to any government. You do it by 
appropriation or you can do it by some form of a statutory advance. We’ve taken a statutory advance 
route. 
 
Now, from a legal standpoint, that position legally is correct. We can do it by statutory advance, we can 
do it without a ceiling of limitation and we can do it within the context of The Saskatchewan Loans At, 
to wit, borrowings that have gone on from time to time in the larger Crown corporations without 
statutory amendments. The outer limit or a limit on borrowing is not related to the fact that the 
corporation can come in and borrow sums, it’s related only to the effect that perhaps they may not be 
able to borrow over that sum, to the extent it’s right. But to the extent that it requires legislative or 
statutory approval, it is not correct. 
 
Now, what I’m saying accordingly is that what we should try to do, I think, with all due respect, I mean 
the Member has got the right to advance this, but it seems to me that it’s not productive to argue 
particularly whether or not in the second stream, whether it’s legal or not, what we are doing has got 
legal validity or legal authority. We think it does and if it doesn’t, in due course, somewhere, someday, 
presumably a court of law will be asked to interpret and decide that ultimately for us. 
 
What I would ask the Members to do is to concentrate on the first aspect of the argument, namely the 
policy considerations. Of which, I think, a case can be made out by the Opposition that there should be a 
ceiling. Equally I think, and in my case on balance more of a case can be made out for not putting a 
ceiling limit in this particular enterprise, for the reasons that I articulated yesterday. That to me seems 
where the debate should be focused. 
 
The debate as to Loans Act and appropriation and to statutory fund and that type of situation, while 
interesting, I don’t think comes to grips with the central issue, which is the question of whether or not 
there should be this ceiling power on it. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3020 
 

So, as I say, I think it’s perfectly lawful, if it isn’t, well the Legislature will find out in due course and 
appropriate remedies will have to take its place. The question whether or not it’s proper, that of course is 
another argument. I’ve advanced the view that I think it is perfectly proper for the magnitudes and the 
uncertainties and that type of thing. I don’t want to get into the whole business about how much the 
mine is worth. 
 
So I can’t articulate better. I think if I went and got a full treatise of the law and presented the earlier 
memos and read them to the Members as to why we think the statutory advance route is as valid as the 
appropriation route and the ceilings are valid, etc., I think that would help clear the air one way or the 
other on the Members. 
 
The question of the resolution of the issue I think has to do on the fundamental policy direction of 
whether or not there should be the ceiling or shouldn’t be the ceiling. 
 
Mr. Malone: — You’ve raised a number of points which I will deal with in due course. My original 
proposition to you was that I compared this money Bill to the budget and you haven’t dealt with that. I 
say to you, it’s the same thing. You could come in on a budget and say, we’re not going to put any limit 
on the departments. The Minister could walk in and say, well we think we might spend a billion, we 
might spend a billion and a half. We’re not sure so we’re not going to put in any items. Would you deal 
with that, please. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I think again, I cannot agree with the Member that this is of the nature of a budget 
debate or of a budget Bill. The pith and substance of this Bill has surely got to be the establishment . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t believe you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, I think that there is some that believe me too, at the back, on the opposite side. 
But surely the pith and substance of the Bill is the establishment of a Crown corporation, namely the 
corporate body, like if you will in private practice, where you set up your memorandum of association 
and your articles or whatever the terminology now is, which talks about borrowing and the like. By the 
way, I don’t know if there are any limitations of borrowing in private Bills of incorporation, not Bills of 
incorporation, but letters of incorporation, articles of incorporation. I’m not making a big case out of 
that. Okay. But whether there are or there aren’t, I don’t make a big case of it, because I realize there is a 
difference. Public funds versus private funds. The fact still is that in reality the nub of this Bill is the 
establishment of a corporate entity. Buying personal property, buying real property, selling real 
property, entering into contracts and arrangements, and one of the things of which is the power to 
borrow. 
 
Now, what the Opposition is zeroing in on is they don’t dispute the power to borrow, they simply say 
that because it’s a public body, you should have a ceiling on the power to borrow. Well, okay, I say I 
don’t agree with that, but I recognize what you are saying. Let’s not get hung up on the 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3021 
 

ceiling as being the pith and substance of the Bill. Because in my view it isn’t. It is but one of the several 
powers that are integral to the establishment of a corporate entity. A public corporate entity. 
 
So I don’t agree with the Member’s view that this is akin to a budget. The essence of which is or the pith 
and substance of which is an entirely different set of objectives, the raising of funds and the 
disbursement of funds. The potash corporation has that as a function, pretty key function, admitted, but 
only one of several of key functions. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Well, you danced around that one very nicely, but you still didn’t answer it. What you 
are in effect saying is that Bill 2 has one important provision, that is the establishment of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, which I remind you is already established by Order in Council. You are 
saying that all the rest of the Bill isn’t very important at all. That the pith and substance of the Bill, to 
use your words, is just the establishment of the corporation and that’s nonsense. You have to read the 
Bill as a whole. You can’t say that some parts of it are important and some parts aren’t. You read the 
thing as a whole and all of it is important. 
 
So really you haven’t answered my analogy as to the budget and to the borrowing powers under this Bill 
and you haven’t answered it because you can’t. 
 
Now, let me deal with your other proposition earlier, when you talked about the principle and the legal 
authority. I’m not sure you are listening to me. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I am. 
 
Mr. Malone: — All right. Now you talk about the principle and the legal authority. Let’s talk about the 
legal authority for a moment. Now, by your own words you have indicated that it’s conceivable that you 
are wrong and that you may have to patch the damage up at a later date, the legalities of it. So what I say 
to you in answer to that, is that this type of Bill would not bind a future government. I say to you that if 
we are the next government in 1979, we are not bound by any of this. It’s illegal in effect and any lender 
that deals with you should be well aware of this, is that a future government could say to that lender, I’m 
sorry, you loaned the money under an Act that was illegal, we are not going to repay the money. We 
could very well take that position if we felt that it would be proper to do so. So that’s your one argument 
on the legalities of it. 
 
Now, on the principle. You say we are dealing with the principle of the Bill. Well I say to you, if we’re 
not here to vote on money and not here to act as a safeguard on the Government spending money, why 
are we here? We’re off the business of whether this is a potash Bill or not. What we’re dealing with right 
now is the function of this Assembly, and if it’s not to vote money, all it turns into then is a debating 
society to talk about private Members resolutions. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to get into a debate particularly with the Member as to 
the nature of parliament and legislatures and the like, of which the raising and 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3022 
 

disbursement of funds I think are important, perhaps even a vital aspect of the Legislature. Of course, 
Members will realize that there are a variety of matters which parliament deals with, almost on a daily 
basis, that have no implications with the sum and substance of raising funds. One can think of many, off 
the top of the head, but let’s just leave that aside. 
 
Again, I’m sort of getting to the point that I am, it’s the old record going around and around, in my 
arguments and your argument and back and forth. I guess I’d better just take my seat by simply saying 
that I disagree with the Member on the question of the legalities of it for the reasons I’ve stated earlier. I 
don’t think I can expound on those any better today. I most certainly disagree with the Member’s 
suggestions of lenders beware, because as I’ve said there are many cases where fairly heavy sums are 
borrowed by Crown corporations without appropriation approval from the Legislature. Many areas 
where large sums are borrowed without appropriation from the Legislature. I don’t think they ever come 
to the Legislature for approval. Again, I stand to be corrected on this, but I would invite anybody to 
point out where that’s the case. Those loans and indebtednesses are just as good as any operation. 
 
Mr. Malone: — You have said earlier that this Assembly can do other things than talk about money. 
But surely, Mr. Minister, the major function of this Assembly is to safeguard the rights of the people in 
the spending of money by the Government. Now there are other functions we have, but the major 
function, the way parliament grew and evolved, dealt with the spending of money. Surely that’s why we 
are here. Everything else is a secondary consideration. I’m not saying they aren’t important but the 
prime function of this Assembly is to act as a safeguard on government spending. Whether it’s through a 
budget, whether it’s through an Act incorporation a Crown corporation. I say to you we’re not talking 
about potash now, we’re talking about what we are doing here. And I say that by this Act you are setting 
a precedent in this Assembly that could last for years, on future governments, whether you form them or 
not. That could say we don’t have to come to the Legislature to get approval to spend money, we’ll just 
appropriate it, on our own without coming to the Legislature. What you are saying, in effect, is that you 
are going to have government by Cabinet. The Cabinet will make the decisions and four years down the 
road has to be an election then the people will decide at that time. 
 
You are making this Assembly into nothing more than a debating society on private Members’ 
resolutions and other things that are important but look pale in significance when compared to our main 
function of appropriating funds. 
 
I am not going to keep belabouring this, I think we have made our point. I suggest to you, Mr. Attorney 
General, you are acting improperly and you are asking us to participate in a procedure that is 
hamstringing this Legislature in years ahead and I don’t like it. In fact, if I had my way, I wouldn’t be 
here, I don’t want to participate in this type of debate. What you are saying to us in effect is we have no 
rights. The Legislature has no rights, and that Cabinet will rule and Cabinet will decree. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3023 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again I don’t accept that proposition that the Legislature has no 
rights. I served in Opposition for four years, and sometimes I felt pretty aggrieved on the access that we 
had to information. I won’t go to document the variety of cases. Leaving that aside, in addition to any of 
the comments that I have made with respect to this Bill, the Member will know of course that the 
Legislature through its body, the Crown Corporations Committee, as an example, will have a 
considerable check when the Crown corporation called the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan tables 
its report, a full accounting of the sums expended and reasons for the expenses. I fully anticipate that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan when it gets to Crown Corporations Committee this year or next 
year, whenever it comes up because of the time lag in the operation, that the Members will be the first to 
exercise their rights of elected Members to probe every little facet of expenditures and examination and 
so forth of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. This is indeed their right to do so. The Member 
should not portray the situation in terms that the Legislature has no control and no check on this. I don’t 
think that is the case. 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say a word or two on 
both the borrowing and the question of advancing funds. Again I want to come back to what I said two 
or three days ago on Bill 1, and it is appropriate as far as Bill 2 is concerned. The statements that have 
been made by the Premier and to a lesser degree by the Attorney General that the potash takeover will 
not be a charge on the public purse of course is obviously not true and the misrepresentation in that 
statement becomes more obvious every day that we debate these two Bills. 
 
There are some very interesting anomalies in this. To begin with in Bill 2 under the question of finance, 
I want to raise this is a general way, I may raise it is more detail on Section 14. Section 14 of the Bill 
says, 
 

The Minister of Finance may out of the Consolidated Fund advance moneys to the Corporation for its 
purpose in such amounts at such times and upon such terms as may be determined by the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. 

 
Now what is the difference, let me go back to the Oil and Gas Bill, setting up Saskoil Corporation. 
Section 9 states, 
 

The Minister of Finance shall pay to the Corporation out of the Consolidated Fund such money as may 
be appropriated by the Legislature for the purpose of the Corporation. 

 
Now why the difference? There are a great many differences that come in the proposed financing of this 
corporation. Every one of them have the effect of bypassing the Legislative Assembly. Here it becomes 
very clear that instead of coming to the Legislative Assembly as is the normal way for any department of 
the Government or any branch of the Government or any creature of the Government, to get an 
appropriation of funds and allow the Legislature to debate, force the Government to be accountable, 
force the Minister to give an accounting before money can be appropriated from the public purse which 
is the Consolidated Fund. They are going to do it by Order in Council, by Cabinet. Why? They may 
answer, well the Cabinet order is public sometime later, and you can get at us when the Legislature sits, 
which may be eight or nine months and again we may get the usual answer in Crown Corporations. So 
that is one difference. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3024 
 

The other difference of course comes in very clearly and the questions have been raised by the Member 
for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone) and that is in regard to the borrowing. I have Sask Housing 
Corporation, Section 41, borrowing limitations, 
 

The Corporation shall not borrow any sum of money, if by doing so the aggregate principal amount of 
the outstanding notes, bonds, debentures and other securities issued by the Corporation or temporary 
borrowing of the Corporation and of outstanding advances to the Corporation to the province of 
Saskatchewan exceed $75 million. 

 
I have the Computer Corporation. The Act passed by the Government setting up that utility corporation. 
The aggregate sum cannot exceed without coming back to the Legislature, and that case is clearly 
spelled out in the Bill, $15 million. 
 
I go back to the Power Corporation. It did stand at one time at $275 million and they have had to come 
back from time to time to have that limit increased. As at one time the Minister in charge of the Power 
Corporation I have had to come back here, and I have been subjected, rightfully so, to questions and 
debate by Members of the Opposition at that time, who are now sitting on the Treasury Benches as to 
why we need that, when we were in government. 
 
In other words, the Government over there, and many governments before this, have set the clear 
precedent that they must and should come to the Legislative Assembly, the duly elected body, for an 
outside limit. They have also set the precedent when they want money for normal operations out of the 
public purse, they must come to the Legislative Assembly. Please don’t give me the answer in the case 
of the appropriation of money from the Consolidated Fund that you can’t give us this assurance, can’t 
give this control to the Legislative Assembly because you don’t know how much you are going to pay, 
you don’t know how much you are going to buy. That won’t wash in that case. Why are you giving the 
Cabinet the power to give to the potash corporation money from the Consolidated Fund, when normally 
(I have quoted one Bill and there are many more setting up other corporations) you force those 
corporations, properly so, to come before the Legislative Assembly? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the information that I have from people that are behind me here, is 
that the Leader of the Opposition is not correct in this matter. Indeed advances can be made without ever 
coming to the Legislature and are made and have been made during the term of his government and 
during the term of our government, Sask Power, Sask Tel, Farmstart, Housing Corporation, Land Bank, 
SEDCO, Saskoil, all of these there have been advances without prior approval before appropriation, 
which is what the Leader of the Opposition is arguing. 
 
In effect the Cabinet or whoever makes the decision decides and that is the case. I would answer him in 
that way. Furthermore, there is the very significant check with respect to Crown Corporations. 
 
Mr. Malone: — That may be the case, but in all of those Acts there is provision for appropriation by the 
Legislature later. I can see perhaps what you say is right with say, the Land Bank, you have to have 
some money to get the operation going. But you 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3025 
 

later came back and said we have spent this money and now we want your approval of it. We may not 
have given you the approval on this side, but at least you came here. We had an opportunity to discuss it 
and debate it. 
 
Surely you are not suggesting that you have gone and spent money and nowhere along the way has it 
come up, either in the Legislature, in Crown Corporations, on Estimates, or anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman, the Member is wrong on this. When he says you can come back 
for approval after the statutory advance having been made. That’s not the case. Those are two difference 
arguments. I say again, with all due respect, we have been confusing several arguments, the policy, the 
legality and the practice. They have all been meshed together. The one argument that the Leader of the 
Opposition advanced that you needed prior approval before appropriation except in this Bill. I am saying 
that that is not the case, that there was no approval you will find in at least these areas, statutory 
advances made without prior approval and in reality with no later approval. On occasion you will find in 
the Blues the listing of the amounts that have been advanced. They don’t need approval. They are there 
for information, they do not need approval. That has been the practice for many, many years. That’s on 
the legality of the thing. Those are two different arguments. If you want to argue that there should be a 
ceiling, as I said earlier, (I don’t know why I should try and help the Opposition out) but I think with all 
due respect that is probably where you have a stronger case, if you want to put in those terms. There 
should be a ceiling. As to the statutory advances, appropriations, that type of thing, I don’t think there is 
a case there. 
 
I think our case is stronger as to why there should be no ceiling, I have advocated that already, but if you 
don’t accept it, it is up to you. That is where the mainstream of the argument must be maintained. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Chairman, I have The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Bill here setting up the 
Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation 1973, Section 9. You quoted that, you said we don’t have to do 
that. If you are not doing it, I suggest you are breaking your own Act, breaking the law. Section 9, unless 
it has been amended, if it has, please call it to my attention. 
 

The Minister of Finance shall pay to the Corporation out of the Consolidated Fund such sums of 
money as may be appropriated by the Legislature for the purpose of the Corporation. 

 
To me, that is plain English, it says you have got to come to the Legislature first to get money. Why do 
you do it that way for that corporation and yet for this corporation you allow the Cabinet to do it? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, as I was saying to the Member for Lakeview when the Leader was 
momentarily tied up, as I understand it, and if I am wrong somebody will correct me, I don’t want to be 
too badly out on a limb on this. Section 9 in Saskoil is one method of getting funds, if I can put it this 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3026 
 

way. Section 10 is another alternate method, right below it, that is the statutory advance method. If you 
struck out Section 9 totally, we don’t have a Section 9 in the potash corporation Bill, you could still raise 
the money by statutory advance, because The Appropriation Act covers the section not being there. The 
options are there to the Government to go by way of appropriation route or to go by way of statutory 
advance route. But in either case those decisions that are made, whether it is by appropriation or by 
statutory, don’t require in the sense the Opposition argues it, prior approval or post-approval. That’s not 
the case. 
 
What happens is that if there is a statutory advance sometimes listed in the blue book at the end of the 
year, Statutory Advance, Land Bank or whatever. The Legislature doesn’t say yes or no to it, so I am 
advised. I think the key to the thing is, from your standpoint, that there should be a limit on the 
borrowing. I think you can make out a much better case on that than you can on the statutory advance 
versus appropriation route. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Well, obviously we are not going to get anywhere, but I just want to again make it 
clear. Both in the question of advancing funds out of Consolidated Revenue and in regard to borrowing, 
there is no question, the Attorney General can talk all he wants, you are treating the potash corporation 
differently than you have treated other corporations. I suggest you are doing it for a reason, for a purpose 
and that is, you want to be in – because this is such a huge risk and you recognize this – a position that 
you will not have from time to time to expose to the public the losses or the involvement of the 
taxpayers’ risk in this giant corporation. 
 
You are hopeful that over a long haul, five, eight or nine years, that you will be able to show a profit. 
You don’t want to face the embarrassment of a bad start-up if the market continues to go down or the 
price goes down, markets disappear or a percentage of the markets, that you will in fact be able to cover 
up and you have set it up very clearly so that you can cover it up for at least a period of four or five 
years. Eventually it would have to come out. I think you want to make sure that you take it past the next 
election because if it comes out in 1977 or 1978 that you are in a loss position, that your markets have 
disappeared, it would prove most embarrassing politically to you. You don’t want that to happen and 
that’s basically the reason that you are setting up the legislation. You are covering your tracks in 
advance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. G.H. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could direct a couple of 
remarks. I want to go back to something the Attorney General said a little while ago when he indicated 
that he felt there were two positions from which this could be argued, one was the legal position and the 
other was, is it basically or isn’t it basically right to have this Bill set up in such a way that there is no 
spending limit. I should like to spend a few minutes referring to the latter. 
 
I am surprised at the Attorney General saying a few 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3027 
 

minutes ago that he had not researched the business too carefully. I’d certainly have done some 
exhaustive research, but I couldn’t help but think as I sat there that what the Attorney General is doing 
on behalf of the Government is falling into the same trap that governments fell into in Britain in the 
years right after the war in establishing Crown corporations. That trap is simply to try to set up the 
public enterprise on the same basis as what the private enterprise has been set up. The Attorney General 
has been saying for the last 45 days that it has been difficult for the Government to get information from 
the private companies that are about to be nationalized or expropriated or bought or whatever. And yet at 
the same time in the House we’re trying to say that we don’t want the same kind of thing to happen once 
those companies belong to the Government and that there needs to be public accounting for it. 
 
One of the concerns that I should like the Attorney General to consider is the business of centralization 
of power again. And to take a look at the question of the executive power and the legislative power and 
the balance that ought to be there just in principle. I don’t think the Attorney General can find much 
fault with the position that we are taking that there should be a public and legislative, parliamentary, if 
you like, accounting for the kind of money that is going to be apportioned in this Bill. I refer him for 
example to a book entitled, “Public Ownership and Accountability”, in which it says this very clearly. I 
will read to you one paragraph in a chapter entitled “The Ultimate Guardian.” 
 

Parliament’s aim with respect to public corporations must be to obtain sufficient information on their 
activities to enable it to discharge its obligation of holding the corporations ultimately accountable. 

 
Now, that is Parliament’s aim; that is not the Cabinet’s aim. I know that the Attorney General is saying, 
well, there is Crown Corporation debate. I suggest to him that that is just not good enough. That is 
hiding behind the skirts of Crown corporations. And there is no reason in the world why the amount of 
money that is going to be used by the Government to purchase potash mines, or at least some kind of 
outside spending limit, should not be in this Bill. 
 

Given the special status (going back to this particular paragraph) of corporations so dramatically 
driven home to Parliament by the early railroad debates and the necessity to reply on Ministers for 
much of the information, Parliament’s past is at best a difficult one. When in addition the burden of 
Parliamentary duties seems to increase yearly along with the size and complexity of government the 
difficulties are enhanced. 

 
That paragraph in that book was written in 1950. There have been tremendous increases in complexity 
and difficulty in getting information since then. I really invite the Attorney General to consider the 
question of concentrating this kind of spending power in the Cabinet and in effect really taking it out of 
the public sector. On the one hand it has been argued that these mines should be purchased so that they 
can be controlled by the public sector, but in the next breath the Government is saying the people who 
are elected as representatives to decide what should happen in Saskatchewan are really 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3028 
 

not going to have any say in the matter. I frankly don’t understand how you can expect us to accept that 
position and I don’t understand how the backbenchers opposite can accept that position because not only 
do I suspect that most of them haven’t read the Bill at all but I don’t know how they can go back home 
to their constituents any better than I can as their representative and say, we have no effective voice in 
the kind of spending that is going to go into the purchasing of potash in this province because we 
abrogated that right and that decision to the Cabinet. I think that is too much power invested in the 
Cabinet and with all due respect to the integrity of the Cabinet, I am not about to buy that any more than 
apparently the Government opposite was prepared to accept that in the board rooms of the potash 
companies that they seem to dislike. I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the Attorney General would comment 
on that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I just can’t help but make one little comment in the defence of not 
only my Government but my colleagues as well, and that is about reading the Bill. I think they have and 
in fact, judging by some of the opposition, not referring to Liberals, but just opposition remarks, I think 
that the Members on this side have read it and understood it one heck of a lot better than some of the 
comments that have been made. I don’t want to get into that type of comment because it always implies 
that somebody is not doing his job and that type of thing. I think that is a bogus issue, the issue should 
be on the policy, assuming that everybody to the best of their abilities applies whatever reasoning power 
they have got and the abilities to try to understand those policy issues. It is quite clear to me that some 
Members of the Opposition have not if they have read it certainly haven’t understood the Bill or the 
provisions of the Bill. I think that’s quite clear. I don’t think anybody needs speeches about parliament 
and this type of thing and how parliament should be protected because that is really a bogus issue. 
 
It is a bogus issue because there is adequate control even under the way the Bill is drafted. I just invite 
Members to consider what the last Member said, for example, he said the debate in the Crown 
Corporations report is not good enough, because, the implication was – in fact, I think he said it, because 
that was only members of the committee debating and not the House. I find that a specious distinction. 
But let’s just take a look at this. Every Crown Corporation report has to be tabled, on the desk of every 
Member of the Legislative Assembly, every Crown Corporation report, whether you are on the 
committee or not. 
 
What does that Crown Corporation Committee report have? I invite the Hon. Member for Saskatoon 
Eastview to pick up any Crown corporation report at any time, Liberal years, NDP years, and what will 
you see there? You will see, for example, all statutory advances shown in that Crown corporation 
financial statement and report. If there is a statutory advance made by the Government to the potash 
corporation of the SGIO that is shown in the annual report. 
 
I won’t accept the suggestions that this can be hidden for four or five years, this is tabled in the report, it 
is in the Crown corporations report itself. All liabilities to the Crown, if there is a loan from the Minister 
of Finance to a 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3029 
 

Crown corporation that is a liability on behalf of the Crown corporation that is shown in the financial 
statement and the amount of it. The cash flows. I just invite to the Hon. Member – I know he is a new 
Member – to take a look at the Crown Corporation Committee reports and he will see that there is that 
type of detailed information which is tabled for all the world to see. 
 
I want to make a second point if I can. And that is it doesn’t just limit itself to the Crown Corporations 
Committee. There is another check and that is a check of the Public Accounts Committee. This is a very 
important check. It is the converse side. If the Minister of Finance has made advances or loans that has 
to come in the Minister of Finance’s statements. That has to come up for perusal by the Public Accounts 
Committee. That comes in a debate because the Public Accounts Committee makes a report in the 
Legislature. May I remind you that an Opposition Member chairs the Public Accounts Committee. And 
the Opposition can criticize. In fact, the Opposition virtually decides what agencies or departments it 
wishes to call. 
 
I recall Public Accounts Committee reports – the famous Public Accounts Committee report about the 
shoe boxes, the money in the shoe boxes, the $500,000 in the shoe boxes. That came out on the floor of 
the House and there was a – in fact, I think the Member for Qu’Appelle took an active leadership role in 
that debate – maybe I’m wrong, it doesn’t matter. This is an example of the type of control, Members 
shouldn’t represent it to the public that there is no chance for the operations to come forward. 
 
Finally, and not the least of importance is the control of the auditor . . . Again, the Member is either 
unwilling to accept this because of the political position that they are in or he is incapable of accepting 
it. But I am telling you that the Provincial Auditor or any auditor has to show the accountings and 
indicate the accountings to the Legislature in his report to the Public Accounts Committee. That is the 
simple fact in the matter. If you think that doesn’t happen then you just haven’t been reading political 
activities for four years, because for the last four years that has been happening all the time. We have 
been having the Provincial Auditor stripping the skin off us for not doing this right or not doing that 
right in the whole operation. I say to the Member that when he gives us a lecture about prior approval 
and the like, this has been done, I don’t mean this in any partisan way but the statutory advances never 
got any prior approval during the Liberal Government. And they haven’t under all these circumstances. 
The legalities of that are clear. You say they had a limit. Saskoil did not have a limit. And the 
Opposition of the day did not oppose that. Statutory demands can be made on this operation. I tell you I 
am not criticizing the Opposition for not opposing it. As I have said already, I agree that they should not 
have opposed it, because it is a legitimate reason in Saskoil as it is in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. So I ask the Member to take all of these factors into account and I am sure you will agree 
with me, that there is indeed adequate checking control. 
 
Mr. Penner: — Mr. Chairman, just in response if I may. I listened very carefully and we are going to be 
looking at an 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3030 
 

amendment for Section 20 of the Bill later, dealing with the audit. The Attorney General has, at least the 
way I heard it, indicated that the Provincial Auditor is the person who ought to in fact be auditing this 
corporation. We certainly agree with that and an amendment to Section 20 put forward by the Attorney 
general would be most welcome to eliminate any other auditor that the Lieutenant-Governor may in fact 
want to appoint. It is our position exactly that the audit should be done by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The question of Crown Corporation debate and Crown Corporation Committee determining and seeing 
everything that the Crown corporation does, sounds beautiful. The Attorney General still I think has to 
accept the fact that what the Crown Corporation debate is all about and what the Crown Corporation 
Committee see is after the fact. I see no reason why from time to time it might not be appropriate to have 
some spending appropriated before the fact. As a matter of fact I think the Attorney General would agree 
that if we could have spending appropriated before the fact that that is a step in the right direction. 
 
I don’t think what he has said in any way suggests that our argument about putting a spending limit in 
this Bill ought not to be there. He said earlier that there are a couple of corporations that he thinks were 
put forward by the Federal Government that don’t have a spending limit in. As far as I am concerned, I 
don’t really care about that because I don’t think that two wrongs make a right. The other thing that kind 
of surprises me, Mr. Chairman, about the remarks of the Attorney General, albeit I’m a novice Member, 
is the Attorney General saying that parliament and discussing parliament and the responsibility of 
parliament is a bogus issue. 
 
I am frankly amazed he would suggest that. I recognize that I am somewhat naïve in the workings of 
government, but I have always felt that parliament was in fact the most important issue that representing 
the people of the province was what we were here for and not merely to sit and rubber stamp something 
that the Cabinet decides it, in its wisdom, should be bale to do. I frankly don’t have enough confidence 
in the “wisdom” of the Cabinet to have it decide very much of anything. I think that responsibility lies 
on the floor of this House and nowhere else. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, when I say that is a bogus issue for precisely the very last words 
which I think are about as phoney as a $3 bill, when you consider the workings of Parliament here in 
Canada and any legislative assembly in Canada, you may say question period, that may be one area 
where we are behind time. I am perfectly prepared to acknowledge that. But I doubt if there is a 
legislative assembly that has as much opportunity for Opposition Members to criticize and to question 
and to debate. My goodness, if this full session of 46 days isn’t an example of that, I don’t know what is 
an example of that, of the Opposition’s abilities in this area. In any event I think I have made the point 
and we have hassled this around and around, Mr. Chairman. I understand the Member’s point, I don’t 
accept it. I hope the Members understand my point, they don’t accept it. Maybe we can get into some of 
the details of the clauses as we continue. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3031 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make one or two comments if I might. 
 
First of all, the Attorney General has stood up and said that we did not object to the setting up of The 
Saskatchewan Oil and Development Act, and the fact that there was no statutory limit. I remember, very 
vigorously, there was a debate about the very provisions of the spending of money. I should like to see 
the Minister prove that there wasn’t an objection on this side of the House, because I know very well 
there was. 
 
The second thing, the whole debate here is on public accountability. He suggests that the Crown 
Corporations Committee is the vehicle where public accountability can take place. I would like to just 
say that is hogwash. I would like to tell you why. I am going to ask the Attorney General when he 
finishes his private discussion . . . First of all, I am going to ask the Minister to tell me and tell Members 
of the House, if this corporation goes out on July 2, 1976, and borrows $2 billion and loses $1 billion, 
when is that accountability before the Crown Corporations? I will tell the Minister, 1978. I would like to 
point out, all books and accounts of the corporation shall be closed and balanced in each year on the 
30th day of June and on such date as the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may determine. In other words 
on the 30th day of June the books are closed. In order to get that particular year’s accounting, would be 
1978. That is the issue that we are trying to point out. There is no public accountability in the Crown 
Corporations. That is a review of either past mistakes or past successes. But as far as the accountability 
is concerned, and I want to make that clear, the Crown Corporations is not the vehicle to safeguard 
public expenditures as it is always 18 months after the fact. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that is equally true, and I invite the Member for Eastview to take 
careful note of this, equally true if Saskatchewan Power Corporation goes out and borrows $100 million 
and makes a bad deal. That doesn’t change anything as the principles of it . . . The limit is another issue. 
The Member’s point is that in response to my point that there was adequate control, etc., his point is to 
me baloney because you have to wait two years in which to do it, and look at all the risk, etc. And look 
how bad that principle is. That is his point. I am saying if it is bad for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, it was equally bad for the Power Corporation and Sask Tel and SGIO when you people 
were in government, when that was your responsibility and we didn’t object to it. Neither did you. 
Because that is the operation that exists there. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Minister, that is the very reason that Sask Tel and Sask Power have a limit. 
Because that is one method of safeguarding to know that the Cabinet benches are not going to jeopardize 
hundreds of millions of dollars. We are talking about the statutory limit of $50 million or $100 million, 
that is dangerous enough, we are talking here of a blank cheque when we are talking hundreds and 
hundreds of millions of dollars or perhaps a billion or two billion dollars. We are asking a vastly 
different thing when you are talking about a blank cheque with no safeguard, the implications of no 
accountability, no public accountability, no limitation of the borrowing power 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3032 
 

means that if this potash corporation goes out and gets two bad years, which by the indications of the 
market it well could be. All of a sudden we are going to find ourselves that you could lose a half or $1 
billion and nobody in the province of Saskatchewan would be aware of it for two years. No one would 
be able to say, hold back, let’s look at this with care. But if you have a statutory limit at least the public 
of Saskatchewan know that when you pay $200 million for a mine or whatever it is, that that’s for one 
mine and that is within the limitation of the Act. But by giving a blank cheque there is no safeguard, 
there is no public accountability, it is only after the fact. And the danger of the loss, everybody 
recognizes this is the biggest public expenditure perhaps in the history of Saskatchewan. No question. 
 
Right now there is a great deal of risk. We are taking a chance of jeopardizing the taxpayers’ money that 
could be used for a variety of other reasons. And this is the reason that we are instating that there should 
be some safeguard in the Act. Certainly there is a lot of flexibility for the Government to act even with a 
limitation but at least the Government then would be able to assess through statements how much was 
spent, how much was purchased for a mine, etc., exactly what that particular limitation has been. But to 
turn around and ask for a blank cheque with no safeguard and suggest that Crown Corporations is a 
vehicle for accountability I suggest to you is very wrong. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask a couple of question. May I say, in passing, I have never 
been in a Crown Corporations Committee and look forward to seeing how effective it is. I did have 
some little experience, though, when I was going around doing a little research to see whether one man, 
Fred Swarovsky has managed to fleece us in the process, I went to the Crown Corporations Committee 
because of the records that were there because the Minister at the time that he made the announcement 
would not disclose the level of lending or any other details of SEDCO assistance to this gentleman. 
When I went to the Crown Corporations, what did I find? I found absolutely nothing. Again, he would 
not disclose the amount that was loaned; how much money this man had put up. I found that it was 
virtually useless for me to go there and get some information. As I said we will see what it looks like 
when we come to this one. 
 
I want to ask you specifically and I have referred to this in the past. The Saskatchewan Oil Corporation 
was established by statute and was debated in the House. I have indicated to you that this particular 
corporation was established by Order in Council and I wondered why it was done by Order in Council 
and was not done by a Bill introduced in the Legislature. I did suggest that I did have some suspicions 
that the corporation was set up by Order in Council to deliberately avoid having the thing debated at 
length in the Legislature, particularly since it was set up such a very short time proceeding the election. I 
don’t know whether that was the fact or whether it isn’t, but I have some suspicion and I want to ask you 
some questions. 
 
The background of this, you made the announcement, your Government did, to get into the potash 
business with the potash corporation. October, 1974 was the date of the public announcement. The 
session began November 28th and sat until December 12th. It sat again January 15th and 15th and sat 
again from 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3033 
 

March 10th to April 18th. The Order in Council establishing the potash corporation was passed on 
February 5th of 1975. The decision to establish it was taken well in advance of the opening of the 
session. The Order in Council which established it was passed when the session was on, in the sense that 
it was sitting January 14th and 15th and came back March 10th. I wonder why, in those circumstances, 
this Bill No. 2 was not introduced in the Legislature at that time rather than have it done by Order in 
Council? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I think there has been an answer given to this question or a similar one earlier. May I 
say that if the Member’s proposition is right then I suppose that we could have saved one heck of a lot of 
days and time – maybe we couldn’t have, because you probably would have maintained it on Bill 1 – by 
not coming through with Bill 2, if we had any intent to avoid facing the Legislature and facing the 46 
days of questioning that we have faced, by simply saying that we want to maintain the OC. I suggest to 
the Member that, indeed, the contrary is true that the intention was to face the Legislature and to support 
and defend the legislation as we have tried to do. And your question is: — why didn’t we introduce the 
Order in Council in legislative form at that time? I think there were a number of factors involved. 
 
First, any plans with respect to possible construction or major activity in that field of the potash 
corporation was perhaps contemplated at the highest level and I am sure if I can say, even more than 
contemplated. What I am saying basically, the activity was essentially not as large as the range of 
options that were open to us at that time. 
 
I have no doubt that if the Bredenbury project had proceeded with a major expenditure of funds that you 
would have seen a version of Bill 2 on the floor of the House maybe not at this particular session, but the 
spring session or this session, in order to have a debate on it. I am quite certain that would have been the 
case, that didn’t come to pass. We felt that with the magnitude, political and otherwise, of Bill 1 that it 
would only be fair to everybody, governments, Canada, etc., to set out in statute precisely the skeleton 
and the flesh of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and to convert it from OC to statute. That, I 
think, is a full and as frank an explanation as to the reason for the introduction of Bill 2 that comes to my 
mind. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, you keep referring to the parallel situation with the Saskatchewan Oil 
and Gas Corporation. That corporation was set up with a statute and the Bill was introduced in the 
Legislature during the sitting of 1973. It was assented to on May 4, 1973. And in a sense there is a 
parallel between the two. One can see that Bill 2 is patterned on the Bill that established the 
Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation. I find it simply interesting that that one was introduced into the 
Legislature and passed by Legislature and debated and that was interesting, too, to observe that that was 
in 1973. When we came to October, 1974 and February, 1975 when we were looking at an election just 
a few months down the road you chose to go by Order in Council rather than come before the 
Legislature even though as I said when you made the decision the Legislature 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3034 
 

was about to sit and when you actually set up the corporation the Legislature was actually sitting. Again, 
I find in that the same kind of attitude that my seatmate refers to, when he talks about the institution and 
the checks of the institution. Because when you do it by Order in Council, as you did in this instance, on 
February 4, 1975 it comes and goes so very quickly that the public doesn’t have a look at it; the 
Members of the Legislature don’t really have a look at it; it does not get debate; the intention of the 
Government is not told when it is done by Order in Council. That is the difference. It is a very wide 
difference in terms of the public by doing it through Order in Council than presenting it before the 
Legislature. 
 
Before we get off this I want to ask you a couple of specific questions. What accounts for the 
appointment of Doug Fullerton of Ottawa to the Board of Directors of the potash corporation and is that 
the Doug Fullerton who is the National Capital Commission? What is behind that? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Before I answer that question, again, I think this is an important point and I want to 
make one point and that is that the Member can draw his conclusions as to the OC but I would point out 
to the Members of the House that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation away back when, I don’t know 
whether it was before the election or not, was established by Order in Council, subsequently converted. 
The Order in Council first is the basis of existence for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, that is a 
pretty big corporation and subsequently converted into a statute. The same thing with Sask Computer 
Utility, which is also pretty important and subsequently converted into legislation as well. 
 
I am saying that you can draw whatever conclusions you have on it but I tell you the reasons from the 
Government point of view. 
 
Now to answer the question specifically – is this the Douglas Fullerton of the National Capitals 
Commission – I am advised that it is. Why do we have him on the board? IN essence we put him on the 
board because of what appears to be this man’s wide-ranging experience in business and in some aspects 
of economics consultation, in fact he now is acting as an economic consultant to businesses and various 
operations. We think that this gentleman has a lot to contribute in giving us guidance and assistance and 
advice as to decision that will be made in the future respecting the potash corporation. I guess the 
answer is that we appointed him because we think he is a good man to have on there. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Can I ask you why in November of 1975, just after we had been sitting for a few days 
here, Mr. Cowley became formally the chairman of the corporation and you became the vice-chairman 
of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation and Mr. Messer became the director of the Saskatchewan 
Potash Corporation. I was wondering why that came about and secondly, is there any precedent for three 
Cabinet Ministers occupying the officers’ positions on a Crown corporation? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know offhand about the last point about the precedent to have three Ministers 
on a board. I don’t know. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3035 
 

I do know that there is fairly wide experience for two Ministers. The reasoning for the two, of course, is 
that the chairman is frequently away or occasionally is away. I will check and see if there are any other 
precedents on this. I rather suspect that there aren’t. Again, there is no Machiavellian purpose behind it 
at all. As to why the choices of the Ministers, that is really something that the Premier has to decide 
when he distributes Cabinet responsibility. Today I am vice-chairman of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, a very honorific title, not quite to being chairman and not quite to being just an ordinary 
member. If it wasn’t for the honour of it I suppose I might have some second thoughts as to whether I 
want to take on the job. But tomorrow I might be, well, as Minister in charge in Saskatchewan 
Telephone Communications or whatever and off the board. These are Cabinet responsibilities that shift 
from time to time and the Premier presumably decides responsibilities as to how he wants it settled and 
to what Ministerial responsibility he wants it settled. I haven’t been able to determine why me. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, I couldn’t find any precedent for it either. And what troubled me a 
little bit and I don’t suggest there is any Machiavellian purpose to it but the tradition of Crown 
corporations are traditionally have a rather independent status and then we found in this Crown 
corporation that the chairman was a Cabinet Minister, the vice-chairman a Cabinet Minister and one of 
the board of directors. Indeed, the Board of Directors was completely dominated by three Cabinet 
Ministers. Now that doesn’t really fit with the tradition of Crown corporations being independent. The 
only concern that I had when I saw that apart from wondering why, is that again we are drifting to the 
point where Cabinet is getting into areas where traditionally it hasn’t been previously. It is a sort of 
slipping again into Cabinet doing things in a way in which we didn’t do it before. And fits into this 
whole bag that we have been arguing for several days, that Cabinet as we see it here, is little by little 
taking unto itself more powers, some of which have been traditionally vested in the Legislature; other 
powers in other respects which by tradition we have been exercising in a different fashion. 
 
I wanted to ask you, too, in respect of the resignations of Mr. Ching and Mr. Dombowsky, as you know 
they were both directors of the corporation until December, and I wanted to ask you when the decision 
was made to have them removed from the Board of Directors and when the decision was made to hire 
them. My concern here is that I hope that they were not hired at the time they were directors. I am not 
asking only about the form because one may enter into contract after they have ceased to be directors. 
When was the actual decision made to engage them in a paid capacity as employees rather than 
directors? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The answer that I have to give the Member is, and I don’t know the exact date, 
someone will have to do a check on it, is the decision to go from the board to the employment is the date 
in which the Order in Council will show. I don’t think that quote “decision”, has any particular 
relevance because it in fact what the relevant thing is the decision date and I don’t know what date that 
is. So we will check into that. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3036 
 

Mr. Lane: — Has the Government or the potash corporation advertised in Saskatchewan for the 
Director of Public Relations, publicity and what not? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lane: — And also advertised in other provinces? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Do you know the provinces offhand? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I would have to get that. We will find out where the advertisements were placed. I 
would assume that they were placed in the Saskatchewan newspapers, in the Toronto Globe and Mail, 
which is a standard business newspaper and I am not sure whether they went to Alberta or not on this, 
but I think for our purposes we could say Ontario and Saskatchewan definitely. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Can we assume the province of British Columbia? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lane: — And any American newspapers? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know. I will have it checked. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I wonder if he could also tell me if any applications have been received and if so, how 
many? Do you know offhand? I am mainly concerned . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I can tell you that I think the last application was, the last total that I had heard was 
120 applications received and they are coming in at about five a day. 
 
Mr. Lane: — When do you expect the appointment to be made? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There have been some interviews conducted now of people, both in Toronto and 
here in Saskatchewan. I don’t anticipate a decision to be made within the next month. It might, but I 
don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I understand one of the applicants is the press secretary to former Premier Dave Barrett of 
the province of British Columbia and I am wondering if that application is under serious consideration? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know if, indeed, the former press secretary has applied. He would be taken 
with as much seriousness as any of the other applicants who come from any other area or 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3037 
 

from any other field of activity, just depends on his qualifications and experience, and his success 
records. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Well, then he is not a serious candidate. 
 
One general question. You’ve indicated the powers that the Legislature has to review the potash 
corporation, and I call to your attention the very fact that, for example, on Saskoil, we didn’t find out 
about the manner of financing of Saskoil until we got into second reading debate on Bill 1. With your 
statements and assurance that the Members of this Assembly would be able to get a fair understanding 
or a fair look at the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. Is there any reason why you wouldn’t be 
prepared, on behalf of the corporation, and the Government, to make a special exception and allow the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan be brought before the Crown Corporation’s Committee next year, 
1977? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I would have to give that some consideration, and announce that in 
due course. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Chairman, I want to raise a point here, and I am going to suggest later on, I want to 
bring forward a motion but it won’t be until towards the end of the clause-by-clause study. But I want to 
raise it in a general way to get the reaction of the Attorney general, because if he agrees, there may be a 
better vehicle to do what I suggest here, and the amendment that I am going to propose. If there is, I 
would like them to work on it over the noon hour and bring it back in. One of the reasons that’s given 
for the Government taking this fantastic gamble, and interposing themselves in this almost 
unprecedented way into the economy of Saskatchewan into our second most important industry, is that, 
as the potash industry now stands, and is now so structured, it is virtually impossible according to the 
critics of the private potash industry, it is virtually impossible for Saskatchewan residents to get a piece 
of the action, to buy shares directly in our potash development. And, this has been raised time and time 
again, by Members opposite and it’s been raised by friends of the Government, it came up on the talk 
show, well even people who are close to the Government raise this over and over again, that it’s 
frustrating for the people of Saskatchewan because in our great resource of potash, and they are 
frustrated from doing it. So, I’m going to suggest an amendment whereby when we do this, though 
we’re against your takeover, but you are determined to do it, you’re determined to go into the potash 
business. I’m going to suggest a way, whereby, the people of Saskatchewan can invest in the potash 
corporation, and I recognize that Crown corporations, by their nature and by their structure are not so 
designed, nor is the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, to sell shares directly to the public. But, we do 
have the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation and it spends a great deal of money advertising, 
I suspect it spends almost as much in advertising as it takes in from the public, telling people what’s in it 
for them, and do you want a piece of the action and buy a part of Saskatchewan. And so, I’ll read the 
proposed amendment, I don’t know if it’s in order and we won’t come to it. I’m not going to suggest it 
now, I’m going to suggest it as an amendment to Section 23, which is the coming into force section. 
Section 23 of Bill 2 be amended as follows, it will be 23(a): 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3038 
 

the Corporation shall, immediately on the coming into force of this Act, enter into such agreements, 
contracts or arrangements with the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation, or such other 
corporation or agency as may be necessary to permit the residents of Saskatchewan to invest directly 
in all potash mine ventures, acquisitions, mining ventures and other undertakings by the Corporation. 

 
And the purpose of that should be very clear, and that is, if you do this, you intend on doing it, then let’s 
include in the Act setting up the potash corporation, a very direct method, a very clear method, whereby 
the people of Saskatchewan, the residents of Saskatchewan can invest their money. Now if you believe 
what you say you believe, that you want to allow the people to be involved directly, then I would take it 
you’d either accept this amendment, or if your people, if your advisers, if your employees, and I see 
some of them there who are involved with the investments in the province of Saskatchewan, and who 
have a great deal more knowledge than I have, or with all deference than you have in this field; if they 
can suggest a better method, whereby the people can be involved directly, well we could, of course, 
welcome that. But the point I want to make, if you believe in what you say, and if you believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan want to be involved directly by buying shares in the development of our potash, 
then put your money literally where your mouth is and either support an amendment like this or agree 
that you will, over the noon hour, work out some better amendment, if there is a better, more direct 
method of doing it. Now you have said this before, we’re asking you now if you mean this seriously, are 
you prepared to take some action? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly find the suggestion a very interesting suggestion. I think it 
is similar to the suggestion made by my friends, the Conservatives, who argued that we should make 
some forms of involvement of the public available in the form of debentures and the like. This is another 
way of doing it through the Saskatchewan Development Fund, and I find that a very interesting one, 
indeed. I will take the Leader of the Opposition’s suggest to ask my officials to huddle over the noon 
hour while some of the rest of us play badminton, do the important things in life, and see if we can come 
back with some proposal on this. I don’t want to be misinterpreted on this, but we are always pleased to 
look at positive suggestions to improve upon this Bill, from the Liberal Party, and I will be able to tell 
the public when I am being criticized, that the Liberals, indeed, suggested that we could improve the Bill 
even further by accepting this motion so, no, I’m joking, I’m making my small little debating point, 
which you must allow me to have a chance to do that from time to time too, and I do it so rarely. We’ll 
look at it, we’ll see if we can do it. It may not be possible now, but I see offhand that that idea has some 
interesting possibilities to it. So let’s consider it over the noon hour and I’ll be back to the House on this 
later. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I filed this with the Clerk, they have a copy. I hope that this isn’t the usual, when we’ve 
asked the Attorney General to consider things over the evening, or over the noon hour, and he says, yes, 
he will huddle with officials, usually what it means, translated into plain English, usually it means I’ll 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3039 
 

huddle with my officials and find some good reason that I can’t think of now, why not to do it. Another 
reason I want you to do this is, I would like to give those great socialists out in the country here, the 
A.D. McLeods of the D.A. McLeods, and all those socialist backbenchers of yours, the one from 
Melfort, who I understand is in a fairly good position, I’d like to give them a chance to put their money 
where their mouth is, and see if they really want to invest their own money, if they have any, into this 
venture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I see them all applauding, I notice all the ones applauding are the ones who have no 
money, I’m looking for the ones who have their money doing some applauding, like Jack Messer. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. I think that it would be only proper if the Leader of the 
Opposition, or his representative there had a chance to look at the amendment, before we discuss it any 
further. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I agree, Mr. Chairman, I just want to give them some more pertinent arguments, and I 
notice there that Mr. Snyder, who I understand is loaded, and has his money invested in houses and 
other capitalistic ventures, didn’t applaud. But I hope they think it over, and it would be a good criterion 
to see who would be the first to sign up and take a direct risk with you people, with their money, their 
hard-earned money, when you are going into this, what we think is risky. So I look forward to your 
answer later today. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, as I have said to the Leader of the Opposition, we indeed will look it 
over the noon hour, very carefully, and who knows, we might be able to say that this is a Liberal/NDP 
Bill to the people of Saskatchewan, and that, indeed, would be an interesting prospect. And I think we 
would want very seriously to consider the proposed amendment, and who knows, if we’ve got the 
Liberals this close to adopting part of the principles of the Bill, we might even get them to make the first 
investment in the Saskatchewan Potash Development Corporation. Hope springs eternal. There it is. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I recognize the Member for Wilkie. 
 
Miss Clifford: — Before we get off this first clause, I’m very glad to hear that the Attorney General is 
considering our amendment, but when we gets done talking, I’d like to ask him a serious question. It is 
short, very short. This is a very serious question, and I’m glad to hear that you did say that you will 
consider this amendment, but I sat through Bill 1 last night not being in Committee of the Whole, and 
I’ve heard a number of suggestions made to you for change in the Bill as there have been in Bill 2, one 
being the spending limit, but regardless of what it was, and I would seriously ask you what the purpose 
and I’m glad that here again, that you said you will consider this but what the purpose of the Committee 
of the Whole is, is it for us to sit, I’m asking this because I’m a new Member, to sit and hear your 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3040 
 

reasons why you put such clauses in and obviously we feel that they are not good ones, but even 
yourself, last night, said that you were sympathetic to some of the ideas that were put forth and you 
thought that they weren’t all that bad, but unfortunately, it was too late at that time to do anything about 
it, and I would suggest, Mr. Attorney General, and I’m asking you very seriously about this that we have 
suggested a number of things and maybe it isn’t too late to consider these things, and I’m asking why we 
are here in Committee of the Whole, that we are here just for political expediency and we are open for 
suggestions. Now maybe you don’t agree with them, but I haven’t heard one thing, and they can’t all be 
bad, our suggestions can’t all be bad, even I think you would not admit that, you know, that, are we here 
to have positive suggestions, and maybe this will help in your consideration, but I’d just like to ask you 
why we are here, if not to seek steps to . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate the frustration that the Member for Wilkie 
might have in this area, because I say again, I don’t want to sound like too much of grey-beard, but 
when I was in Opposition for four years, I shared many of the frustrations that Opposition Members 
always have, that is to say, why government doesn’t move, and so forth. I think the basic reason why 
many of the amendments are not accepted, is that, I’m not saying it of this Bill, I’m talking to you 
generally now, the nature of the political game is to advance amendments which will be embarrassing to 
the Government, so that amendments which will be embarrassing to the Government, so that they can be 
rejected, so that then the Opposition can go out in the country and say, look, look, this reasonable 
provision about such and such a way and they have refused it. You see, and honestly believing that to be 
the case for political reasons. And, I think another problem that comes into play very often is that, for 
example, this amendment which is a good one, I think has a lot of merit, this last amendment that the 
Leader of the Opposition has talked about, which he will be proposing on Section 23 that has a lot of 
appeal, it is something that the government has talked about, when we decided to move with Bills 1 and 
2, but very frequently, as the Member will appreciate, it’s not as simple in packaging the Bill together. I 
have often said that in may ways, the easiest part of this whole operation of Bills 1 and 2 will be to pass 
the Bills, and to draft the Bills, the difficulty comes afterwards in packaging together and getting the 
programs running, and getting the whole thing to do. The easy thing is to adopt the amendment of the 
Leader of the Opposition. But there is no use adopting it unless you know that you can implement it by 
program, by policy. Now, you are asking me to assume that motion that is proposed to us, is put forward 
in sincerity, and not as the Leader of the Opposition says, because he wants to show that D.A. McLeod 
wants to put his money where his mouth is. One might assume from those statements that it was 
tendered with a view to, you know, going out to the country and saying, now, I’m not arguing that, but 
I’m saying one might do this, but, I’m not, I’m accepting his suggestion as a legitimate attempt to 
improve upon Bill 2, to make it better, and we’re going to try our best to see if we can incorporate that 
suggestion of the Leader of the Opposition’s into the Bill, because I think it will strengthen the Bill, I 
think it will strengthen the credibility of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I think we can go out 
in the country and say look, here is what the Liberals have proposed and we think it’s a good idea. Let’s 
get behind it, because they proposed it in genuineness and sincerity. We have done quite a bit 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3041 
 

of work and thought about this already. Maybe six months from now the Liberals will have a chance to 
vote for it then, because they proposed it now. This is all being recorded, these proceedings, so there are 
a number of reasons that enter into it like that. 
 
Miss Clifford: — Mr. Chairman, I should just like to say that I would hope that it wouldn’t be rejected 
because, as I said before, there has been a suggestion that it’s just too late at this period of time, but as 
you’ve said that it would be a good suggestion, could I make you a wager, if I beat you at a game of 
badminton, would you put the amendment in? 
 
Section 1 agreed to. 
 
Section 2 agreed to. 
 
Section 3 agreed to. 
 
Section 4 agreed to. 
 
Section 5 
 
Mr. Malone: — Just a minute, Mr. Chairman, have there been any other directors appointed since your 
last announcement, I forget when it was, but are there any other directors appointed since then? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m glad the Member asked me that question, because I wanted to make a comment 
in response to the Member for Regina South and forgot to make this point, but his argument that this is a 
Cabinet dominated board, and so forth, and I think that at the present stage there is some legitimacy to 
that point of view, but I would point out that it is the hope of the Government that the essential character 
of the board will change. You will appreciate that to a large extent apart from tooling up in the 
administration and hiring personnel for the legal problems attached to Bills 1 and 2, there hasn’t been 
much yet in the way of corporate activity. I hope that on passage of the Bill, this will significantly start 
up. I think that when that does, I suspect that composition of the board will change, to take on the more 
traditional roles of boards, the Crown Corporations boards. In fact, I am fully confident that that will 
take place, and you will see appointments from the business community, the Saskatchewan business 
community, Western-Canadian business community, indeed, the Canadian business community, of the 
highest order to this Board. We are very optimistic that some very high calibre Canadians who have 
business expertise and who sympathize with the basic principles behind it will serve on the board in a 
non-Governmental capacity. I think those announcements will be coming in due course, in the next 
several months, as the activities unfold with the board. Your question, specifically, have there been any 
new appointments, the answer is the last two appointments with Mr. Fullerton and Mr. Lisyk, my deputy 
Attorney General, which was at the time Mr. Fullerton’s appointment was made. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Well, I just want to make a comment. You said that the board of directors would, in 
due course, perform the traditional 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3042 
 

functions of other Crown corporations, and I would hope that’s not the case, because without 
condemning some of the boards of other Crown corporations, many of them are not on there for business 
expertise, they are there for other reasons, and in many cases act as rubber stamps of the general 
manager and the other officials, so you are intending on making this board up of business personnel and 
industry oriented personnel, are you? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, we certainly intend to do that. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — One more question. It’s traditional in most Crown corporations to designate in the 
Act the make-up of the board of directors and I notice, not only is there no number here, but what is 
even more important unless I’ve missed it somewhere, what is even more important is the designated 
number of government employees or Cabinet ministers and the relationship of the private business 
community to the total make-up of the board. In other words, that five government employees and ten 
outside of government. Why is this not included in the Bill? Could the Minister tell me what is the 
intention of the Government because if he is sincere and talking about the business flavour and some 
relative business independence of the board, then certainly there should be a strong majority of people 
outside the government or then it becomes nothing more than the arm of the Cabinet. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for the preponderance of civil servant appointees is, as I 
have indicated earlier, that up until now, certainly in the old potash corporation of Saskatchewan and 
now the sort of new Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the decisions with respect to Bredenbury and 
then later this decision on Bill 1 and 2 really weren’t formulated. It was a corporation but it’s activities 
were more of administrative than the sense of its own internal operations and the considerations of some 
matters as opposed to getting out there in the field as say, Sask Tel or Sask Power would be. I think the 
Member makes a good point. We hope to change, as I have indicated earlier, the flavour of this. 
 
As to the section of the Bill, this varies over as to size. Some Acts do have that type of “x” number of 
people as the Member pointed out, civil servants and non-civil servants. Some do. Some are silent on it 
and we choose the silent group primarily because we wanted the maximum degree of flexibility. While 
civil servants might, in a sense, lack independence, although I’m not sure of that, I have found in my 
experience that some of them really have been invaluable in giving good hard solid advice to the 
politicians and to the others and to the board itself, indeed, in making these decisions. So we will be 
making changes in this. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — I have no argument or quarrel with a certain number of civil servants being on the 
board of directors. I also agree with the Minister that many of them can provide some very valuable or 
are valuable additions. But it is important to know whether or not it is the intention of the Government to 
have a majority of the members of the board from the business community. Now there is a reason I ask 
this because if the original board of directors of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation had had a number 
of business people represented 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3043 
 

on that board, perhaps the decision to proceed as the Government is now proceeding might have been 
changed and might have been different such as the feasibility study of Bredenbury. The necessity of 
business acumen and judgment with the experience in directorships and so forth was really something 
that was sadly lacking on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan up to this time, and here we have had 
a potash corporation that has been established for nearly a year now if I can remember, or over a year, 
with very little business representation on it, very little independent flavour, it’s really been, in fact, an 
arm of the Cabinet and now we have an Act that does not specify just exactly what the make-up of that 
board will be. It doesn’t indicate that there will be some representation outside other than the Attorney 
General’s word that he is going to try and attract some outstanding individuals which, I’m certain he 
will, but I think it’s vital that members of the board have a majority from outside the Government 
despite the contribution a civil servant might make and I think this is the real weakness of the Bill. A 
weakness that also puts some suspicion in my mind that, really, what is going to happen is it’s going to 
be a government decision and not an independent corporation and I think this is again, is it the intention 
of the potash corporation to have a majority of the board of directors outside of the government and 
outside of the Cabinet? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I can say, with precision, I can say that it would be, as I understand 
government policy, the intention to make it primarily outside the Cabinet and the civil servant sphere. It 
may not work out that way but that is the hope of it. I wonder if the Member for Qu’Appelle, I have the 
answer to his question about the director of public relations and I’m advised that it’s been advertised in 
the Globe and Mail, in the Financial Post, in the Winnipeg Free Press, in the Star-Phoenix in the 
Leader-Post, in the Edmonton Journal, in the Calgary Herald and in the Vancouver Sun . . . They don’t 
list it here but maybe we should, it’s a paper of wide readership and two trade journals. On is a journal 
called Marketing, and another one called Advertising Aid out of Chicago, circulation in the U.S.A. and 
Canada, a trade journal. These two journals have had the advertisements placed. About 200 applications 
have been received with still more coming in on a daily basis and lots of enthusiasm out there, lots of 
people applying to take on jobs with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and it seems as if we have 
an exciting era here that we’re entering into. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Could the Attorney General give us an approximate number of the board as he sees it as 
this time, the numbers aren’t mentioned. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t see the . . . how many do we have on now, about seven or 
eight and I would think that it would be about the same number, give or take one or two, just the 
composition would change. You don’t want to make it too big and you don’t want to make it too small 
because you fall into the criticisms the Member for Milestone talks about. Two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, eight people now, it may go to ten or eleven but not any higher. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3044 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — Would the Minister mind telling me how many are outside the Government? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I will give you the names and you’ll find that there’s only one outside Government 
at the present time. The names are Mr. Elwood Cowley as Chairman, Mr. Roy J. Romanow as 
Vice-Chairman, Mr. John Messer, our renowned Minister of Industry and Minister in charge of SEDCO, 
Mr. Gary Beatty who is the deputy Minister of Finance, Mr. Roy Lloyd of the Energy Secretariat, 
formerly of Finance, Mr. John Burton, a very eminent person, Mr. Douglas Fullerton, we’ve talked 
about him and Mr. Ken Lisyk, the deputy Attorney General. So one person is outside of Government. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Do I hear the Minister saying in response to the Member for Indian Head, do I hear him 
saying that it is the intention of the Government as this thing is developed that eventually to move the 
Government members entirely from that board? Is that what I’m hearing? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, I didn’t say entirely, I said that the intention was to change the complexion of 
the board as to make it a majority non-government people. You cannot remove all government people. 
You’ll always have one Minister or two on there and, indeed, I think you would want to have the deputy 
Minister of Finance and certainly if you listen to all the legal points raised by my friends opposite, I 
think it’s even worthwhile having the deputy Attorney General there. So this will change in due course. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Chairman, the point I’m making is this. I can appreciate you, as the Minister in 
charge of the corporation and the deputy Minister of Finance but very obviously if the Government is 
going to in any way honour its commitment that it has made, the whole concepts established the 
independence in this board, certainly there have to be some drastic changes made and made very soon. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Again, its independence, yes, in a sense of the word and independence, no, in 
another sense of the word because obviously the Minister has to come to the House for the Crown 
Corporations Committee is going to ask questions about it. That never makes the board independent. It’s 
always dependent upon the House. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Attorney General, I just want, once again, to draw your attention to the point 
that I’m trying to make. Mr. Fullerton, the one man outside the Government, was just appointed in the 
month of December, in reality and he lives in Ottawa. In reality the totality of the board of directors of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan over the past year has been made up of entirely members of the 
Cabinet and members of the Government and all of the decisions in relation to entering into the potash 
industry directly, the feasibility of Bredenbury, the assessment, the evaluation, the business potential for 
Saskatchewan, the risk, the gamble and everything else has been made by no one else but the NDP 
Government and its employees and 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3045 
 

if we’re going to have a board of directors in a Crown corporation that is traditional with the 
establishment of other Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, it is absolutely vital that this policy be 
changed and changed as quickly as possible. I point out again, it is almost like a closed shop, this whole 
Bill. It doesn’t designate any authority, it designates no accountability, it does not designate the 
members of the board, the make-up; in other words I have yet to see any Bill or any Crown corporation 
designed in the province of Saskatchewan the way this particular Act is designed and I point this out 
again that these clauses establishing the board of directors are another indication of exactly the points 
the Opposition has been trying to make for the past three months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, a common device used by lenders to ensure that the 
money they have loaned is being used properly is to insist that representatives of their company or bank 
or whatever be placed on the board of directors of the company that the money is loaned to, in some 
cases one director, in some cases more. Now, are you prepared to indicate at this time whether the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan would be prepared to go along with something like that, that is, if 
you borrowed money from an institution in the United States, if they insisted that one of their 
representatives sit on the board of directors, would you be prepared to abide by that request from the 
lender? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I can’t say yes or no to that at this time. We really would have to consider all the 
conditions, all of the request, the implications that are attached to that before deciding yes or no on that. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Certainly the possibility is there that you would have members of your board of 
directors who could be New York based or Chicago based or Saudi Arabia based, whatever? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It’s possible but I don’t think that it’s a very probably likelihood. As I say, it’s 
possible but I don’t think very probably. 
 
The question put to Section 5, it was agreed to. 
 
Section 6 agreed to. 
 
Section 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have an amendment to Section 7 moved by the Member for Regina South, 
seconded by the Member for Regina Lakeview, that Section 7 be amended by adding “thereto” after the 
word “shall” where such word appears in the first line the following words: 
 

be situation in the province of Saskatchewan shall. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I should like to say, Mr. Chairman, in respect to that amendment we, as the Attorney 
General knows, did manage to 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3046 
 

force one amendment at least to these Bills which we considered to be such a disaster and that was the 
changing of the reference to the companies or the name of the Act from 1975 to 1976. This second 
amendment which we have some optimism about, we pointed out very early in the going that the Act 
itself did not require that the head office of the corporation be located in Saskatchewan. We wanted to 
be quite certain again that if you’re going to go forward with this move to which we’ve objected 
throughout but if you’re going to do it, then we ought to make certain that the corporation head office is 
going to be located in this province and not elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the Members of the House that the head office will 
definitely be located in Saskatchewan. I’m fighting hard to locate it in Saskatoon, for example. I’m 
trying to convince the Board of Trade and others that it should be . . . Thank you very much . . . I’m 
getting enthusiasm, I’m getting lots of support from some of the Saskatoon Members on this side. It’s 
strangely silent from the Saskatoon Members on the opposite side. I’ve received many favourable 
comments about my colleagues’ decision to locate SEDCO offices in Saskatoon and some people are 
greatly disappointed to see the Liberal Members oppose that . . . 
 
Mr. Malone: — Who was disappointed? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Steuart when he got up yesterday he said it was a waste of money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The letters. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, the letters, I’ll give you the letters later. I’m sure that the Member for Eastview 
(Mr. Penner) and the Member for Sutherland (Mrs. Edwards) joined hands here in a non-political, 
non-partisan way and say we want this head office located in Saskatoon and they joined up, I’m 
convinced that we would locate it is Saskatoon. I just want to say that we object to the amendment for 
one reason only. I give the House the assurance that the head office is going to be located in 
Saskatchewan, it’s being recorded. It if isn’t, next session of the House, March, or next year of the 
House, you take out my words and do whatever you’d like with them but it’ll be located in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me ask you this. If I agree to the amendment, would you agree to give me leave to read the Bill a 
third time later this day based on the acceptance of this amendment? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You will? If that’s the case then I think we have no problems on this. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — All right, if we complete clause by clause study of this Bill and you wish to have it 
read the third time this day, there is nothing but this amendment to stand in the way we would certainly 
agree with that. We’re serious about putting the amendment forward. As I say we’ve indicated to you we 
don’t 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3047 
 

agree with what you are doing but we want to make certain that that head office is going to be located in 
the province and not elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Yes, we would be agreed to this suggestion from the Attorney General with this 
particular amendment. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Attorney General, I’m going to make a further amendment that this proposed 
amendment be further changed and it will be seconded by Mrs. Edwards that Section 7 of the printed 
Bill be further amended by inserting the word “Saskatoon” before the word Saskatchewan. We make it 
quite clear that the actions of the Government to date, Mr. Chairman, have been somewhat divisive and 
have created hard feelings within groups within the city of Saskatoon, with Esterhazy and with Regina 
and it’s the Liberal Party’s position that a definite stand be taken on this and although we oppose the 
nationalization of potash industry the Liberal Party is going to commit itself that the head office of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan be in Saskatoon and no other city and I’m glad that the Attorney 
General feels that way. Some of the comments made by some of the Saskatoon Members of the 
Government opposite haven’t been conducive to the fair assessment of where the location should be. I 
can recall threats made . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. We had before the noon break an indication from the Attorney General that 
he was going to urge the Government Members on that side that the head office of the potash 
corporation be moved to Saskatoon. There’s been an awful lot of comment and debate during the 
readings of both Bill 1 and Bill 2 as to the location of the head office of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. I would like to make it clear that we obviously haven’t changed our position on the 
matter that we are opposed to nationalization and the need. But now that we are faced with the 
inevitable, we have attempted in the past to get from the Government an indication where the head 
office would be located. As a Member, with part of Regina City in my constituency and being a native 
Saskatonian, I thought that the fair thing would be to check on the record and find out which would be 
the most logical or the best suited place for the potash head office. I consider that Saskatoon is noted as 
the potash capital city, I believe, too, and I think that the Attorney General and some of the Saskatoon 
Members can recall that the first mine in Saskatchewan to start off the potash industry was developed in 
Patience Lake and I’m sorry that the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) shows that 
he’s lost and doesn’t really know where it is because I think the mine was at Patience Lake, now you 
may not know a potash mine from an office building on Second Avenue but please bear with me until 
I’m finished and perhaps we could even get a definite indication of that particular Saskatoon Member 
and what his true feelings are in this regard. I think that Saskatoon has made a pretty well-known 
statement that it is the potash capital of North America, that it has, in fact, a monument down on the 
Saskatchewan River to that effect. We note that there is some indication from Regina Members that it 
should be in Regina. I think that some degree of fairness should be in order that an announcement of a 
major development in the last couple of weeks was in Regina for which I commend the Major of Regina 
for his leadership in getting that particular project, but the Provincial Government has committed itself 
to 320,000 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3048 
 

square feet of useable office space in the new downtown redevelopment. This would be greater than two 
comparative Toronto-Dominion Bank buildings in the city of Regina. Now these are being bought and 
paid for by the people of Saskatchewan and through the Government of Saskatchewan. The news report 
of that particular day also indicates that the Provincial Government may be prepared to double its 
original commitment of 320,000 square feet; in effect the Provincial Government may be building the 
equivalent of four Toronto-Dominion Bank Towers or larger building in the city of Regina. At the same 
time prior to the last election the city of Regina had received the announcement that there would be a 
major new government building on Wascana Centre Authority by the Public Health Building at the cost 
of some, I believe, $25 million. Now, we also urge the Government to make its decision very soon 
because at the present time it is not going to be a disruptive thing to move the head office to the city of 
Saskatoon. Personnel are still being hired, we had the indication from the Attorney General that not too 
many, relatively very few people have been hired by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan so it will 
not be disruptive to move the head office at the present time. In addition, I think, Mr. Attorney General, 
that the practice of the Government opposite when the question has come up about location of head 
office of trying to keep various communities on the string is, I think, a demeaning type of government 
practice. In think, too, that it’s divisive that Esterhazy or some other place would indicate and everybody 
wants the head office of the potash corporation. And seemingly from the threats made by the Saskatoon 
Member for Riversdale or the one from Saskatoon Centre. Threatening the Board of Trade because they 
went and undertook at their own expense an advertising campaign against the policy of the Government 
indicates that the Government was really trying to use the potash corporation head office as kind of a 
bribe for people to restrain themselves from using their democratic right of free speech. We think that’s 
wrong, we thing that’s bad government. So, I think with all these various considerations and the fact that 
it is already designated as the potash capital of North America, that there really should be no question, 
that a firm statement should be made by the Government offices that the head offices of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan be located definitively in the city of Saskatoon and that the necessary 
arrangements be made. We know that the Government has already made arrangements for space in the 
city of Regina but again the number of personnel to be affected is not that great and if we are to accept 
the Government’s position that this is going to be a great booming industry, that we have the head office 
personnel with their expertise here and I’m taking the Government’s ads and the Government at its 
word. It will certainly have access to the mining section of Department of Engineering, the College of 
Engineering at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. So for these many reasons and the fact this 
would end once and for all the practice and I don’t think most of the backbenchers agree with the 
practice, you know, of trying to mislead various communities, oh, you’ll be the head office if you’ll vote 
for us; oh, yeah, you’ll be the head office if you don’t say anything and keep your board of trade locked 
up and don’t let them say anything and you could be in running for the head office. That’s not good 
government and I know the Members opposite agree with that. So it is my intention, therefore, Mr. 
Chairman, to make the following motion, seconded by Mr. Penner, that Section 7 of the printed Bill be 
further amended by inserting the word “Saskatoon” before the word Saskatchewan in the amendment. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3049 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to assure the Member for Qu’Appelle that if I was able to 
make that decision alone on this side, he would unqualifiedly have my vote now, but that I can’t make 
the decision unqualifiedly by myself and, Mr. Chairman, I would simply say that there are other reasons 
as well. The Government is petitioned by a number of communities who want the head office located 
there, they’re very excited about the prospects of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And we have 
to consider them. I’ll give you an example, one is Melville. Melville writes to the Premier on December 
18th, I won’t read the letter in detail. It sets out 14 points, 13 points, I’m sorry, of why the head office 
should be located in Melville, Saskatchewan. Another one is the Moose Jaw Economic Development 
Commission, a letter dated December 18, 1975 by the executive director, to the Premier. 
 

May we ask, Mr. Premier, that your office most seriously consider Moose Jaw as the most logical site 
for such office to be established in consideration of the short distance between Regina and Moose Jaw 
and the availability of temporary space as well as land for the building of permanent headquarters and 
the good reception of such an acquisition to our City add up commercially to the benefit of Moose 
Jaw. 

 
I think that’s a consideration and a matter that should be considered. I have a letter here under date of 
December 15, 1975 from the town of Esterhazy. The town of Esterhazy, I think is an interesting possible 
selection and right around IMC country and around a great deposit of potash ore. I’ve gotten a letter here 
from Mr. Fred J. Soutar, Town Administrator, he takes me to task because he says this: 
 

The statement allegedly made by you to the news media that the headquarters of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan will be located in Yorkton or Moose Jaw is of great concern to this 
community. Apparently some Members of the Cabinet are unaware of Esterhazy’s bid for the 
headquarters made early this spring. 

 
And I can see that there is big interest in this, where the location is going to be. I wrote back to Mr. 
Soutar saying to him that I did not ignore the request personally, I was just speaking up for my own city, 
Saskatoon. So I’m very committed to the city of Saskatoon. The Member will agree with me, all 
Members will agree with me that we cannot dismiss out of hand the multitude of requests. The Mayor of 
Regina has made a strong submission, these letters from Melville and so forth. This is a decision which 
requires the most careful of considerations and reactions. I can assure you that as a Saskatoon man, I’m 
going to keep doing my bit to plug for Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Penner: — I wonder if I could just say a word in response to what the Attorney General has said, 
I’m sure he will appreciate and the other Members opposite will appreciate that it wasn’t until the 
Attorney General implored us so vigorously this morning that he was going to support Saskatoon that 
we got the idea that maybe we should insert the amendment and while it may be that some Members 
opposite will be able to stand and vote in favour of the sub-amendment. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3050 
 

Mr. Bailey: — In speaking to the sub-amendment, it places the Conservative caucus at this time in a 
particularly bad position. For the simple reason, Mr. Chairman, that we are not opposed to the head 
office of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation going to Saskatoon personally because of the proximity 
of myself and my constituency, I suppose my feelings would be that way. Our caucus is represented 
from across Saskatchewan and we gave our commitment that we would in fact support the original 
amendment but I’m afraid that when we look at the request that the Department has, when we look at 
possibly that there are people in Saskatchewan beyond Regina and Saskatoon. I could put in a real pitch 
for say, Rosetown, even though we’re a few miles from a potash mine. I really think that the 
Government Members opposite can vote as they like to this sub-amendment, the official Opposition can 
vote as they like to this sub-amendment, I would think that the Conservative caucus, rather than to tie 
down the Government to a particular point or to play the ball game between Regina and Saskatoon at 
this time that we won’t have any part of it. 
 
Mr. B. Allen (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Chairman, I was particularly interested in this amendment 
particularly from the Member for Qu’Appelle driving industry out to the city of Regina to our sister city, 
the city of Saskatoon. Now, it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that a case can be made to have the head 
office situated in Saskatoon but I suggest an equally good case can be made to have it situated right 
where it is now, in the city of Regina. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is, if we defeat this amendment 
as I’m sure we will, will the city of Regina be given due consideration in terms of situating the head 
office of the potash corporation in Regina and not as the Member suggests without any study or any 
consultation whatsoever be situated in the city of Saskatoon. I would say, just in asking that question, 
that I think that in doing that you would certainly want to hear representations from different groups and 
I’m sure the Saskatoon Board of Trade would want to put in a proposal that the head office be in 
Saskatoon. I think that they should be allowed to do that, Mr. Chairman, and I wonder if you can give 
me that assurance, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Chairman, I’ve listened to all the debates on Bills 1 
and 2 and many times, I was almost in the arms of Morpheus, having to listen to all that. I do want to say 
to Opposition Members that this is one sensible amendment that they have come up with and I think it 
has a lot of merit and I’m willing to give you credit and say it’s a sensible move on your part, I haven’t 
made up my mind as to how I’m going to vote but . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s the Party Whip speaking. 
 
Mr. Mostoway: — We all know that Saskatoon is the potash capital of the world, there’s no use 
denying that, and want to give credit to Members opposite for that stroke of brilliance that they came out 
with just recently. 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3051 
 

Mr. Steuart: — I should like to say one word, I think this whole Bill 1 and Bill 2 in this whole move, is 
so stupid, so short-sighted that it’s like fighting over who gets leprosy. As far as I’m concerned, no one 
voted for Prince Albert because it won’t very long . . . 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to speak too long on this issue but 
I think it’s obvious that it belongs in the capital city where it is now, there’s no question about it. I’m a 
bit surprised at the Member for Qu’Appelle to come in here, and whose vote is 70 per cent Regina, that 
he would bring in a motion to locate it somewhere else. If he had any aspirations for the leadership, 
Gary, I’m afraid you’ve blown the leadership and you’ve blown your seat as well. I’m somewhat 
surprised to find that the Member for Lakeview, the Member for Regina South and the Member for 
Wascana, a young lad from Wascana, that they would permit the Member for Qu’Appelle to bring in 
this sub-amendment. I understand that it was supposed to be seconded by the charming lady there for 
Saskatoon, but I think she was out, so Mr. Penner seconded it. I think we’re getting into a lot of 
discussion here, unnecessary discussion, I think every community has a right to ask for it. Someone said 
that the first potash mine produced potash near Saskatoon, I thought it was Esterhazy that came in first. I 
thought they were flooded down there for about five years. But anyway, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to 
get into a long debate but it’s obvious that the capital city should at all times get first choice . . . in every 
matter and I’m a little bit disappointed in my good friend, the Member for Qu’Appelle that he would do 
this to Regina, to the good people in Glencairn and University Park which you’ll have next time. I can 
see just the candidate next time telling the people that he wanted to get rid of the potash centre from his 
own seat. I can expect that maybe from the Member for Regina South, because he’s an import, he hasn’t 
been here too long. But the Member for Lakeview who was probably born and raised here, that he 
doesn’t get up and stand and support me on this. I feel a little bad about the Member for Wascana, I 
hope he still stands up and says something in my support. Anyway, I’m sure it will be in Regina, it is 
here and it will stay here, I think with what happened in Saskatoon, some of their people there, how they 
said they didn’t want it, and they didn’t want any part of potash, it’s pretty hard to put it there now. 
Some of the Members supported the Board of Trade there, their aspirations in trying to get rid of Bill 1 
and 2. Mr. Chairman, I know that the good sense of this House will vote that sub-amendment down and 
I hope to hear some no’s from the other side, too. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I’m glad the Mayor of Regina has made certain comments. Make no mistake, the Mayor 
of Regina will probably go around Glencairn and say that if Saskatoon is the head office that the right 
decision was made because it is the potash capital of the world, and it is well known for that and that’s 
precisely the decision that should be made in this House. All this bickering back and forth was evidence 
as to which town should have it, should be ended, and I think the Government is doing itself a disservice 
to encourage that type of bickering between communities. That is not the object of this, and I think that I 
would urge the Mayor or Regina to support the sub-amendment. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3052 
 

Mr. Lange: — Mr. Chairman, in order to resolve the fracas, which obviously exists in the House right 
now, I should like to remind the Member that in rural Saskatchewan we have a decided problem with 
regard to industrial development, and particularly in the southern half of the province, and it would be 
interesting to have an exemplary case of a decentralized large corporation, headquartered in a small 
town in rural Saskatchewan. I should also like to remind Members that potash was first discovered in 
1942, only 12 miles from the town of Radville in the heart of my constituency and in order to try and 
resolve the problems that are before the House right now, and obtain a little pacification, I would 
suggest that perhaps the headquarters should be in Radville. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Ready for the question? The question is on the sub-amendment, moved by the 
Member for Qu’Appelle, seconded by the Member for Saskatoon Eastview, will you take the 
sub-amendment as read? All those in favour of the sub-amendment say Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Those opposed say No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — All those Members in favour of the sub-amendment, please stand. 
 
All those who are opposed to the sub-amendment, please rise. 
 
I declare the sub-amendment lost (14 in favour, 27 opposed). 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In answer to the question called on the amendment, and on the sub-amendment, I am 
prepared to recommend to our side of the House that we adopt the amendment, the only concern that I 
have is that once the Bills comes out of Committee of the Whole, the only way we can get it read a third 
time is by leaving, and if I can be assured by all Members present that that leave will be granted, then as 
far as I am concerned we can get on with business and adopt it. 
 
Mr. Malone: — I gave the assurance on behalf of the Liberal caucus, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Larter: — You can have that assurance from the PCs. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you ready for the question? The question is on the amendment, moved by Mr. 
Cameron, seconded by Mr. Malone, that Section 7 will be amended by adding, thereto, after the word 
shall where such word appears in the first line, the following words be substituted “in the Province of 
Saskatchewan, and shall”. All those in favour of the sub-amendment please rise. It’s agreed. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, before we get off this section, I wonder if the Attorney General is 
prepared to let us have his answer as to the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition, 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3053 
 

you indicated you were going to consider it over lunch, lunch is now over. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I am prepared to do this now, or to do it when Section 23 arrives. I thought the 
Leader was going to move the amendment at Section 23. 
 
Mr. Malone: — We are prepared to wait until Section 23, I just didn’t want you to forget. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, no, it’s ever burning in my mind. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Section 7 agreed? 
 
Section 7 agreed to. 
 
Section 8 agreed to. 
 
Section 9 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have an amendment, I believe, here on . . . do you want this amendment? We 
have an amendment to Section 9, it’s been moved by the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron), 
seconded by the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner, that Section 9, subsection (3) be 
amended by adding thereto, after the word “Corporations” where such word appears in the third line, the 
following words “but not including, non-Canadian multinational corporations”. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I can speak to the amendment. You may recall during the 
course of the hours upon hours of debate we had in connection with this proposal, that we kept hearing 
from the Members opposite, one refrain. It was a refrain how nasty the multinational corporations are, 
how desirable it was if we drive multinational corporations from our province, and added to it always 
was the suggestion that we, on this side of the House, in opposing these Bills were aligned ourselves 
with multinational corporations. Had that point been made by Members opposite once or twice, three or 
four times, we may have let it go by. I attempted at one point to make a reasonable point to the Attorney 
General about what our policy was with regard to multinational corporations and the development of our 
resources, and he scoffed at it. I said that our policy was not so very much different than what their 
policy was, as distinct from what they say their policy is. I said that our policy was, if we found 
multinational corporations were a benefit to the province of Saskatchewan in terms of developing our 
resources, that they had money to offer, they had expertise to offer, that we couldn’t otherwise have, we 
were prepared to welcome them to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — He in return, as I say, scoffed at my motion. Speaker after speaker after speaker from 
the other side of the House got up and condemned out of hand multinational corporations, said that they 
had no place in our province, I said to them at 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3054 
 

that time, that I was going to put them to the test, because I was going to move an amendment which 
would prohibit the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan from entering into any joint venture 
arrangements or other associations with multinational corporations. The substance of it is, if Members 
opposite, so many of them who spoke about multinational corporations in the derogatory terms in which 
they did, if they genuinely believe in what they said, then they can rise with us and vote for this 
amendment. On the other hand, as we suspect what they were doing was peddling a political line, then 
they will be voting against the amendment. What we will do in the process, however, is smoke some of 
them out. What we will do is say to you, in effect, put your money where your mouth is. If you find the 
potash companies are such distasteful citizens in our province, then we give you an opportunity to 
record a vote in favour of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan not having any dealings with those 
nasty multinational corporations. 
 
Let me make one additional point, in seriousness. As I said there were two or three of us, early in the 
going in this debate, who attempted to make a point of reason, in this connection. The point of reason 
was that the multinational corporations consisted of people. People whom we invited to our province for 
a specific purpose, to bring their money and their expertise to our province to develop a resource that we 
ourselves couldn’t. Saying, as I said earlier, that our policy is that these people can be of value to us, 
let’s deal with them and bring them in, that was the point of reason we tried to make. What we heard in 
response from so many of them, but as I said, if there were two or three we would have let it go, but we 
must have heard it from a dozen, is how we were the friends of these multinational corporations, and 
how they on the other side found them so distasteful. As I say, we now give you the opportunity to put 
your money where your mouth is, and we’ll see how you vote on this one, which, as I say, would 
prohibit the potash corporation from dealing with multinational corporations. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the Member there and his approach on multinationals. 
Unfortunately, I cannot adopt that motion, I don’t think the Conservatives will vote with it either. As the 
Member said, I believe, in second reading we were going to have some fun with the Opposition side, 
and I don’t want to totally put this amendment in that category of fun, but I do simply say that the 
position that has been stated is that this amendment of Bill 2 is not moved by any blind pathological, 
hatred of multinational corporations, necessarily. No, we’ve said this, I said in my second reading 
speech, that we are put in a corner by this particular class of multinational corporation, the potash 
industry, I said that. And then I went on in my second reading speech to enumerate the timber industry, 
the uranium industry, the hard-rock mining industry, where we were able to work out satisfactory 
arrangements with corporations, multinational or otherwise. But even if there was a pathological hatred 
for them, what good would it do to accept this motion? The simple fact is, that we do have the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and it will be working on a worldwide basis and the simple fact is that 
there are some multinational corporations in other countries, other countries that have not seen perhaps 
some of the arguments that might be advanced against multinationals, how can we be blind to that fact. 
We must live and deal in the world in which we exist, and finally, I would say 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3055 
 

in conclusion to the Hon. Member, this. He argued that we have said that multinational are bad, and that 
he wants us to put our money where our moths are. I’m Ukrainian, I sometimes get confused on these 
little terms, but, what does the amendment say? It says that all multinationals are bad, except Canadian 
multinationals. And a multinational is a multinational is a multinational., and if we said that we would 
have to be consistent and not accept Canadian multinationals either, because they too would have all the 
bad characteristics that you said we said multinationals have. So, I appreciate the point that the Members 
makes. I hope that he understands why we can’t accept the amendment. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Comments, Mr. Chairman. We have heard time after time in this House, Members 
opposite accuse the Liberal caucus and the Liberal Party of being defenders of the multinational, the 
Premier held his little finger up and said you’re defending the multinational corporations, and we’ve 
heard it around the province, and we’ve heard press releases, we’ve heard it from the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, and the NDP nationally, provincially, multinational corporations are a bad thing, 
according to the NDP. Now if you are really sincere in that belief, we know that you will join us in 
voting for the amendment that has been proposed by the Member for Regina South. If you are really 
sincere about your hatred of the multinational corporations, and if you really sincerely believe that the 
Liberals are the defenders of these, you have no alternative but to vote for the amendment that has been 
proposed and the phrase has been used by both previous speakers, put your money where your mouth is, 
it’ll be very interesting to see how some of you who have made public statements vote on this particular 
amendment. 
 
Mr. E. Anderson (Shaunavon): — Mr. Chairman, I should like to pass a few remarks on this 
amendment. I think we should understand that the amendment pertains to the potash corporation, not 
other corporations. We have heard in this House, repeatedly told to us and to the province, that we can’t 
deal with the multinational corporations that control the potash industry, but this is the reason that we 
have to expropriate, it would seem a strange argument to say now that we can deal with them, once after 
expropriation, so I say, as has been said before, put your money where your mouth is. Your argument 
has been that you can’t deal with them, so I can’t see how you can vote to deal with them now. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The question before the committee is the amendment to Section 9, moved by the 
Member for Regina South, seconded by the Member for Saskatoon Eastview, will you take the motion 
as read? All those in favour of the amendment, please say Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Those opposed say No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I say the No’s . . . standing vote. All those in favour of the amendment, please stand. 
Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. I declare that the amendment is lost. 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3056 
 

 
Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, with regard to Section G, I wonder, Mr. Attorney 
General, in regard to the patent rights on some of these mines, in particular, solution mining at, say, 
Kalium, in light of what has happened in the last week or so on patent rights, and that the patent rights 
are, indeed, out of the jurisdiction of the Provincial Government, has there been any thought or planning 
gone into this question; what would happen in the case of purchasing mines with regard to patent rights? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I think we dealt with this. I don’t mean to negate the Member’s 
question, but we dealt with this at length yesterday and the day before yesterday, I think. And let me jut 
say in substance, without again regenerating the entire argument, that quite clearly in some areas of 
patents, the corporation might not have the power, but the corporation in other areas would have the 
power, for example, if a patent is held elsewhere, but there is a right conferred by the patent owner onto 
a lease, if I may put it that way, or a patent rights holder, we could expropriate that interest, that that 
recipient has in the patent, and generally speaking, this is how we think the arrangements are, so there 
are a number of combinations that are possible here. 
 
Section 9 agreed to. 
 
Section 10 agreed to. 
 
Section 11 agreed to. 
 
Section 12 agreed to. 
 
Section 13 agreed to. 
 
Section 14 agreed to. 
 
Section 15 agreed to. 
 
Section 16 agreed to. 
 
Section 17 agreed to. 
 
Section 18 agreed to. 
 
Section 19 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, I would, I’m sorry, it’s number 20 I want to speak on. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Attorney General, why have you selected the 30th of June. As I pointed out 
this morning, it means that there will be no accountability to Crown corporations to the Legislature until 
1978. Why could that not be moved back to the normal fiscal year? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for the 30th, is that that is the traditional or normal 
fertilizer year. They go from June to June or June to July, the industry works on that basis, fertilizer 
year, the taxation, mineral resources, and the like, and it 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3057 
 

 
seemed consistent that it should work this way with the corporation as well. 
 
Section 19 agreed to. 
 
Section 20 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think I may be covering old ground, but I’m aware that 
on all other Crown corporations the audit is prepared by the Provincial Auditor, nobody else. This is the 
first Crown corporation that I am aware of where, by statute, somebody else other than the Provincial 
Auditor is going to be allowed to audit the books and I should like to know the reason why. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, previously we have endeavoured to give an answer to this question. 
Essentially, the Member will appreciate that this will likely be a very substantial undertaking, whether it 
be substantial, and our hope is that the Provincial Auditor will, indeed, be the individual, through his 
officers, who will be auditing this. We have full confidence in the Provincial Auditor, and we believe 
that, however, when the Bill was being drafted, it was thought that where an undertaking of this size, the 
magnitude and the like of the audit, might dictate that another auditor be designated fulltime to audit it, 
in effect, to stand in the place of the Auditor. It would have to come before the House, of course, and the 
whole operation, the audit report would be of such a size that the Provincial Auditor couldn’t carry it 
out. So, as I say, we certainly hope that that is a satisfactory explanation. 
 
Mr. Malone: — No, it’s not to me because SPC is a substantial undertaking, Sask Tel is a substantial 
undertaking, all of the Crown corporations are substantial undertakings to one degree or another, the 
Provincial Auditor audits them. Surely the answer is to give the Provincial Auditor more staff so that he 
can undertake to audit the books of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, rather than have an outside 
auditor. Now let me ask you this. As you know, on the Public Accounts Committee, one of the things 
that really makes that committee go, is the Provincial Auditor and his staff are available for assistance to 
Members of that committee. Now, in this case will the auditor, if it is not the Provincial Auditor, be 
available in the same way to the Public Accounts Committee? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I am sure that would be the case, because as I was saying earlier, any Crown 
corporation has to table a financial statement which is audited. And on Public Accounts, if the Minister 
of Finance has made a loan to the potash corporation, that the Minister of Finance is covered totally by 
the Provincial Auditor, and that’s the section that Public Accounts would deal with. Handling of the 
Provincial Minister of Finance, and the Treasury, and the like, it would be undoubtedly within Public 
Accounts, because no one is even suggesting that the auditor might not be involved in that operation. So 
I would answer your question that, yes, both ways, or all ways. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Are you suggesting though to get that other auditor, if it is not the Provincial Auditor, 
to appear before a Public Accounts, we would have to subpoena him, and his records. 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3058 
 

Mr. Romanow: — No, I don’t, I am not suggesting that at all. What I am saying of Public Accounts is 
this, again, maybe I’m not making myself clear, but in Public Accounts, as the Member will know, in 
Public Accounts we are dealing here with a check of the traditional activities of Government 
departments and so forth of which one department is the Ministry of Finance, and if the Ministry of 
Finance should advance sums to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, they will have to be reported 
as part of the Minister of Finance operations, as I indicated in my earlier question. That is the only thing 
that is referred to the Public Accounts Committee, whether it’s Power Corporation or otherwise, and 
under that type of a situation, since the Provincial Auditor is the only person who auditors and controls 
any departmental expenditures, the answer to the Member is quite clearly and unequivocally, that in 
Public Accounts, it will have to be the Provincial Auditor, so that if there is any advancement of funds, 
the Provincial Auditor is in there, and he is making comments. Now, let’s leave Public Accounts aside. 
Let’s say, hypothetically, let’s say this comes to pass, that the Provincial Auditor is not designated, 
another outside auditor is designated, what then happens? Well, the same thing happens there as happens 
when the Provincial Auditor who audits SGIO or Sask Tel or Sask Power accounts. Namely, they are 
attached to the annual Crown corporations’ reports, tabled on the Members’ desks, sent down to Crown 
Corporations Committee, the management has to answer the questions, together with any audit people 
who are there. And that will be the same situation that applies here in case the Provincial Auditor is not 
the one designated. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — I should like to ask the Attorney General whether he can give us one single example 
of a Crown corporation in this province whose books are not required by law to be audited by the 
Auditor General. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised and I don’t want to drag my officials into this 
particularly but I want to mention the name because hopefully it will give me some added weight to my 
argument. I’m advised by Mr. Holtzman and My Lisyk, Mr. Holtzman primarily who has been 
Legislative Counsel, that there are indeed Crown corporations which have this provision, but he says 
offhand he can’t name them. Now maybe we can take a moment or two to find it out but I’m advised 
that it is the case. I would remind the Hon. Member that it wasn’t too long ago that all Crown 
corporations all had their own audits externally done. It was a fairly recent development, I think during 
the Thatcher years, I could be totally off base here, but the Provincial Auditor was brought back into the 
operation. I think that was a good development. As the Premier indicated we fully expected that would 
be the case with respect to the Provincial Auditor but it might not be because as even by the Member’s 
own admissions, you know, we’re looking at a very, very large and substantial operation and it might 
have to make a decision either more staff for the auditor or on the alternative maybe even on his 
recommendation, I don’t know, might have to delegate it out to somebody. That’s the best answer I can 
give you. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, you’ve been making the point throughout, drawing the parallel 
between the Act which established Saskoil and the Act which will establish the Saskatchewan Potash 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3059 
 

Corporation. Now the Act upon which this one is patterned, that is to say the Act establishing the 
Saskatchewan Oil Corporation, requires, as a matter of law, that the books be audited by the Provincial 
Auditor. The significance of that as I’ve indicated to you before is simply this. The Provincial Auditor is 
a unique creature in the sense that he cannot be dismissed by Government or by any Crown corporation. 
He can only be dismissed by the Legislature. Therefore he enjoys a level of independence which no 
other civil servant in my knowledge enjoys. He is answerable to the House and can only be dismissed by 
the House. A private auditing firm can be dismissed at any time, by the corporation or by the Cabinet. 
So the Provincial Auditor enjoys a measure of independence that no one else enjoys. 
 
Now, when you make the argument that this is a very large undertaking and therefore it may be 
necessary for that reason to go outside the Provincial Auditor’s office, I say to you that that’s the very 
time when the Provincial Auditor is the most needed. If it was a little corporation and little expenditures 
it may not be necessary to have the Provincial Auditor have a look at them. The larger the enterprise the 
greater the necessity to have an independent audit by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t . . . I can’t find very much to disagree with the Hon. Member 
on in this regard. I agree about the importance of the Provincial Auditor and his independence. So I 
agree with this and I just simply indicate to him the reasoning that was behind that situation. No one 
ought to attach any greater importance to it than that. 
 
Section 20 agreed to. 
 
Section 21 agreed to. 
 
Section 22 agreed to. 
 
Section 23 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have an amendment that I must put to the committee. This is moved by the 
Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart), seconded by the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. 
Malone) that Section 12 of Bill 2 be amended as follows: 
 

Section 23(a). The Corporation shall immediately on the coming into force of this Act enter into such 
agreements, contracts or arrangements with the Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation or such 
other corporation or agency as may be necessary to permit the residents of Saskatchewan to invest 
directly in all potash mine ventures, acquisitions, mining ventures and other undertakings by the 
Corporation. 

 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Chairman, just speaking briefly since I outlined my reasons behind this amendment 
earlier, I won’t belabour the point. I want to make it clear at the beginning that this amendment, whether 
it passes or fails, is in no way an endorsement in any manner or form of this very, very bad Bill, this 
very, very bad move. However, if you are determined to bulldoze this Bill through, which apparently 
you are in spite of 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3060 
 

the mounting evidence in regard to markets, in regard to cost of money, in regard to the price you are 
going to have to pay, if you don’t steal the mines, in regard to the attitude of the people of 
Saskatchewan, proven to you at least three times, that the vast majority who think about this and that’s 
most of them, oppose the Bill. In spite of all the mounting evidence against what you are doing, if, 
which is apparent, you insist on doing it, then I want to give you the opportunity to fulfil one of the 
reasons that you put forward for entering into the potash industry and that’s to give the people of the 
province a chance to invest directly in the development of this resource. So that basically is the reason. 
Since Crown corporations are not structured so as to have direct investment in them by the people of the 
province or anyone else, then we have suggested this vehicle which I said earlier may be imperfect, may 
not be the proper vehicle and that’s why I ask the Attorney General to look into it. If he agrees with the 
spirit of the amendment, that he might be prepared to propose, either support this amendment or if he 
can think of a better way of doing with the spirit of this amendment suggest, to propose that to the 
House. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have the image in my mind of the Leader of the Opposition 
forwarding this amendment, not touching it himself but with about a ten foot long stick, saying, but here 
it is fellows, just in case. It’s not really my stick and I really don’t believe in it, but there it is. So, okay, 
if he wants to do it that way. 
 
I take the motion as a serious motion and I would simply say this, that I’ve had the lawyers take a look 
at this and the Leader asked me before lunch to check into this. After reviewing the amendment, I’ve 
been advised by my solicitors and by people in the Department of Finance and have come to the 
conclusion it’s a little bit hurried, that the amendment is not necessary to achieve the functions that the 
Leader of the Opposition would advocate. 
 
The Bill provides that the corporation may issue and sell securities, the potash corporation that is to say. 
And as the Members of the House will know, the Saskatchewan Development Fund and, indeed, not 
only the Saskatchewan Development Fund, but individual residents will be able to purchase those 
securities that are issued. It is conceivable that the Corporation will give consideration to the sale of a 
special type of security that would be available to Saskatchewan residents only, rather than on a 
Canadian or a non-Canadian basis. 
 
The proceeds from the sale of all securities authorized by the Bill of course would be used by the 
corporation to carry out the objectives of the corporation under its legal processes. 
 
Now this seems to me like an easy answer to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and I thank him for 
emphasizing this opportunity that’s available to the Saskatchewan Development Fund and to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. As I said earlier this morning, I look forward to the day when he, too, 
will buy one of these security offerings by the potash corporation. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to add a word. The real purpose behind or one of the 
real purposes behind this is 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3061 
 

accountability. You know by debentures and bonds there’s no vote of a shareholder. One of the things 
that shareholders do, is they demand that those companies and corporations where they make 
investments, are managed with a certain degree of efficiency or that investment will go down the drain. 
 
One of the very things that we have been objecting about this Bill is that it’s been cloaked in secrecy. 
There has been no information provided now as to the risk, the amount of money involved, the interest 
rates, where the money will be obtained. Not only that the Bill itself is cloaked in secrecy so that there 
will be a minimum of information provided to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
By permitting shareholders in the corporation, then it will force another safeguard for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan because the Government or the corporation then will be answerable to the shareholders as 
well. I don’t think a bond holder or a debenture holder, they have no responsibility to report in that way. 
 
I just point that out as another argument, why whatever amendment, even though this one may not be 
possible, but if you’re going to go into this vast and risky gamble, that one of the additional safeguards 
would be by selling shares to the people of Saskatchewan and then they would have an opportunity to 
have a report from the board of directors and it would be one more safeguard. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — The Attorney General directs my attention to the clause in the Bill and just repeat that 
portion of what he said in reply to my amendment, because I’m reading Section 22 and I don’t think that 
can be it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, under Section 15, page 8 of the Bill, subsection (3), the Corporation may, with 
the approval of the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council sell or otherwise dispose of bonds, debentures, 
other securities, etc. hypothecate, and once they do that presumably the Saskatchewan Development 
Fund, like anybody else could pick those up and invest as the Member has suggested in the purport of 
his amendment, that through the Saskatchewan Development Fund we have these types of arrangements 
and dealings. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Chairman, speaking on this particular motion, it’s interesting to me at least, that here 
we are on day 46, I believe it is and we’re down to the last clause by clause study of Bill 2, that this 
topic should come before this House. I’m sure that all Hon. Members will remember that this particular 
topic or the spirit rather of this particular motion was given by the Conservative Party in hits address to 
the Speech from the Throne. Several times during the clause by clause discussion I personally asked the 
Attorney General several questions in regard to this particular topic. We’ll be pleased to support this 
amendment to clause 23. 
 
I should like to say, Mr. Chairman, that we are in a time of using fancy phrases now and then and I’d 
like to recall to the Hon. Members opposite that the phrase which they used in 1971 was the phrase, The 
New Deal for the People., I thought of this phrase in going through these Bills in the last 46 days and in 
conclusion as we come to the end, the Government has a deal, 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3062 
 

all right. They’ve had their own deck of cards, they have not allowed anyone to cut the deck, they call 
their own game. We have every reason to believe that with the amount of information that we have, 
they’ve got some aces up their sleeves besides. So really this gives the Government the opportunity and 
it gives the people of Saskatchewan, they seem to be very strong on this word ‘people’, it gives the 
people of Saskatchewan to be co-owners or at least part owners in this operation. It’s one of the 
alternatives which we laid early before this House and while we oppose, we think you are wrong in 
passing these Bills, we think you are wrong in what you are doing, at least it will give the people of this 
province an opportunity, if there should be a profit in this to benefit, rather than the profits going out of 
the province to New York or indeed overseas. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — I want to make a comment or two and then perhaps ask you a question. I don’t think 
your referring to Section 15 and 3, it is really an answer although you may be able to correct me on this. 
You have two ways to raise money usually in enterprises of this kind. One is you issue shares and a 
shareholder participates in the profit or suffers the losses. That’s an investment. The other way to raise 
money is to borrow it. Section 15 and 3 talks about borrowing and gives the potash corporation power to 
issue bonds, debentures or other securities in connection with its borrowing. Now the borrowing is 
guaranteed by the province. One can’t really invest, as I see it, in the risk in the venture by buying a 
bond. The bond is guaranteed with usually a fixed rate of return. We here are talking about giving 
people the opportunity to invest in the venture, in the risk. If it succeeds and makes profit, they would 
derive some profit from it. If it failed they would lose. That’s what we are talking about. A shareholding 
as distinct from a security or other bond being issued to them to protect the borrowing. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Member has added another dimension to this and I again would 
not disagree too much with these two divisions as I understand it, but looking at the amendment it says, 
the proposed amendment, and I’m not trying to stick him to the exact wording, but the import of that 
amendment says that the corporation shall enter into agreements with Sask Development Fund to permit 
investment directly. Now the Member might say that’s what they meant by directly i.e. shared directly, 
but we interpreted that to invest directly, meaning that the Saskatchewan Development Fund, in its 
functions, picks up some bonds, other forms of securities or indebtedness, it’s a form of investment. The 
Member would agree with me because he’s just, well, he described two forms of investment, one being 
the share investment, that type of an equity investment, and the bond form of investment. So it is a form 
of investment. That’s what would happen. 
 
I don’t think that the Saskatchewan Development Fund, I’m almost sure that it doesn’t get into the type 
of equity financing that the Hon. Member talks about, share financing. The Saskatchewan Development 
Fund gets into picking up bonds. For example, the Saskatchewan Development Fund now has province 
of Saskatchewan bonds that it holds as an investment for its shareholders. That’s a form of indebtedness 
by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That what the amendment says and that’s why I say to the Member for Else and Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, that if my 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3063 
 

interpretation is right and I think that’s a reasonable interpretation, it can be done now, because the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund can pick up these issuances of indebtedness as they are picked up and 
that will thereby be a contract or an agreement which will allow people to invest, whether it’s directly or 
not, but I say directly into the holdings of the potash operation. I hope that this would work out. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a very substantial difference. I think you understand the intent 
of what we are suggesting. It has been suggested that there are people in this province who would like to 
be able to invest in a potash mine. They don’t have the opportunity at the moment to do so, because they 
can’t buy share sin the companies that currently operate the mines. Shares. We think there is some merit 
in that, that people ought to have the opportunity to invest in the venture. Now what you are talking 
about here is the corporation borrowing money. I can lend the corporation some money and in turn the 
corporation will give back to me a bond, which is guaranteed by the province or some other security 
with a fixed rate of interest. I’m not there participating, either in ownership in the company, nor is my 
return in any way related to the risk. Either up or down. We’re talking here about an ownership in the 
first place and then secondly having the investment tied to the success or failure of the venture. A 
genuine investment. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I hear what the Member says the proposal is, but again with all 
due respect, it’s not his motion, but that’s not what the black and white of the letters say. The black and 
white in the letters say that the corporation shall enter with the Saskatchewan Development Fund for 
what purpose. Now really, there would have to be a rewriting of that. But, leave that aside for the 
moment, because that’s a bit of a side issue. 
 
I want to say to the Members that I think a form of fixed income security, bonds or something of that 
nature is certainly a worthwhile consideration. It may not have to be done through the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund. It may be done directly. I think that’s an excellent idea which has to be explored 
further as to variations. We think the power is there now and the law to do it, but it would probably have 
to be a little bit further searched out. As to the question of direct shareholder investment, that is to say 
floating 100,000 shares and offering them to the public at $10 a share or whatever, that I think is a 
different flavour, because to do that in effect negates what you people say you are for and that is that the 
people of Saskatchewan should be the shareholders of the resource. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — . . . is there anything to prohibit . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t think there is, but even so, then my comments are just as valid, that we don’t 
need the amendment. In any event I just simply say that the people of the province are the shareholders. 
They own the resource, they own the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and to offer up 100,000 
shares and run the risk of Penzoil coming in and buying up 99,000 of them again, just ends up in the 
same, or potentially could end up in the same thing that we started to undo way back when. So I think 
 



 
January 28, 1976  Committee of the Whole 
 

3064 
 

the question of direct share investment, directly, I think one has to be very careful of that. Direct 
investment through some form of bond or fixed income, that I think is one that I welcome and I think 
it’s possible, given the current framework of the law. That’s my answer to the Member. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Let me, Mr. Chairman, just perhaps explain a bit the detail of the amendment itself. 
Now I can’t really believe, Mr. Attorney General, that you’re not understanding me. I think you 
understand me, but you don’t want to face the point that I’m trying to make to you. 
 
A Crown corporation, of course, cannot issue shares. The potash corporation can’t go out and sell shares 
to people . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Can you tell me . . . shares? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Well, listen to me and I’m about to tell you. Our suggestion is since the potash 
corporation cannot do that, you go to the Saskatchewan Development Fund and it establishes a fund into 
which people can invest. That fund in turn is given over to the potash corporation. The fund grows or 
shrinks according to the success or failure of the enterprise. That’s where you have your shares. That’s 
the method in which we thought you could do it. You understand my point. 
 
The Saskatchewan Development Fund, can be believe, establish a fund for the purpose of investing in a 
potash venture in Saskatchewan. It can issue shares in that fund. You pay $10 into the fund, you get a 
share back. 
 
Now, the Development Fund in turn invests with the potash corporation. The fund, as I say, grows or 
shrinks according to the success or lack of success of the Government enterprise. That’s what we are 
talking about. Be able to invest in the risk, not simply buying a bond. You can buy Saskatchewan 
Government bonds virtually any time and Government of Canada bonds. That’s not what we are talking 
about. 
 
That was the reason for the reference to the Saskatchewan Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I understand the point. I ask the Hon. Member to contemplate where the logic leads 
him. First of all, if he argues that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan can’t issue shares, of which I 
think is quite obviously the case, and even if we could, why would we for the reasons I’ve advocated. If 
they can’t do that and that doesn’t get you anywhere. So then he says, let the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund set up shares. Now obviously Saskatchewan Development Fund as a Crown 
corporation, by the same arguments can’t set up shares or if it could in itself, conceivably somebody 
could come in and buy up the chares and control the Saskatchewan Development Fund. 
 
Now, if you go one step further and the Member says don’t issue shares for PCS, don’t issue shares for 
Saskatchewan Development, just issue shares for a special fund, what does that gain you? So you issue 
shares for a fund, but where do you reinvest those shares? You can’t invest them in Saskatchewan 
Development Fund and you can’t invest them in the Potash 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  January 28, 1976 

 

3065 
 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — How can you do this? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — By arrangement. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — By arrangement. Okay. I know the point that we’re making. By arrangements and 
things of this nature. I just simply ask the Members to contemplate that because again, six months down 
the road maybe there is some way we can come up with that. I don’t think we can right now. The Tories 
have always advocated that. They’ve never advocated direct shareholder interest. They’ve always said, 
can I participate. The Tories have said, I want to buy a bond or a debenture or something like that. Fixed 
income, financing. I’ve said always to them, that’s an excellent idea. I interpreted the Leader of the 
Opposition’s statements as meaning that in the same context, the Saskatchewan Development Fund. 
Well anyway, you made your point and I understand it. I don’t think that I can agree with it. I make my 
point. I’m sure you understand it, you don’t agree with it and it’s one of those many things in this Bill 
that we agree to disagree on. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I don’t want to belabour this, Mr. Chairman, but obviously the Minister pays lip service 
as he has for the last three months to something that’s brought up by the Opposition, but doesn’t want to 
do it. I want to make it very clear. If you wanted to do it, you could do it. We would feel a lot better, 
having got into this mess, we’d feel a lot better if you had a few sound businessmen with a few shares 
looking over your shoulder than . . . 
 
Amendment not agreed to. 
 
Section 23 agreed. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, we have, could I just ask the Conservatives and the Liberals, we have 
a five cent amendment which I moved and then withdrew and now I propose to move again. All that it 
does is that it changes . . . there are only two amendments to this Bill and I want the Liberals to know 
that they are responsible for both of them. The first one was the situation in Saskatchewan and the 
second one that I propose is change from 1975 to 1976. Can we do this, because the Bills opened up 
now. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, the Act isn’t worth anything so I suppose we agree to a five cent 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are you ready for the question? The question is on Section 1 of the printed Bill, 
amends Section 1 of the printed Bill by striking out 1975 in the second line and substituting 1976. 
Agreed? 
 
Therefore Her Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
enacts as follows: 
 



 
January 28, 1976 
 

3066 
 

An Act Respecting the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The question being put on Bill No. 2 as amended, it was agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 19 – An Act to provide for 
the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the Bill in front of me, but this is a Bill that has come up on at least 
three or four occasions. As the Members will know the law requires that annual reports, Crown 
corporation reports, department reports, etc., be tabled within a certain fixed period after the session’s 
opening. Normally it’s within 15 days after the opening of the session. 
 
Originally it was thought that the fall session would never last 15 days. We would debate the Speech 
from the Throne, go for four or five days on other matters and then adjourn until the spring and you 
would still be avoiding the 15 days. 
 
On Bill 42, the Saskoil Bill and the Saskoil Bill in 1973, it went longer than 15 days and we had to 
introduce this type of a Bill. Of course, this is another session where again the 15 days are all shot. 
 
The effect of passage of this Bill does not obviate the need to file those reports that have not yet been 
filed. Members will know that many reports are filed. We keep on trying to get more of them out. It does 
not obviate that need at all. It just means that when we reconvene they’ve got an additional 15 days, 
when we reconvene in March to get all of them out and then we get the committee started and the whole 
operation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words I move reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved that Bill No. 2 – An Act respecting the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan be now read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time on the following recorded division: 

YEAS — 32 
Blakeney Lange Shillington 
Pepper Faris Rolfes 
Thibault Robbins Tchorzewski 
Bowerman MacMurchy Matsalla 
Smishek Mostoway Vickar 
Romanow Larson Nelson (Yorkton) 
Messer Whelan Allen 
Snyder Kaeding Koskie 
Byers Dyck Johnson 
Kramer McNeill Banda 
Baker MacAuley  

 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3067 
 

NAYS — 18 
 

Steuart Edwards Larter 
Lane Nelson (Assiniboia- Bailey 
Malone       Gravelbourg Bernston 
MacDonald Clifford Ham 
Penner Anderson Katzman 
Cameron Merchant Birckbeck 
 
Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved that Bill No. 1 – An Act respecting the Development of 
Potash Resources in Saskatchewan be now read a third time. 
 
Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to sum up and reaffirm the feelings and 
fears of the Progressive Conservative Party and our caucus have regarding the potash legislation. 
 
First of all the majority of the people of this province oppose these potash Bills and the potash takeover 
and certainly the Government has ignored these reflections. Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the 
Liberal filibuster was caused by these two very bad pieces of legislation. This legislation is morally 
wrong and totally unacceptable to the democratic process which built this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Larter: — We do not deny the Liberals right to filibuster, we do, however, question its value. Mr. 
Speaker, many historians and parliamentarians in Canada feel that the filibuster tactics in the Canadian 
Parliament indeed started the erosion of parliament and took away some of the rights of the Opposition 
party and transferred some of these rights and infringements to Orders in Council. We wonder if the 
history could be repeated here in Saskatchewan in this Saskatchewan legislation. Mr. Speaker, one thing 
is sure that a filibuster does cost and that it does cause a longer session and it does cut down on 
attendance by some of the Members of the Legislature. They were elected to attend this Legislature. 
 
The filibuster can also guarantee that people on low and medium income by this lengthy filibuster will 
never be able to take part in our system. We believe that the filibuster in this case did not accomplish 
anything, let alone change any of the Bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party believes that the threat of expropriation was still the 
key to the potash takeovers and indeed the filibuster system assisted this Government in negotiations 
with the potash companies. Only history again will bear this out. We condemn this Government in the 
strongest terms for entering into this high-risk business with public funds. We continue to urge this 
Government not to use these vast powers contained in these Bills. Many of our MLA candidates last 
June out of genuine fear for the future of this province ran in this election. These potash Bills confirm 
their fears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we indeed question in no uncertain terms the 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3068 
 

political conscience of this NDP Government. It is too late now, but we ask you again, withdraw the 
Bills or call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before I talk about the Bill itself, I 
should like to say a word about the rate late and, if I might call it, deathbed repentance of the 
Conservative Members to my left. I would point out that if we hadn’t filibustered, if they want to use 
that word, or put up stiff and fairly long opposition to this Bill, the Conservative Party would not have 
been in a position after Christmas to receive the admonition of their Members and become the most 
vocal that they did in their whole opposition of this Bill and take a full page ad in the Leader-Post and 
the Star-Phoenix. I would point out to them that had we collapsed and rolled over and played dead as 
they wanted to, as their Leader suggested should be done in this Legislative Assembly, these two Bills 
would have passed, this Act would have been perpetrated well before Christmas and the opportunity for 
reasoned and sensible debate by thousands of people in the province of Saskatchewan would have been 
denied had we followed the weak . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — . . . course chosen by the Conservative Party. There was some excuse for the 
Conservatives at the beginning, they were new and they lacked experience. Our Members, with the 
exception of four of us, were new and lacked experience as well, but it only took them about two or 
three weeks to find their feet and to recognize their democratic responsibility and play a full and 
competent role in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I would remind the Members to my left that they were elected to do two things, when 
they think the Government is right to agree with them, and when they think the Government is wrong to 
do at least two things, one, to propose alternatives which is what we have done and, two, to oppose bad 
legislation which they seem to agree this is and which most people in the province agree this is and to 
oppose it with all the power, with all the strength that they have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — And in this case they failed and failed miserably the people who elected them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak very briefly about this Bill because I don’t think there is anything to be 
said about potash that hasn’t been said in the last three and one-half months. But I will remind some of 
the Members over there who are getting vocal at this late date what was said by one or two Members on 
that side and all of the Members on this side. How did this Government get into this position? Well, they 
either got into it by painting themselves into a corner or they got into it by very devious plans, but that 
will be left as far as I am 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3069 
 

concerned for the people of this province to decide. 
 
The first thing they did was harass the potash industry, cripple them with the largest taxes that have ever 
been levied against any individual or any corporation in the history, not just of this province, but of this 
nation. That’s step number one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — After they had removed the ability of these people who came into this province at the 
request of a former NDP Government, a former socialist Premier, Mr. Douglas, and after they had come 
into this province to develop a resource that had lain for millions of years and certainly was known for a 
decade or two to be under four or five thousand feet of overlay, doing nobody any good, they asked 
them to come in with their money and their technology after they had been given the solemn word of the 
Premier of the province that they could develop this with a reasonable taxation load, and freedom from 
expropriation by the Government, and we are speaking of all governments of the province of 
Saskatchewan; they were turned on by the Government opposite, they removed through taxation their 
ability to expand and then, it was as if they cut the legs off an individual and then said, how come they 
can’t run, how come these people can’t expand. Of course they couldn’t expand, and no one in their 
right mind paying 80 to 85 per cent free tax profit and being threatened with expropriation, being 
threatened with competition by the Government, being surrounded and harassed by a jungle of red tape 
and by constant abuse by everyone from the Premier to the lowest backbencher on that side of the 
House. No wonder they didn’t expand, no wonder they were in a state of shock. Having set the stage the 
Government then moved in to take over all or part of this industry and in doing so they launched this 
province on the largest, riskiest gamble that has ever been launched by any government, I suggest, either 
provincial or national in the history of the province or this nation. 
 
They then presented Bill 1 and Bill 2, having demanded, not asked, by demand of this Legislative 
Assembly that they give to that Government untold power, powers with no precedent in the history of 
this province. Did they then present facts, figures and studies to make the case of the Premier outside of 
this House, I would point out very glibly called a good business deal and self-liquidating debt? Well, we 
all know, Mr. Speaker, that they did not. They have presented in three and one-half months not one 
figure, not one study, not one shred of evidence to show that they have, in fact, any evidence to back up 
the statement that this is a good business deal and that it will be self-liquidating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — We had to question, Mr. Speaker, if they had those studies at the beginning but then 
when we got into committee the evidence came out that they had in fact taken many studies. They had in 
fact done considerable research, they had in fact paid one company over $500,000 and I estimate that 
they paid out well over a million, maybe as high as $2 million already, in studies. Now why wouldn’t 
they make those studies public? Why would they not accompany this demand for power, this demand 
for 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3070 
 

the backing of this Legislative Assembly to risk $1 to $3 billion of the taxpayers’ money, why would 
they not accompany that with the corresponding evidence to lay to rest the legitimate fears of a great 
many people that this was a very risky venture? Well, either they have total arrogance both for this 
Legislature and the people of this province or in fact, and this is what I suspect, the studies and their 
research indicated that this is indeed a very risky venture and they were afraid to table this evidence or 
they would stand exposed as, to say the very least, poor businessmen and to say the most, a most 
irresponsible Government, that in a fit of anger have launched this province and the people of this 
province on a very slippery road that could end up costing us billions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the performance of the Government opposite, their irresponsibility in refusing to 
give this Legislative Assembly and, what’s more important, the people of the province any evidence, 
any proof that they have carried out studies commensurate with the size of this risk indicates both their 
arrogance and their irresponsibility. But I think that there is something that has happened or something 
that has not happened in this debate which speaks even more clearly about the attitude of the Premier, 
the Cabinet and his supporters, their attitude about this Legislative Assembly and their attitude towards 
the people, and that is we have the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan who is literally forced to 
come into the debate at a very late date, his entry into this debate was skimpy, shallow and was without 
merit or without . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — He went on television, paid for by the people, he commissioned ads put through the 
advertising agency at a good commission, spending hundreds of thousands of the taxpayers’ dollars to 
present one side of the story, but either through contempt or fear or both, he literally refused to take any 
meaningful part in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — What is even more contemptible he allowed the Attorney General to pilot these two 
Bills through when he clearly should have absolutely nothing to do with them. They should have been 
either piloted through by the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) but preferably by the Minister who will 
be in charge of the potash corporation (Mr. Cowley), the Member for Biggar, who is typically again 
absent today when we wind these Bills up, as he has been absent most of the time during this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — I have never attended this House since 1962 when I have seen the Premier of the 
province of any stripe of government – CCF, Liberal or NDP – who has shown clear contempt of this 
House, a clear dereliction of his duties by refusing to sit in his place, not only not take part, but 
absolutely refusing to sit here more than at the best 5 per cent of the time. It is a disgrace and it is 
contemptible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3071 
 

Mr. Steuart: — I say that this is a bad deal. We have people ready and willing to invest their money, 
their skill and their know how in the potash industry. Their only sin was to come here and turn that 
mineral into jobs, revenue and fertilizer to serve hungry people in this world. They were ready to 
expand, they were ready to employ more people, all they asked, and certainly it was a minimum for 
anyone to ask, was fair and decent treatment from the Government opposite. This the Government 
consistently refused to give them. 
 
What do we have? We have a government risking not just $1 billion, but if they intend to expand, it 
could well be $1 billion to $3 billion. The Premier can say what he wants outside of this House, he can 
hire all the slick eastern advertising firms he wants to put the best face on it, you are still risking the 
taxpayer’s money. They know it, Mr. Premier, the results of those studies that have indicated that 62 or 
63 per cent of the people would like a voice in this and over half the people are opposed to it and only 
21 or 22 per cent are in favour of it, show clearly that this is a major issue and it is a major concern to all 
thinking people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — It is a bad deal! It will have serious repercussions that will affect this province for years 
to come. 
 
It has dragged once more the good reputation of Saskatchewan as a place where you can trust the 
Government, where you can invest your money, where you can come to make your life, it has dragged 
our reputation in the mud, both nationally and internationally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — That is the legacy that is hung around the neck of Premier Blakeney for as long as he is 
in power and as long as he lives. That’s what Mr. Blakeney, as Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, has done through this deal and other deals that he has perpetrated on the people of 
Saskatchewan. I say that it is a sad commentary and a serious load for him to carry. 
 
It has done more than that, he has added to the growing power of this power hungry socialist 
government. It will add by a stroke of the pen anywhere from 2,000 to 3,5000 to 4,000 people working 
directly for the Government of Saskatchewan eventually. More power to a power hungry government. 
What it has done to the future of investment in hard rock minerals, in the forests or anything else, what it 
has done to our future only time will tell. But already we know that Saskatchewan is now considered a 
black mark in Canada, a black mark in the western free world and a place where investors say to be 
avoided at all risks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Steuart: — The cost in jobs and investment and the future of Saskatchewan is unbelievable. 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3072 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a black day for the people of Saskatchewan. The Government can applaud, 
they can use their power to push this Bill through, but they know in their hearts that what they are doing 
is wrong, what they are doing is against the will of the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. They 
know they are using their power to ride roughshod over the democratic process, they tried to sneak it in 
before Christmas, they are putting it in their first term of office in what I think is a vain hope that it will 
be forgotten by the people of Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. Speaker, it will not be forgotten, it will haunt 
them in the next election. I am opposed to this as are Members on this side. We are proud of the fact that 
we held these two bad pieces of legislation up for at least three months and I wish we would have the 
strength to have held it up for at least another three months or three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, let me say as I have the privilege and the honour and I say that with all 
of the sincerity that I have in me, the privilege and the honour to have had the seconding and now the 
third reading of these two Bills to close with a few words on third reading. 
 
The prediction that some of us made at the time of the second reading has indeed come true after nearly 
three months of debate. I said that time in second reading that this Bill would be a political milestone for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan; that it would be a milestone in economic and resource 
development for the people of Saskatchewan, indeed, for all the people of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I didn’t for one moment think that the multinational corporations of the United 
States or other parts of this world and their spokesmen in this House, the Liberals and the Conservatives, 
would let us off easily. Not one of us ever thought that the Liberals and the Conservatives who owe their 
allegiances, political and otherwise, to the multinational corporations would allow this Bill to go through 
without a fight. They can’t do it, Mr. Speaker, they have fought absolutely every progressive legislation 
that the NDP produces. 
 
They fought the Medicare Bill in 1962; they fought the power corporation and the SGIO in 1945; they 
fought hospitalization way back in 1945. They laugh because that was years ago. Well you think you 
can change your stripes, but you can’t because a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal in 1945 and 1976. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, had they been retained by the potash multinational 
companies and the Conservatives, been paid by the potash corporations, they could not have done a 
better job in advancing the interests of the multinational corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3073 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Note what the Liberals are applauding. What I said they couldn’t have done a better 
job in advancing the interests of the multinational potash corporations, mind you not the people of 
Saskatchewan, but the multinational potash corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The Leader of the Opposition for whom I have a great deal of personal respect – I 
say that publicly, I have said it many times even though I disagree with his politics, I think he is a 
masterful debater and he articulates views – but when he gets up and tells the House that they are proud 
of filibustering for 45 days, who did the filibuster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You are right they are proud of filibustering. Because the only people whom the 
filibuster could have benefited are the potash companies, not the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, they are proud of it because they are in that bag. Mr. Speaker, what you 
have seen in this debate from the Liberals opposite are a bunch of pocket potash lawyers in this House 
advocating the cause of the potash companies and not of the people of this province. 
 
I want to say that when I said it was a political milestone, to see the Conservative Party join in hand and 
glove with the Liberal Party opposite to fight this Bill as strenuously as the Liberals did every step of the 
way, taking the position that this is a socialist sickle and all of these scare tactics that we settled now 40 
years ago in Saskatchewan, it doesn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) said it is wrong for democracy, it is morally wrong, this Bill. Well 
what is right? Is it right for the potash companies to refuse to expand, to refuse to pay the taxes or 
portions of their taxes, to refuse to make their financial statements, is that morally right? Is that 
democracy? I ask any man or woman in this Chamber or in the galleries if they defied the law as openly, 
what would happen to them? Is that democracy? No! But the Liberals and the Conservatives they get up 
and say somehow that the little guy has to pay his taxes, the little guy has to comply with the laws, but 
not the potash corporations, that’s what you are saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We, the people of Saskatchewan don’t know, then he says having set up the 
crippling taxes, they couldn’t expand. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says, 
couldn’t expand. I say that the potash companies wouldn’t expand, not couldn’t expand. They wouldn’t 
expand because they wanted to use that as a tool to force this Government, a 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3074 
 

properly democratically elected government to buckle under to a tax rate that the potash companies 
wanted and not the people of Saskatchewan, that is why they wouldn’t expand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this debate has been a study of contradictions and 
confusion by the Opposition, particularly the Liberal Party, a study of contradiction. It is the same old 
Liberal Party that has been around for 10 or 15 years; it is the same old Liberal Party taking the same old 
position. I just want the Members of the House to note what the Liberals say. First of all the Members 
claim that they are not defending the potash companies. When I asked them through 46 days of debate – 
you give to us one alternative to the takeover proposal other than tax reductions which is proposed by 
the potash companies, they can’t. They say we should sit down and work this out. If we had a little 
conversation somehow some wisdom would come down from on high and everything would be okay. 
No, no, that is not good enough. I am going to ask the Leader of the Opposition, the Liberal Party, on the 
hustings as we go out now to talk to the people in the country, I am going to ask them why it was that 
there was no other alternative put forth by the Conservatives or the Liberals to Bills 1 and 2. Except one 
alternative, reduce the taxation like the potash corporations want. Yet, they say they are not the 
spokesmen for the potash corporations of the United States and the rest of the world. Just study this 
contradiction, Mr. Speaker, this is another, it was even said today, the Opposition is going around the 
province saying that this takeover is going to bankrupt the province. The Leader of the Opposition said 
that this is the largest, riskiest gamble, he said so today. We are on the one hand going to bankrupt the 
province and then on the other hand the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) gets up and says we are 
stealing the assets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they say on Section 45 of The Potash Valuation Bill, that that section is too loose. 
The Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) who is out of the House at the moment, gets up and says you 
are going to pay too much, or he is in the House, I am sorry. Then in the next breath the Member for 
Regina gets up and he says it’s a devious section because it is too tough. Mr. Speaker, they say about the 
studies, show us the studies, show us at least, I recall the Leader of the Opposition telling us, tell us at 
least that you have carried out the studies. So I cam into Committee of the Whole and told them the 
studies that we have carried out. Now what does he say, he says those studies aren’t good enough. They 
want the studies, then they don’t want the studies, they say the studies show the risk and then the Leader 
of the Opposition gets up and criticizes the Premier. Because when you are bankrupt of arguments the 
only thing left is a personal attack. That is the only thing left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — When you know that your party is in jeopardy, when you are fighting with every 
political instinct to survive and you have no arguments, you use a political personal attack. 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3075 
 

The Premier in this debate, that is another study in contradiction. On the one hand they yell that the 
Premier would not take part in the debate. Then when the Premier takes part in the debate he says, oh he 
didn’t debate at all. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition on his attack about the Premier and about 
the time spent in this House is most unfair. Unfair and really an unwarranted attack and unwarranted 
comment. He had no right to say that. When he said the chairman of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan was not even here on the occasion of the third and final reading. As I have indicated, the 
Members opposite, maybe did not know but I have said this and it’s common knowledge, the Minister is 
charge of the potash corporation is attending a funeral in the Cowley family now in Saskatoon. Now, I 
suppose what he should have done is been here. But you see, when you get so reckless, when you get so 
reckless that you don’t care about personal reputations, when you don’t want to match the argument, 
when all that you want to do is to destroy the personalities and not the policies behind them, you get into 
this sad situation that the Liberal Party is in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, as this has been pointed out in the debate, in second reading and 
throughout, that the Liberals when they were in power, to give you an example of their approach and 
whether they said that is a red letter day. They sold, for example, the sodium sulphate for one cent a ton 
to corporations. You know what that is trading at today? Forty dollars a ton. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is 
giving away a resource not in the ownership of a corporation, not to Imperial Oil, not to Gulf, but a 
resource that we, the people of the province of Saskatchewan own. That we should be the beneficiaries 
of, that our children and their children should be the beneficiaries of, but Liberals and Conservatives 
would have us give it away, one cent compared to $40. Well, I don’t want to be a part of that type of red 
letter day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the challenge that someday soon the electorate will 
have a chance to voice their opinion. I am confident that this is going to be recorded electorally and 
beyond the electoral politics of this province as a great milestone in the history of this province and this 
great country of ours. Because as I have said, this Blakeney Government, the first government in 
Canada, if not North America, has demonstrated the courage, the wisdom and the strength to pioneer a 
first in our democratic system. 
 
The control of Canadian resources, Saskatchewan resources, for Saskatchewan men and women, for 
Saskatchewan children right here at home, to return the decision to this province and to this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Not from Toronto, I am not concerned about that but to return the decision-making 
from wherever it is located in other parts of the world. 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3076 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have said the authors of this Bill are the potash companies themselves, aided and abetted 
by the Liberals and the Conservatives, their mouthpieces and spokesmen throughout this province. I 
want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that someday soon, if not now, the people of Saskatchewan will record 
this to be the most positive Act in the books of Saskatchewan, if indeed the country, because we will 
have guaranteed a fair, stable return from the resources that belong to all of us for potash which could 
become the basis of an even more exciting and challenging future for all the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I am the proudest guy in the House to be a 
Member of the Blakeney Government for that objective. I move third reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time on the following recorded division: 

YEAS — 32 
Blakeney Lange Shillington 
Pepper Faris Rolfes 
Thibault Robbins Tchorzewski 
Bowerman MacMurchy Matsalla 
Smishek Mostoway Nelson (Yorkton) 
Romanow Larson Allen 
Messer Whelan Koskie 
Snyder Kaeding Johnson 
Byers Dyck Banda 
Kramer McNeill Koskie 
Baker MacAuley  
 

NAYS — 20 
Steuart Cameron McMillan 
Stodalka Edwards Bailey 
Lane Nelson (Assiniboia- Larter 
Wiebe      Gravelbourg) Berntson 
Malone Clifford Ham 
MacDonald Anderson Katzman 
Penner Merchant Birkbeck 
 

STATEMENT 
ANTI-INFLATION PROGRAM 

 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am asking leave of the House to make a statement 
which ordinarily would be made on Orders of the Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this statement concerns Saskatchewan’s participation in the national Anti-Inflation 
Program. I would advise the House that negotiations are continuing between the Federal Government 
and ourselves. They are not complete. But a number of groups in the province have asked for a 
statement of our position because they believe it will assist them in dealing with the problems either 
from their vantage point as employees and unions representing those employees or from the point of 
view of employers or from the point of view of pricing commodities. I think it therefore appropriate to 
make a statement before the House adjourns. In response to a question I 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3077 
 

believe by the Hon. Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) I indicated I would attempt to make a 
statement before the House adjourned. I am not in a position to make a complete statement but I will 
give a statement of the Government’s position and it is as detailed as it is possible for us to make it at 
this time. 
 
In October the Prime Minister announced the introduction of price and income controls and the 
establishment of an anti-inflation board to administer the anti-inflation guidelines. At the same time the 
Prime Minister asked the provinces to impose rent controls and to make the provincial public sector 
subject to the national guidelines. 
 
The Saskatchewan Government expressed some serious reservations about the program, nevertheless we 
have consistently held that it should receive our general support. We moved quickly to rent controls. We 
were unable to move as quickly with respect to the guidelines because of time required for the passage 
of the Federal Act, and the publication of the Federal regulations. 
 
Let me comment briefly on the federal program as it has unfolded and indicate how Saskatchewan 
intends to proceed. Our primary concern has been and still is that prices and profits must be effectively 
controlled. We are still concerned that the federal board does not require prior approval for price 
increases of selected key commodities. It remains to be seen whether the board system of prior 
notification will be workable and effective. 
 
Similarly we are not satisfied that the limits on professional income will be fully effective. In our view 
an income surcharge would ensure more effective compliance. We are concerned too that the rigid 
application of the percentage guidelines will create special problems for the expanding Saskatchewan 
economy. We have raised these concerns with federal authorities. These concerns have not yet been 
fully met. Nevertheless we believe that it would not be in the best interests of Canada if Saskatchewan 
failed to give its co-operation and support to the national effort to curb inflation. Furthermore, it would 
be unfair if workers in private industry in Saskatchewan had their wages and salaries subject to the 
guidelines while the wages of public sector employees were not. Similarly it would be unfair if private 
firms were constrained by the price and profit guidelines while commercial public enterprises were not. 
 
For these reasons, the Government of Saskatchewan has decided to support the national effort by 
establishing the Saskatchewan Public Sector Price and Compensation Board. It will be established 
pursuant to the provisions of The Executive Council Act. The board will be chaired by Judge Ernest 
Boychuk, Chief Magistrate of the province. Mr. Boychuk will continue to function in his capacity as 
Chief Judge of the Magistrates Court. The other board members will be Mr. Jim Maher, a businessman, 
former Member of the Legislative Assembly, and former alderman and mayor of North Battleford; Mr. 
Everett Wood, former Minister of Municipal Affairs. We are very fortunate in being able to attract such 
a well respected group of individuals to serve on our board. They will be asked to administer a complex 
set of regulations in a manner which requires the utmost in discretion and wisdom. 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3078 
 

The board’s area of jurisdiction will be the provincial public sector. In consultation with the Federal 
Government we have defined the public sector. I may digress by saying it is necessary that this 
definition be a joint definition since the federal guidelines apply in the private sector and the federal 
board and the provincial board applies in the public sector. 
 
We have set accordingly to define this and it will be defined as including provincial and local 
governments themselves, and their agencies plus other institutions which depend to a substantial degree 
on public financial support. 
 
Specifically the provincial public sector will include: provincial government departments; provincial 
Crown corporations; provincial boards, commissions and special funds; cities, towns, villages, rural 
municipalities and local improvement districts, municipal sewer and water works, electric light and 
power systems and transit systems; police commissions; school boards; universities; institutes of applied 
arts and technology; community colleges and including private and affiliated colleges receiving 
provincial financial support; public art galleries and museums; archives and libraries; hospitals, 
psychiatric facilities and sanatoriums; community health centres and home care programs; alcohol and 
drug rehabilitation facilities; sheltered work shops and special care homes with six patients or more and 
correctional centres. 
 
The board will have two main responsibilities, (1) to ensure that all commercially oriented public sector 
enterprises follow the pricing guidelines and, (2) to ensure that all labour settlements follow the 
compensation guidelines. In addition the board will monitor increases in user charges and fees. Crown 
corporations, municipalities and other bodies in the public sector will be asked to increase user charges 
and fees only by an amount sufficient to cover increased costs, unless the increases are otherwise 
justified by program objectives or fiscal requirements. 
 
Federal and provincial governments have agreed that tax and revenue sharing mechanisms at all levels 
of government, and this includes provincial liquor boards, will not be subject to the price guidelines. It 
will be outside the jurisdiction of the federal and provincial boards. 
 
The provincial board will be given the power to require that any public sector body give 30 days notice 
and receive the board’s prior approval for any price or compensation increase. In cases where the board 
has not required private approval the board may review any increase after it has been implemented and 
making a ruling within 30 days of the increase. The board may reduce any intended increase or rollback 
and increase already in place. 
 
The board will be guided by the national percentage guidelines, taking into account modifications, 
exceptions and qualifications as they apply to Saskatchewan. The application of the national guidelines 
will be retroactive for any price increases announced and implemented after October 13, 1975 and for 
any pay increase announced and implemented after October 13, 1975, except where the pay increase is 
substantially the same as an offer made by the employer prior to October 14, 1975. In these cases it is 
proposed that regard would be had to the 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3079 
 

ceilings on pay increases provided for in the national guidelines. 
 
All public sector bodies are expected to give their full co-operation to the board and to comply with its 
requirements for prior approval and with its rulings. The Government is committed to take whatever 
steps are necessary to ensure compliance in any case where the board has indicated that there is a failure 
to comply. Such steps could include asking the Legislative Assembly to roll back a particular price or 
compensation increase or reducing the provincial government’s financial support to the public sector 
body involved. 
 
We are counting on co-operation but if that fails the Government will act. 
 
During the next week or so the board will begin its job. It will have a small support staff, drawn partly 
from the existing Public Service. The Government will notify those public sector bodies which will be 
within the board’s jurisdiction. The board will then meet with these bodies either individually or in 
groups. 
 
I may digress by saying that while the board will undoubtedly commence its activities in the next week 
or so, it is possible that there might be delays in getting all aspects of the guidelines completed if 
negotiations with the Federal Government do not proceed as we hope they will. We are in the process of 
negotiating with the Federal Government the terms of a formal agreement so that Saskatchewan is 
officially part of the national anti-inflation program. The negotiations are still in progress and the 
position of the Federal Government on several important matters is not yet known. 
 
While our arrangements may be somewhat different from that of some other provinces, we intend to 
follow the national guidelines. We are confident that our board will play its full part in striving to reach 
national objectives while maintaining a special sensitivity to Saskatchewan and its particular situation. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to begin with that we welcome this statement from the Premier 
and my first recollection, what I heard on the news at noon was to chide him for announcing it to 
another body and not this House. It may well be that he just gave them an announcement that he was 
going to make an announcement here and he’s made the full text of his announcement here. However, 
that’s a small point and I think that the pertinent thing is that the Premier has announced, in a very 
general way, the intentions of the Government. Now while I welcome this and it may go some way to 
clear the air there are almost as many questions unanswered by this announcement as there are answers. 
 
For example, I hope that what the Premier is not saying in effect, we will tip our hat to the federal 
guidelines, to the federal fight against inflation but in fact, where it involves our jurisdiction, jurisdiction 
of local government, jurisdiction of Crown corporations, jurisdiction of those bodies that we in part or in 
whole, fund, nursing homes, local government and so on, that we will be prepared to set our own 
guidelines irrespective of the national guidelines and it would appear that 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3080 
 

this is possibly setting the stage for a double standard in the province of Saskatchewan. One group, 
private employees and private firms will come under by national law, the national guidelines. All other 
groups outlined in this statement, and they are a host, there are a tremendous number of people and 
agencies involved, will come under the provincial board. This could set the stage for two sets of 
guidelines and for some serious inequities. 
 
The composition of the board we welcome. It looks like a strong board and I am pleased that these 
people in our province, Mr. Boychuk, Mr. Maher and Mr. Everett Wood have agreed to take on what 
will, I am sure, prove a very grave responsibility and very onerous task and I say, immediately, 
inasmuch as we are able, we will give them our full co-operation. 
 
I notice that there are conditions for rollbacks and we welcome this. I am sure and I hope that the board 
will immediately look at the serious price increases placed on the public by some of the Crown 
corporations, notably, power, telephones and SGIO. 
 
I am concerned about the teeth, I am concerned about the administration of the provincial guidelines. 
One of the complaints of the Government opposite, and with some justification, was the question of 
prices, relative to straightforward controlling of wages. It is relatively straightforward, they ask for so 
much and you say these are the guidelines and use the power of the Federal or Provincial Government to 
institute the guidelines whether they are fair or unfair. 
 
In the question in the case of prices it is more difficult and in the case of incomes it is more difficult. 
The complaint of the Government opposite has been that there appears to be one set of standards for 
working people, one set of standards for wage earners and one set of standards for price and income 
increase. And as I say, to some extent they may be right. However, they have also talked about the 
massive red tape and the inability of the anti-inflation board to react quickly to price increases. 
 
Now, here they are setting up, and I quote from page six from the Premier’s statement: 
 

The Government is committed to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure compliance. In any case 
where the Board has indicated there is a failure to comply, such steps could include asking the 
Legislative Assembly to rollback particular price or compensation increases or reduce the provincial 
government’s financial support to the public sector bodies involved. 

 
Now this may call for legislation and we are talking, now, of about maybe another two or three months 
before such legislation could be in place. I think this could be slow, it without a doubt will be 
cumbersome and I would hope the Government would reconsider and find some mechanism whereby 
the board would have the very direct power and a very clear responsibility and right to take decisive 
action when there is non-compliance with their ruling. This may not turn out and my fears may be 
unfounded, I hope they are. But on the surface, at first glance, it appears to be slow and it could be 
cumbersome and there could be a long delay. We already have price increases and wage 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3081 
 

increases that appear to be above the guidelines. And so this has happened already, by the time you set 
the board up, write the regulations, give them the ground rules and give them their staff, another two 
months will probably have gone by and this situation may even be worse. 
 
However, let me say this, that having stated those concerns I am sure they are concerns of the 
Government as well, I hope they are, that we don’t want two sets of standards in the province which will 
make for great inequities and we want this board to work. I would rather have hoped that the 
Government would have followed the lead of the province of Manitoba and said, all right, we will have 
one set of guidelines and they will be the federal guidelines so everybody is treated with the same justice 
and the same equity. However, having decided to go down this course, I hope that they will do 
everything in their power to see that there is equity in the wage settlements, income settlements and 
price levels set by this board and as quickly as possible give this board the teeth and the power they need 
to do the job, the very serious job, that you have asked them to do on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In summing up my feelings I want to say that I welcome, again, the statement by the Government. 
Although I have some concerns I want to say that I wish the board and the Government good luck and 
they will – as we have said from the beginning of this session – they will have the full support of the 
Liberal Members of this Legislative Assembly in their legitimate and reasonable and sound efforts to 
join with Canadians from all other provinces in what must be a national fight to attempt to control 
inflation both in this province and in this country. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, with your permission and I believe the 
arrangement was that we would be permitted a series of questions, brief questions. 
 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the Premier, as the 
Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) did. I was a little surprised in that the Premier must feel goodness 
within, I think it was on Monday that I asked him the question and he referred that it would be within the 
next ten days and it is 48 hours later and we have before the House the Provincial Anti-Inflation 
Program. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Premier, that Members of the Conservative caucus will co-operate with the 
Government and we certainly welcome this announcement this afternoon. I am sure, too, that the 
Government, when we reconvene, will provide plenty of time to the Members in the Opposition to 
discuss fully the points that the Premier has raised and I am sure, too, that they will welcome and 
encourage any suggestions that the Opposition may have. 
 
There are many areas of concern that I have and I am not going to disturb the House at this time in 
talking about those concerns. I think that the people of the province of Saskatchewan will, first of all, 
place their outmost trust in the members of the board, people who are well known in Saskatchewan, and 
of course are trusted in Saskatchewan. 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3082 
 

So we welcome the opportunity to have this announced and we will welcome the opportunity to 
contribute to assist the Government in the way of an opposition to carry out to the people and for the 
people of the province in the fight against inflation. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question, a series of questions, very brief, a 
couple of supplementaries. 
 
First of all I am afraid, Mr. Premier, that I don’t share the optimism of my colleagues on this side of the 
House and it would appear to me and would the Premier agree, that it appears to me that this set of rules 
has left the door open for the provincial NDP Government to do whatever they so desire? 
 
For example, just exactly what do you mean? The board will be guided by the national percentage 
guidelines taking into account modifications, exceptions and qualifications as they apply to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me ask, does that mean that these guidelines apply to contracts that have now been signed, for 
example, the liquor board contract. 
 
Second, are they going to apply to negotiations at the present or currently now being taken under 
negotiations. I refer, of course, to the school teachers and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
employees. 
 
Third, if these are going to be exempt, who else is going to be exempt and who is not going to be 
exempt? Because I am sure that every wage earner in the province of Saskatchewan considers that he, 
too, has a modification, a qualification and an exception. I suggest for the general tone, the wide 
openness of this, that you are placing an almost impossible task on the shoulders of Mr. Boychuk, Mr. 
Maher and Mr. Wood, because there is no specific here. Is it the intention to, would you indicate, for 
example, those three groups that I named? 
 
Would you also explain to me if you are going to clearly outline who is exempt and who is not, which 
group of employees will and will not. Perhaps I could start with that question. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I think the Hon. Member raises good points because that language is wide. It is really 
designed to describe the federal guidelines as we understand them. What I am saying is the federal 
guidelines consist of the percentage guidelines, together with certain modifications, exceptions and 
qualifications. Perhaps those are too many words, but the percentage guidelines do not apply where 
there is a historic relationship. We are attempting to define what we call a regional equity comparison 
and I can read the guidelines to permit that if you wish to read them, because that is a historic 
relationship across the Prairies, for certain groups. And there is also another exemption in the guidelines 
dealing with instances where you simply cannot get people at that price where there has been a vacancy 
over a period of three months, I believe, is the figure in the guidelines. That is what we are attempting to 
describe by that phrase. We will in due course and I hope before long be able to lay before the board and 
this Assembly a list of rules and regulations which will be just the federal guidelines virtually, there will 
be very, very few modifications 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3083 
 

thereon. 
 
The transition question which you ask, first nobody is exempt as such, nobody is exempt from the 
guidelines but from the purview of the board, but the board is asked to deal with contract settlements as 
well. If the price increase was announced and implemented after October 15 it is caught, if it was not, if 
it was either announced or implemented prior to that it is not caught. 
 
With respect to pay increase the same thing except that where there was an employer’s offer on the table 
we intend to honour it. That is what I call the postal situation. They had an offer on the table, the offer 
was accepted after the guidelines but the offer was on the table before the guidelines and I think the 
Federal Government felt that they couldn’t renege on that. Now that situation of the offer on the table 
before the guidelines covers the situation of the liquor board employees and the settlement was virtually 
the offer. There may be some argument about that but substantially the offer. It really was and I will 
debate that with the Hon. Member if he likes. The situation with the public service is very similar and to 
these people we had made an offer which was virtually the equivalent to the settlement with the labour 
service employees with whom we had just settled after the work stoppage in August. We worked out a 
pattern, that pattern we virtually offered to the regular public service and to the liquor board and that one 
was virtually on the table. There are some modifications and I don’t want to get into just what is on the 
table because some of those negotiations are not over. But we feel honour bound to implement the offers 
which were on the table. That does not include some others, it does not include, for example, the 
teachers where there was, as it happened, no offer on the table. This is with respect to people like the 
teachers, nurses and some other groups, we have to look to historic comparisons at what we have called 
the prairie region in a general way, what I’ve called a region equity approach. That is the approach that 
we are addressing ourselves to, we are not suggesting that there are going to be 14 per cent guidelines in 
Saskatchewan or anything like that. The arithmetic guidelines will be the same. The only argument will 
come about whether or not the historic comparisons and the shortages of employees and the like would 
make a difference. That is our policy and it’s not easy to state but I think it will seem to be not 
unreasonable. I think I’ll not say anything further and it may be that other questions will elicit further . . . 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — It doesn’t really give me any more assurance, the Premier’s response. However, 
we’ll wait and see and I’m looking forward and I’m sure all Members of the House and the public to the 
regulations. 
 
The second question. Certainly one of the biggest disappointments I have . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think in order to have some order in the questions there may be some other 
Members who wish to question. If the Member has a supplementary, fell free to go ahead. If he has 
another question and no one else has a question, then 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3084 
 

the Member may go ahead. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try and make it brief. Why has the Premier not only penalized 
wage earners and workers and makes no effort to indicate reduction in public spending of the public 
purse? In other words, I’ve heard him, is it not a fact he criticized the Federal Government for really 
having difficulty controlling price freezes and price increase yet here we find in this anti-inflation 
program of the Provincial Government and they are saying that they’re going to hold down the wages of 
workers and the lower paid people in the province of Saskatchewan and absolutely no indication as to 
the Government’s spending in relation to their own spending. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I have two things there. I think the statement primarily was designed to deal with 
price restraint and income restraint. I am not nearly as convinced as other people are that the restrictions 
of government expenditures brings beneficial results, particularly to low-income people. This is not, 
however, to suggest that the Government is not pursuing a policy of restraint and we believe that rather 
than make some announcements with all the efforts some other governments have made, I think largely 
for cosmetic effect, I think the proper course of action for us to follow is to indicate that we are 
following a program of restraint and to indicate that much more fully when we present to the Legislature 
our budget in approximately six weeks time. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — The board may reduce any intended increase or rollback an increase already in 
place and of course we are referring to the public sector. One of the things it does indicate that there is 
no intention, it leaves the government an escape clause, that they do not have to review Crown 
corporation increases in the province of Saskatchewan that were prior to October 13. Of course I refer to 
Saskatchewan Power, Saskatchewan Telephones, SGIO and so forth. Is it the Government’s intention to 
have the board that you have duly constituted, Judge Boychuk and the other two members, review the 
increase of the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan which I’m sure the Premier will admit contributed 
more to the inflationary costs of Saskatchewan in the past year than any other single factor? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Basically I don’t admit what the Hon. Member bases his question that these 
contributed more to inflation than any other factor, I think that they were cost pass through proposals. I 
don’t mean to detail them here now but the Hon. Member will know that in the last two years the cost of 
natural gas to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has gone up 400 per cent and I think that from about 
an average of 21 per cent in Alberta to about 86 per cent; 86 cents, 21 cents to 86 cents as an example 
and while that undoubtedly may contribute to inflation it is not something that is outside any federal 
guidelines. I think the question of whether or not the board is going to review increases either of prices 
or of compensation wages which took place prior to the effective date of October 13th. We simply 
haven’t decided all of those matters yet and I wouldn’t be able to state a government’s position on that. 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3085 
 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose I could ask the obvious question, are liquor prices now going 
down, but I have a general question. 
 
You have indicated that the term or the phrase “historical relationship” will take into account your 
phrase “the regional equity relationship” and I am inclined to agree with you. It does obviously extend 
wage settlements in other provinces as a guideline back into our province and brings the relationships 
that way. But has your definition of regional equity relationship been accepted by the federal board or 
have discussions gone on with that particular phrase? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The short answer to that is that it has not been accepted nor has it been rejected. I 
don’t know whether it needs to be accepted or rejected because it is part of the Federal Government 
guidelines and it is a matter of who interprets it. But we don’t want an interpretation which is sharply at 
variance with the federal interpretation. We can have an interpretation which is modestly at variance, but 
we don’t want one which is sharply at variance because this is undoubtedly going to produce difficulties 
as between the public sector and the private sector in Saskatchewan. These finer points are in a sense 
what are under discussion now between our officials and the Federal Government officials and I know 
that the Minister of Finance has had some correspondence with the Hon. Mr. Macdonald on two or three 
key points. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I wasn’t being argumentative on that, I was attempting to find out the status of any 
discussions. 
 
I note, from my recollection of the remarks, that you expressed concern at the outset about whether the 
professional income surcharge was an adequate measure of restraining professional incomes and you 
expressed some doubt as to that. You also expressed some doubt as to the effectiveness of the 
anti-inflation board program or the failure to demand prior notice. You did deal with the prior notice 
under our board, but seemingly unless I missed it, didn’t deal with the question of professional incomes. 
 
Are we to expect a professional income either, special program for Saskatchewan, an income surcharge 
and I suppose by the same token are we to expect in Saskatchewan a special corporate tax surcharge or 
income surcharge? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Certainly if we moved in that direction we could not confine it to professionals. I 
think there is no way that we, in the province of Saskatchewan, could apply an income surcharge based 
upon professions, nor perhaps, do I think we should. Whether or not there will be an income surcharge 
on people of higher incomes is something that I cannot now indicate simply because no decision has 
been made, but I think it is fair to say that it is something that we are considering and which, whatever 
decision we make, will be part of the budget. 
 
With respect to any corporate one, I suppose the same can be said, although again, if I be frank with the 
House, that we are not considering that as actively as the other alternative. 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3086 
 

Mr. Lane: — My second supplementary deals with the question of local governments. 
 
At the SUMA convention yesterday, and I stand to be corrected, the Minister indicated that grant 
restraint will be asked for by local governments and that the grants would take into account basically, 
the impression that I was left with, last year’s term, plus an inflation factor. I could have misinterpreted 
that. Would you give your thinking as to how this particular program is to apply to grants to go to local 
governments as opposed to their services supplied. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The program as such ahs no application to grants. It has no application to taxes, and I 
refer the Hon. Member to the top of page five of my statement where I specifically say that taxes 
includes those charges and imposts levied by the liquor board. So that there is no restraint on the amount 
to which we can gouge those consumers of liquor. 
 
Having said that, the program is not designed to apply at all either to taxes or to grant transfers. We will 
be asking, as I did this morning, asking local governments to restrain their expenditures as we will be 
restraining ours, but I know they will have some real problems in cutting, effectively cutting programs, 
and so will we. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier is aware, first I wonder if you are aware and, 
second, is it true, we are told by the teacher negotiating team and confirm whether you are aware of this, 
that they have been told in their negotiations that they can’t settle anything because, indeed, they are 
afraid of what the Liberal Party would say if a settlement were made above the guidelines; that you have 
been holding out the bogeyman of the Liberal Party as though we are running the Government now – 
and we would be proud to do that. I wonder if that is true if that illusion has in fact been created. That is 
what the teachers believe and I wonder if that were true in your negotiations with other bodies such as 
the nurses and the hospital workers, whether you have been hiding behind the Liberal skirts, if you like, 
in failing to settle. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would be amazed if the teachers believe that. I wouldn’t be amazed if 
certain Liberals tried to make the teachers believe that, but I have a fairly higher regard for the 
intelligence of the teachers in this province and, therefore, I am sure that they would unlikely succumb 
to the blandishments of the Member for Wascana. 
 
The answer is, so far as I am aware – and obviously I am not at the bargaining table – but so far as I am 
aware there is absolutely no truth or no substance to the proposition put forward by the Member for 
Wascana. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier was here when both I and the Member for 
Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) spoke and indicated that as far as this party was concerned we thought 
that teachers were one of the exceptions to the ordinary guidelines. 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3087 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think there will be no exceptions to the guidelines. What there will be 
will be an application of the guidelines and the guidelines permit a consideration of historical 
relationships. In our judgment in approaching the problem of teachers’ salaries, you cannot take 
teachers’ salaries in Saskatchewan in isolation from historic relationships at least across the Prairies. 
This is not to suggest that we are talking about equality of salaries, but it is to suggest that we are talking 
about a general relationship of salaries across the Prairies. This has been the case over the years. There 
have been occasionally one group who have been a little ahead of the other, but there have never been 
wide variances over any substantial period of time. We have to take into account that we are talking 
about a three-year program. 
 
If we were talking about a one-year program we could, with some fairness, say to employee groups, 
well, you just got caught and tough luck. But for a three-year program that, I think, is not an appropriate 
stance for a government. 
 
The teachers in this province have had a two-year contract and as a result thereof have reached the 
position where the historic relationships between Manitoba and Alberta is not what it has been for the 
most part. Accordingly, I would think that an appropriate application of the guidelines would take into 
account historic relationships and our negotiators at the negotiating table are negotiating on that basis. 
Any contract arrived at will be subject to the review of the board, but we will be wishing to say to the 
board, we hope we can reach an agreement with the teachers and we hope that we would be able to say 
to the board in our judgment this increase is within the guidelines because there is the arithmetic 
guidelines and then there is that additional amount which is necessary in order to restore, in a general 
way, historic relationships among teacher groups in this area of Canada. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — I wonder if the Premier would indicate whether the settlements, the teachers’ 
settlements, nurses, the hospital workers have been delayed awaiting these announcements and, 
secondly, do the announcements, I gather they have no requirement for legislation or will we be delayed 
again for a further six weeks before Saskatchewan finally gets into the inflation battle? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I think there have been no significant delays although I think it is fair to say 
that all parties in negotiations in the last few weeks have not pursued them with all the vigour that they 
may have, and I think that is both true on the employee and the employer side, simply because we were 
not sure what the federal guidelines meant. We were reasonably sure that the federal guidelines would 
be applied in a general way here in Saskatchewan, but we had to figure out what we thought the federal 
guidelines meant. 
 
Anyone can calculate, they are arithmetic guidelines, but we are only now finding out what all of these 
regional comparisons and that sort of thing means, as we see instance after instance being adjudged by 
the federal board. We will find the same thing out in Saskatchewan as we have a Saskatchewan board. 
 
We do not anticipate the need for legislation under this 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3088 
 

program. It is possible that it may be necessary. It is not clear. The merits of legislation are far from 
self-evidence. There is legislation in Canada. I am told that Ontario is covered by the federal legislation 
on the public sector. But that didn’t solve the teacher-trustee dispute there. I am told, although I don’t 
know this, because I don’t know whether Manitoba has signed an agreement with the Federal 
Government, that the public sector in Manitoba is covered by the federal guidelines and the federal 
legislation. But there is a work stoppage there in the transit system in Winnipeg. So it is not immediately 
clear the benefits of legislation, but there may be. That, time will tell. 
 
I think that it is worthwhile to point out that I think the most successful anti-inflation program on the go 
at the moment is the one in Britain which has reduced the rate of inflation from about 25 per cent to 
about 14 per cent over a period of ten months. There is no legislation there. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Members of the House for having allowed the 
Premier to make the announcement. I think we are finished with this portion of the proceedings. So that 
we could move onto another matter, I should like to ask leave of the Speaker and the Assembly for two 
or three minutes, if I can. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

PROROGATION 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make a statement and I hope it will not be considered to be 
incongruous with the remarks that we were just addressing to this House a few moments ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to address to the House some remarks with respect to the way we should proceed 
during the next six or eight weeks. The current legislative sitting has proceeded now for 46 days. If one 
considers the number of days in which we have sat mornings and evenings, that would be equivalent, I 
suppose, to a 60 or 70 day session. It has been a long session with few breaks. The question, therefore, 
arises as to whether or not we should not prorogue this House and reassemble with a new session. 
 
I may say that I have looked at some material and I see that this session is 46 days long, since 1900 there 
have only been eight sessions with have been longer. A standard session is running now, if you take the 
last few and a couple of those in the last two or three years, but if one takes from 1964 which was 29 
days; 1965 it was 52; 1966 – 44 days; 1967 – 40 days; 1968 – 48 days; 1969 – 44 days; 1970 – 45 days; 
1971 – 44 days; 1972 – 51 days and so on. I think you can see that in many ways 46 days is a fairly 
standard session. While we should not take credit, I suppose, for sitting mornings it has been a tough 
session also. 
 
I am, therefore, going to suggest to the House, if there is general agreement and no disagreement, that 
the House prorogue rather than adjourn. There are some problems – two private Bills on the Order Paper 
would die, would need to be reintroduced, other Bills, of course, would need to be reintroduced, but with 
respect to the private Bills, some people who put out some 
 



 
  January 28, 1976 

 

3089 
 

money on advertising might have a sense of grievance and I think we would be able to reimburse those 
organizations. There are just two. 
 
I understand that the Attorney General has consulted with representatives of the two parties opposite and 
I understand that they are in agreement with the proposal to prorogue. This would give us all a complete 
break and would provide Members with the opportunity to come back to a new and fresh session. 
 
I want to make this clear, it would have the effect of having an extra sessional indemnity. I don’t want 
anyone to misunderstand that aspect of it because of the sessional indemnity it should be understood is 
$2,500, not $12,500 but $2,500. And no one should think it will be more than that. I think in all justice 
having regard to the fact that the session is likely to be 75 days, maybe more than that, that would only 
leave 29 days and I am not sure we will complete our business in 29 days. Likely, perhaps, to be 
considerably longer than that if we proceeded as one session. I think it is not unreasonable to put this 
proposal before the House. 
 
I think we are all aware of the problems for private Members that this lengthy and unexpected lengthy 
session has caused. The problems are not nearly as obvious for Cabinet Ministers, and I am the first to 
concede that. But I think considering all of the equities, it is not unreasonable for us to propose to 
prorogue the House and reassemble in a new session. 
 
I believe that the House Leader has had an opportunity to consult with the two parties and we believe 
that an arrangements could be arrived at whereby we would not have a long Throne Speech to debate 
again, but we could proceed with the business. There would be a Throne Speech, of course, but the 
debate would be shortened and we would proceed, primarily, I think with the budget and thereafter the 
legislation. 
 
I want to put forward this proposal without any feeling that we are firmly committed to it if there is a 
feeling that it is inappropriate. I put it forward and if there is no general objection to it, then we will be 
proceeding on those basis. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, if I may reply to the Premier, I think that 46 days – and the morning 
sittings – it didn’t start out this way to be a session anywhere this length, but it turned out to be this 
length. I think if you add up the hours, I’d have to agree with the Premier that the hours have been 
extremely long. There is no question in my mind that for the Members who come from outside Regina, 
which is most of the Members, the expenses for this session are comparable to the expenses of a session. 
I have no hesitation at all in supporting the idea that this be considered a session. If it is a session then 
the sessional indemnity is reasonable and I think that the proposition is equally reasonable. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there being no further comments or no objection on this I think that 
matter can be put aside. On that basis then I should like to tell the House that what we will be doing next 
is of course calling in His Honour or asking His Honour to grace us with his presence and give Royal 
Assents and thereafter there will be a short prorogation address by His 
 



 
January 28, 1976   
 

3090 
 

Honour and that will be it as the Premier has outlined. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 

At 5:25 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor having entered the Chamber, took his seat 
upon the Throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant-Government was pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 
thank you and congratulate you on the work you have done. 
 
After full and extensive debate, you have given approval to The Potash Development Act, 1975 – a 
measure which will assure for this and future generations of Saskatchewan people orderly development 
of this valuable resource in the public interest. 
 
You have also provided a solid base in law for the public instrument of potash development, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
In amendment The Residential Tenancies Act, 1973, you have taken an important step toward 
controlling inflation by limiting increases in rents within a framework which protects the legitimate 
interests of both landlord and tenant. 
 
In taking leave of you, I wish to express my personal appreciation to the many Members on all sides of 
the House who have extended so many courtesies and good wishes as I approach the end of my term in 
this office. 
 
I thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the activities of the session and 
wish you the full blessing of Providence. 
 
The Hon. Mr. Romanow, Acting Provincial Secretary, then said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is the will and pleasure of His honour the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business and the 
Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


