
























































Hansard: May 03, 1976


1444 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

36th Day 
 

Monday, May 3, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. S. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure, through you, to introduce to 
Members of the House the Grade Five students from Ethel Milliken School in my constituency, in the 
company of Barb Scott and Brenda Arnold. I hope they have an enjoyable day and I look forward to 
meeting with the students as soon as we wrap up the Question Period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Time for Government to Intervene in Nurses’ Strike 
 
Mr. G. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could direct a question in the 
absence of the Minister of Health to the Minister of Finance. In view of the fact that we are again in the 
situation where virtually all of the nurses in the province are off the job, if the Minister wouldn’t agree 
that it is now time for the Government to intervene and do something about getting nurses back to work. 
 
Hon. W. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — No. 
 
Mr. Penner: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister of Finance would indicate to us 
how it is that the Government justifies settlement for some hospital workers in the range of 23 per cent 
to 27 per cent and yet suggests that nurses should hold the line at 21 per cent? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the matter of hospital employee wages, as well as nurses’ wages, is a 
matter for collective bargaining between the hospital association and the respective unions. In the case 
of the non-medical employees, they were in collective bargaining, they arrived at a settlement and the 
settlement has been referred to the Prices and Compensation Board. The matter of percentages is not 
always the key question. The more important question is the dollar increase. I think percentages have a 
tendency to distort, particularly in this period when both the Federal Government and provincial 
governments are making an effort to take action in the area of inflation. 
 
Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that the Minister of Finance is clearly abdicating the 
Government’s responsibility. I want to ask him who it is that provides funds to the Saskatchewan 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1445 
 

Hospital Association for the purposes of bargaining with, for example SUN? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, in case of hospitals with 50 beds or more we are operating on global 
budgets. In the case of hospitals with less than 50 beds, they have the option of either working on a 
global budget or a line by line budget. These matters are determined between the SHSP and the 
individual hospitals. The Government provides about 98 per cent of the funding for the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, final supplementary. Would the Minister not agree in admitting that the 
Government supplies about 98 per cent of the funds, thereby suggesting that the responsibility rests with 
hospital boards rather than with the Government, is clearly an abdication of the Government’s 
responsibility? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, in case of the hospitals we believe in local autonomy. The hospital 
boards, and there are about 120 hospitals that are operated as union hospitals, then there are some of the 
urban hospitals, the boards are appointed on a different basis. For example, the City Hospital in 
Saskatoon, the city of Saskatoon appoints the board. They are autonomous bodies. We believe that that 
is the proper way to be running our hospital system. We have not had demands to do away with the 
system. 
 

Who Pays Cost of Flying Patients Out of Province 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, a question that I wanted to direct to the Minister 
of Health. I see he is not here again, notwithstanding the fact that there is a very serious health problem 
in the province. I think the Opposition is entitled to some explanation as to why he is not. But in his 
absence, Mr. Speaker, a question to the Acting Minister of Health. The Minister of Health made 
reference last week to the fact that emergency patients were being flown to other provinces so that the 
necessary medical work could be performed on them in those provinces. My question to the Minister is: 
who pays the costs of the transportation of these patients from Saskatchewan to Manitoba or Alberta, as 
the case may be, and where are the patients being flown to? Is there any particular hospital? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge I am not aware of any patients being flown, 
so far, to any out of province hospital. If there is a patient who requires specialized care and because of 
the strike a particular service is not available, that consideration would be given to flying that patient. 
We do have an air ambulance program in Saskatchewan, presumably that program would be used in the 
event that there was a need to fly any patient out. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Minister says presumably consideration 
will be given. Will you assure the House at this time that any person who finds himself in the 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1446 
 

position of having to be flown to Winnipeg, or Calgary, or Edmonton, that the cost of that flight and the 
cost of their return home, will be borne by the Government through its various health plans? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — I will take it as notice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The question is, Mr. Minister, just what is it going 
to take before the Government will intervene in this nurses’ dispute. I remind you that we faced a very 
serious situation several months ago when certain SPC workers went on strike, at that time it was 
deemed necessary to recall the Legislature to get them back to work. I am not suggesting that a 
Legislative thing be done just now. If the Attorney General would keep quiet, I would ask the question, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is it going to take for the Government to intervene to get this strike settled? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Next question. 
 

When Will Government Adopt — ‘Buy in Saskatchewan Policy’ 
 
Mr. E. A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy Premier. 
 
In view of the fact that this Government spends millions of dollars outside the province annually on 
various purchases, example, $3.5 million in the past year on business forms, why has this Government 
not adopted a ‘buy in Saskatchewan policy?’ 
 
Mr. Romanow: — May I have that again please? 
 
Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if I could have the Attorney General’s attention for a moment. The 
Government apparently spends millions of dollars each year, an example — $3.5 million on business 
forms alone in the past year — why has this Government not adopted a ‘buy in Saskatchewan policy?’ 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Hon. Member that where possible the Government 
intends, of course, to buy Saskatchewan products. This has been our stated policy and we make as many 
purchases within Saskatchewan as possible. Of course the Hon. Member will also know that concurrent 
to that is a duty to make sure that Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money is being spent as wisely as possible 
and on a tender basis. Sometimes it is not possible to make the appropriate purchases as suggested. 
 
Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Is the Deputy Premier not aware that the capability 
exists in Saskatchewan today to supply business forms at a competitive rate? 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1447 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the question is directing itself at zeroing in on the question of 
business forms, then I would have to do some further examination. I would have to know who it is that 
went outside of the Province of Saskatchewan, what were the requirements and the circumstances 
surrounding it. I do know that there are many purchases of business forms from within the province, so I 
can’t answer a general question like that unless the Member provides some details. 
 
Mr. R. L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — A supplementary question. Is the 
Deputy Premier or the Minister responsible for purchasing, and I understand that’s the Premier, is he 
aware of the ‘buy Alberta policy’ established by the Government of Alberta and the ‘buy Manitoba 
policy’ established by the Government of Manitoba, is he aware of the implications of that policy? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I can only reiterate that the policy of the Province of 
Saskatchewan is to ‘buy Saskatchewan’, and we try to do that wherever possible. Now you may give me 
an example or two where it hasn’t been done. That doesn’t prove the point that the policy is not being 
enforced. There may be other circumstances with respect to the proposed purchase that are at issue. As 
far as I am concerned I don’t care too much what Alberta and Manitoba has. I know it is a ‘buy 
Saskatchewan’ here and that’s what counts. 
 
Mr. Collver: — A final supplementary question. In the light of the Attorney General’s response, can we 
clarify the response to sum it up as it were, and say that where competitive the Government of 
Saskatchewan would purchase from Saskatchewan organizations before they would buy from outside 
suppliers? Is that a fair statement of the Government of Saskatchewan’s policy and if so would the 
Attorney General or the Government of Saskatchewan be prepared to accept from Saskatchewan 
suppliers examples, many examples, of the Government of Saskatchewan buying outside and in turn 
establish that policy from hence forward? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly with respect to the first part of the question, I think the 
answer can be, yes, to that. The question of “competitive” is in this province, both price-wise and, of 
course, the needs of the particular agency and where that’s possible that’s ‘buy Saskatchewan first’. If 
you have some examples, I would be pleased to receive them. 
 

Time for Government to Intervene in Nurses’ Strike 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Minister of 
Health. May I ask first where the Minister of Health is? We find it a little unusual that he isn’t in his seat 
today under the circumstances. But let me ask you, in addition, how long are you prepared to continue to 
see the impasse between the nurses and the Saskatchewan Hospital Association continue before the 
Government takes some direct action? 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1448 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I’ll see if I can get myself acquainted and provide the 
answer as to the whereabouts of the Minister of Health. I think he is in Saskatoon on Government 
business as it so happens. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cabinet office! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, and the Cabinet office which is a matter of Government business as well. I 
want to say this, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll check that and give the Member the response. 
 
Let me say with respect to the second part of the question that I find it somewhat difficult to respond 
with some degree of precision as to precisely what the Opposition is getting at when they say that it is 
time now that the Government interfered. I would be pleased if the Opposition would give us a specific 
example of what they suggest should be done. Do they suggest direct legislative intervention? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I asked a simple, well-phrased question. How long is 
the Government prepared to have the impasse between the two sides continue before it is prepared to 
intervene and put a stop to it? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member should not be too hasty. We are all concerned about 
this strike but the simple fact of the matter is that they have been in intensive negotiations and 
conciliation procedures now over the weekend. So far as I know these conciliation proceedings are still 
ongoing. So long as they are talking and so long as there is a hard bargaining process going on, it is the 
position of this Government that we do not interfere in the free collective bargaining process unless 
absolutely mandatory. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary. Now at least we have something concrete from the Attorney General, 
that negotiations are going on. Is he in a position, because apparently the Minister of Health doesn’t care 
to come and give his position, are you in a position to tell us what those negotiations have been doing, 
whether there is any hope of a settlement of this strike in the very near future, like today? And if not, 
what is the intention of the Government? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this has been widely reported in the public press with respect to the 
conciliation and the Conciliation Officer, one Mr. Ferguson, I believe, if my memory serves me 
correctly and there is a conciliation discussion situation which is going on. This is not something that 
has just come to light. It has been going on over the weekend. And I repeat again, that where there is this 
type of discussion going on, presuming the collective bargaining process is still going, the two parties 
are communicating, and so long as that is the case, we intend to see it through. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If the collective bargaining process breaks down, then 
what do you intend on doing? 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1449 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if that should occur then of course the Government will consider its 
options. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Would the Deputy Premier give us an assurance that the Government is not prepared 
to see this continue beyond more than ten days? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say again what I have said to the Hon. Members, that the 
parties are in a process of discussion. Everybody is anxious that this matter be solved as quickly as 
possible and I simply ask the Hon. Members to be patient and let’s see what the outcome of the free 
collective bargaining process is. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Does the Deputy Premier not agree with me that in a situation like this it is much more 
important that the Minister of Health be in the Legislature to answer questions from the Opposition 
rather than running the political Cabinet office in Saskatoon? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 

Reduced Rate for Old Age Pensioners in Parks 
 
Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Renewable 
Resources and Tourism. Due to old people and pensioners being on a fixed income in this province, 
there has been some agitation by many of these people, and as many of them stay right in the province, 
has the Government any plans of giving a reduced rate to old age pensioners, pioneers, for the provincial 
parks and the regional parks for the coming year? There is quite an agitation on this. 
 
Hon. A. S. Matsalla (Minister of Renewable Resources and Tourism): — Mr. Speaker, at this moment 
that is under consideration. 
 
Mr. Larter: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you give us some idea 
when something like this could happen. I don’t believe for what has happened in this province the last 
few years with inflation and the fixed incomes, I think something like this would be a very good gesture 
on the part of the province to give them a reduced rate. 
 
Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, once our considerations and discussions are completed an announcement 
will be made in due course. 
 

Availability of Emergency Ambulance and Aircraft Service 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the acting Minister of Health. In connection with 
the emergency ambulance, aircraft service that is being provided, may I ask how many aircraft are 
available for the purpose; and secondly, how does a family that is very concerned about one of its 
members in the 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1450 
 

hospital go about making application to have that person flown out of the province for an operation that 
is needed? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the determination of urgency or emergency would be made by the 
medical physician and whether a patient needs to be flown out of the province, or whether those services 
may be available in some other hospital in the province. The medical profession knows very well how to 
communicate and how to get the air ambulance service, those instructions are available. As well, the 
hospitals know how to get an air ambulance. There are, I believe, four aircraft that are available. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Is there a possibility of any other destination, apart from Winnipeg and Edmonton 
being approved? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, from time to time people are flown out into other communities, or other 
areas. I am aware that on occasion Saskatchewan patients have been flown by air ambulance to the 
Mayo Clinic. It doesn’t follow that it would only be to Edmonton or Winnipeg. Those services are 
available to our Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Collver: — A supplementary. Is the cost for these patients who are flown out of the province going 
to be borne by the Medical Care Insurance Commission and the cost of medical treatment? I didn’t hear 
that one asked. In the light of the varying rate of payment for Medical Care Insurance Commission and 
in the light of the fact that the MCIC only pays Saskatchewan rates insofar as Saskatchewan people are 
concerned, is the differential between rates, say in Alberta and the rate in the Province of Saskatchewan, 
as a result of the emergency situation, going to be borne by MCIC? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — A similar question was asked a little earlier, that is, who was going to be paying the 
costs of the ambulance service for flying out or whether the rate in case of medical care, whether 
Saskatchewan rates would be paid or those in other provinces. I am not able to answer the question, I 
will take the question as notice. 
 

Auction of Government Cars and Trucks 
 
Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Government Services. In 
light that you are going to have an auction sale under E4, selling cars and trucks, where you put them on 
tender. Have you ever considered putting them out for auction? 
 
Hon. G. T. Snyder (Minister of Government Services): — Yes, this is a matter that has been under 
consideration and very recently the departmental officials have looked at the possibility of having an 
auction rather than selling goods by what has become regarded as the normal process. I don’t know 
whether it will materialize or not because of some difficulties. Some people, I believe, would experience 
some difficulty if they were obliged to travel to a central point for an auction when under present 
circumstances, however, 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1451 
 

they can drive down, for example, from Moose Jaw to Regina to look at the vehicles and put in a written 
bid and they could probably do this in the normal course of events in their normal time off during the 
week. So this is one of the things that is under consideration but it is not without flaws and we think that 
the present set of circumstances is probably better in the long haul. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Having checked into the CNR, which is presently 
doing the same system by auction in all or damaged goods, and not tendering, they have found they have 
tripled and quadrupled the amount of money they are getting back. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — I am not familiar with the CN’s operation. I am not sure that the two are directly 
applicable and I am not at all sure that the same set of circumstances would apply. I am just not aware 
and I wouldn’t be willing to comment. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Have you got the facts on Detroit and New York, who 
auction off their cars and trucks now? 
 

Road Load Limits 
 
Mr. G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
On March 19, in this Legislature, you were asked a very specific question by the Member for Regina 
South (Mr. Cameron) about the specific policy with regard to load limits. The question was: does the 
Minister continue to tell Members of this House that the specific policy was initiated at the request of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities? And you said, yes. You repeated that statement 
on March 17. 
 
In light of the Local Government’s Conference over the weekend and the brief of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, when in fact they deny that that specific policy as enunciated by 
yourself was theirs, are you now prepared to admit that either intentionally, or otherwise, the House 
received bad information from the Minister and would you admit that the Government policy as 
enunciated at the SARM Convention was in fact not based on the recommendations of the SARM? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — No. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, further in the brief as submitted by the Saskatchewan Association of 
Municipalities they restated their position. They stated their request that they want to retain the right to 
issue road bans and the right to issue overweight permits on rural roads. The municipalities’ rights to 
issue bans and overweight load limits are a necessity in order for a municipality to adequately protect its 
rural road system. In light of Government policy which takes away or does not give those rights to the 
municipalities, would the Minister 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1452 
 

now admit that in fact the Government policy is designed solely to get inland terminals and in fact was 
not designed to protect the rural roads of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — No, I would not. Mr. Speaker, I think that in putting forward the policy intent to 
the SARM Convention indicated that there was going to be a process of discussion to work out the 
administrative problems. Certainly the issue of overweight permits, certainly the issue of spring road 
bans are an issue that we need to discuss and of handling by the municipalities it seems to me would be 
very appropriate. 
 
With respect to the position paper put forward to the local government conference on Friday and 
Saturday, the request for the 74,000 figure which was put forward is certainly a new one in terms of my 
discussions with that organization. I will want an opportunity to sit down and talk with them with 
respect to the position that they have now taken. I want to do that as soon as I possibly can. I had hoped 
to be there for the conference on Friday, but things didn’t work that way, unfortunately, but I will be 
meeting with them as soon as I possibly can and discuss this new proposal that they put forward. 
 
Mr. Lane: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In all cases the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities have requested any load limit policy to take into account the factor that the weight per 
inch width of tire will not exceed 500 pounds. Your policy, as enunciated, was in absolute terms. Would 
the Minister not admit that in fact the policy requested by SARM is totally at variance with the policy 
enunciated? And in light of the new request for the 74,000 pounds limit, would the Minister now be 
prepared to tell the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that the existing policy as enunciated at 
the SARM Convention is being withdrawn by the Government and that the whole matter is now up for 
reconsideration and that it will not be a part of Government policy to get people simply because they 
wish to deliver to inland terminals? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of withdrawing at this time our proposal we 
put forward. We intend to proceed as we had planned to proceed and that is with a series of meetings, 
going on from there to meet with municipal people at their district meetings in June, before any final 
announcement is made. We have concern for loan limits on the municipal roads and we intend to 
develop a strategy which will protect those roads. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — In view of the fact that the policy is likely to come into effect before we next meet 
again in the Legislature, as we will be adjourning soon, may I ask the Minister whether or not he is 
prepared to give Members the assurance that when the uniform weight limit policy is finally adopted it 
will provide for the unfettered right to municipalities to issue overload permits? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t do that now. I think certainly that is an appropriate 
consideration. But I would not want to make such a firm commitment at this time without the vehicle of 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1453 
 

discussion which I think all Members agree in this important policy change is necessary. 
 

Government Auction of Cars and Trucks 
 
Mr. Collver: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Government Services. In light of 
the wave of nostalgia that is presently creeping, not only in our province but also over North America, 
and in the light of the accumulation over the past number of years of memorabilia by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and if you want, items that are not being used by the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
in the light of the tremendous success of the recent auction sale in the city of Detroit, would the 
Government of Saskatchewan consider holding an auction sale of memorabilia and items that it is no 
longer using in order to achieve sufficient moneys . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Next question. 
 

Appeals to Office of the Rentalsman 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the office of the rentalsman. Some 
weeks ago the Minister gave this House an assurance that all appeals to the rentalsman either by way of 
a landlord or by tenant would be completed and disposed of by the end of April. It now being passed the 
end of April my question to the Minister is: have all of the appeals been disposed of by the rentalsman 
and if they haven’t been what is the backlog of the appeals and when are they expected to be disposed 
of? 
 
Hon. N. Shillington (Minister of Co-operation): — They have largely disposed of all of the appeals. 
There are a small number outstanding, if my memory serves me correctly, less than 30. Now, there are 
some appeals that haven’t been dealt with because all the information hasn’t been provided. There are 
quite a number of those, but of those that are just simply waiting to be dealt with it is my understanding 
there are less than 30 to deal with. I would have to advise the Hon. Member in writing as to the precise 
number, but the problem is largely in hand. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister give me some approximate figure 
as to the number of appeals where you are waiting for further information? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I will do that as well in writing. I don’t have that figure at all. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that at least one nursing home in 
Regina, Pioneer Village, that the rental rate there has increased considerably, I believe as high as $180 
per month. I assume if you are aware of this, are you taking any steps into putting nursing homes under 
the provisions of the rental control legislation? 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1454 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I am aware of it and I want to get some information on it, but at the present time we 
have no plans to put nursing homes under the provisions of the rent control legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Environmental and Economic Studies of Electrical Power 
 

Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce that 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has started environmental and economic studies of a possible 250 
megawatt hydro electrical development at Nipawin, Saskatchewan. Although other sources such as the 
Churchill River, and an extension to the Poplar River Thermo Plant are also being studied, we must 
continue to look at new alternatives for development in order to assure that electrical power will be 
available in future years to Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The Nipawin site is being considered among other possibilities for development by the year 1982. 
Participating with Saskatchewan Power Corporation on the studies are the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources and the Community Planning Branch of 
the Department of Municipal Affairs. The SRC will examine the possible effects of a reservoir, dam and 
power plant, transportation, forestry, vegetation and aquatic ecology. Renewable Resources will study 
the impact of the project on wild life, natural history and archeology; while Municipal Affairs will look 
at the social economic effects of such a project. 
 
The Corporation will undertake studies of other related environmental matters as well. The Corporation 
consultants have for some time been conducting field investigations in the Nipawin area, starting in 
1964. These studies have been updated periodically, including soil sampling, test drilling, foundation 
engineering and preliminary project designs. The utility was originally looking at several sites on the 
Saskatchewan River system. These have now been narrowed down to three possible locations on the 
main stem from the junction of the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers to Tobin Lake and about 50 
miles downstream. Consultants then recommended the Nipawin site as the most suitable for initial 
development. 
 
This site will best utilize the combined flows from the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers. The 
available water power should be able to accommodate three generating units of 85 megawatts each. An 
additional two units might be built for peaking purposes sometime in the future. 
 
The environmental studies will be completed by mid 1977 and are expected to cost in the neighborhood 
of one quarter million dollars. If results of the studies indicate that the project should be built public 
hearings will then be held before Saskatchewan Power Corporation is granted approval by the 
Government to proceed with such construction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1455 
 

Mr. R. E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, if I may reply shortly. I am pleased to see 
they are doing an environmental study in the Nipawin region. I would certainly hope it is a fuller and 
more intensive study than was done in the Poplar River area and I would suggest that the Minister 
certainly start looking into the possibility of pulling out fences and buildings before the water starts 
getting into the reservoirs in that particular area. I would also hope that the people in the area would get 
fuller information than they received in the Poplar River area. I would hope that the entire project was 
brought out in the study so that the people would know just how large and how intense the particular 
project would be. I think the Poplar River area was a good example where you start bringing in new 
ideas a few months after the project is started, now there are many scare ideas in the area. The people are 
upset in Coronach and I would hope with the lessons learned in that area SPC will not make the same 
mistakes up in the Nipawin area. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, although normally the Member for Estevan would reply to the Minister, I 
deem it an honor to be able to reply to the statement by the Minister today, because that is in my 
constituency. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You . . . 
 
Mr. Collver: — Yes, indeed, yes I gathered that. For some number of years it has been suggested by the 
people of the area that this would be a good development spot for Saskatchewan Power to consider for 
hydro electric development and although I did not get a copy of the Minister’s statement the impression 
that I got from what the Minister said is that the proper studies would be done to assure that the project 
is in the best interests of not only the people of Saskatchewan and Sask Power but also the people of the 
area. Quite frankly, I commend the Minister for this announcement today. I am sure the people of the 
area will be happy to hear that finally this project after many, many years is now coming to serious 
consideration and serious study with a view to the development of the area. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, on a Point of Order. I just raise once again 
the point that we have been raising time and time again in these sessions about not getting copies of 
Ministerial Statements. I must say that in recent days we have been receiving copies from the Minister 
of Mineral Resources, the Minister of Transport and the Attorney General, and I regret that the Minister 
of Industry and Commerce did not see fit to give us a copy. I hope he will do so in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! That is an observation, that is not a Point of Order. 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1456 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Question Period 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to raise a Point of Order that came up as a result of the 
Question Period. I realize that the Question Period traditionally has been a period during which the hot 
political issues are discussed, and I realized the Question Period traditionally has been a time when the 
kind of harsh questions can be asked and harsh answers given, but I do want to know why when we 
make just a suggestion for the Government of Saskatchewan to perhaps make some money in the 
Question Period that you would rule my question out of order? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, I gather the reason the Member rose is to find out why I ruled him out of order. 
It was because of lack of urgency. If Members have constructive suggestions to make I am sure there are 
lots of opportunities by resolution in the House or during Estimates. I am sure the Minister of 
Government Services would be pleased to hear your suggestions in that area with regard to the sale of 
used vehicles. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, just on that Point of Order. If I could just mention one thing. The auction 
sale period in Saskatchewan and the period of nostalgia that is sweeping the country may not last, 
neither one may last . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I am sure the sale of antiques is going to go on and on for centuries. The next Point of 
Order if there is one. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Hon. E. Tchorzewski (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 66 — An Act to 
amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, 1970. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments on Bill No. 66. Let me say that it is a pleasure for 
me to introduce these amendments to The Teachers’ Superannuation Act. We have introduced several 
amendments since 1971 and each amendment has provided additional benefits to superannuated teachers 
and surviving spouses. 
 
The agreement that has just been concluded by the committees established under authority of The 
Teachers’ Collective Bargaining Act, 1973, has again provided for great strides in improving the 
benefits and extending allowances to some needy widows who would not otherwise have qualified for 
such an allowance. 
 
There are a number of amendments, Mr. Speaker, and without editorializing, as it may possible be said, I 
want to go and deal specifically with them. The amendments to the Act include as follows: First of all 
there’s an amendment to the present Bill, Section 21 so that counting as teacher service up to one year 
while a teacher is on leave from the School Board for the purpose of maternity or adoption leave is now 
going to be made possible. Superannuation contributions will be required for a 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1457 
 

period counted as actual teacher service. 
 
Section 5 in the Bill that is before us provides a reduction to the service requirement to qualify for a 
regular allowance. It will be possible for a teacher to qualify for an allowance with ten years of 
contributory services upon attaining the age of 65. If that teacher had a refund of contributions he will be 
permitted to repay the amount required to qualify for such an allowance. It will be possible for the 
teacher to qualify for an allowance at any age provided he or she has accumulated at least 35 years of 
contributory service. 
 
In Section 6, Mr. Speaker, the Act is also being amended to further enhance reciprocity among the 
provinces. An amendment is being effected so that salaries earned in other provinces can be used in the 
calculation of an allowance where participation within the agreement was elected by the teacher. The 
Act now provides that only salaries earned while teaching is Saskatchewan may be used in the 
calculation of that allowance. 
 
There is a new Section, Mr. Speaker, being inserted in the Bill, that is Section 20D. And in it the 
minimum pension that any superannuated teacher may receive will be $8.00 as it is now per month, for 
each year of service, regardless of the number of years of service rendered, and that is where the change 
is. Previous legislation restricted the years of service to 35. Provision is also made to re-calculate 
allowances coming within the Section, effective January 1, 1976, to give the teacher the benefit of all 
services rendered. And this means that previously superannuated teachers with 40 years of service 
qualify for a minimum allowance of 35 years, you can multiply by $8.00 per month and by twelve 
months, which would give you $3,360 per year. But, effective January 1, 1976, that same teacher will 
have his or her allowance re-calculated to provide the minimum allowance $3,840 per year. The 
increases for the cost of living will be applied in addition to that amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that the Act is being amended to provide an allowance for certain 
widows, who did not qualify for an allowance under previous legislation. It was not necessarily 
discrimination against these widows, but a matter of the superannuated teacher selecting a type of plan 
that provided an allowance to him only in his lifetime, or a guaranteed plan that expired, no further 
allowances paid. So, effective on July 1, 1976, these widows will qualify for an allowance amounting to 
50 per cent of the deceased superannuate’s allowance based on single life plan, together with cost of 
living increases and minimum provisions of the Act. 
 
Section 9, Mr. Speaker, deals with survivor benefits. And in this, the Act is being amended to extend 
eligibility of a dependent’s allowance in the case of a teacher who has at least eight years of service. It 
was payable strictly when death occurred while teaching. Payment will now be extended to situations 
where death occurs while the teacher was in various circumstances which I want to outline at this time. 
 
And the circumstances are: Under contract or on leave of absence from the School Board; in receipt of a 
disability allowance from the Teachers’ Superannuation Committee; in receipt of benefits from a salary 
continuance scheme administered by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; and no teaching prior to 
September 15 of the following year after having ceased 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1458 
 

teaching June 30, and any period of absence approved by the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Act is also being amended to provide an allowance to the surviving spouse or 
dependents of the deceased teacher on the date the deceased teacher would have qualified for an 
allowance under the Act. And this is a real benefit and provides security to the survivors even if death of 
the teacher does not occur in the interim. At least the survivor will qualify for an allowance on the date 
the teacher would have qualified for an allowance after having met the service requirements of the Act. 
 
Section 10, Mr. Speaker, amends Section 49 of the present existing legislation and it deals with interest 
and contributions made to the fund. Effective on July 1, 1976, interest on teacher contributions will be 
increased from four per cent to six per cent compounded annually. No other teacher plan provides for a 
better return than four per cent, although there are many other kinds of plans that do. And also, the 
service has been reduced from five to two years to qualify for that interest. Also provided is the 
exclusion of substitute teachers, teaching for the purpose of refunding contributions. There is a 
mandatory four month waiting period before contributions are released and a four month waiting period 
commences after the last teaching day, whether or not it was rendered on a substitute basis. I’m sure this 
will be welcomed by many teachers who cease teaching on a permanent basis and are called upon from 
time to time by Boards to substitute on some occasions. 
 
Now, without any further comments, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure in introducing these 
amendments which I’m sure will be welcomed and I have no doubt will be supported by all Members in 
this House. So at this time I want to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. G. H. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, if I could make a few comments with regard 
to the amendments this Bill suggests and some of the comments made by the Minister of Education. I 
understand that as the Minister said this Bill represents negotiations between the teachers and the team 
representing the Government and Trustees in the recent round of negotiations and I’m certain that from 
the point of view of teachers in the province it is welcome improvement to the overall superannuation 
plan. 
 
The Section on maternity leave and adoption leave, I think, make reasonably good sense. The 
amendment to Section 27 allows for retirement with no age limit attached. When I first looked at it, I 
must confess, Mr. Speaker, I was very concerned, because it’s that kind of provision which tends to 
dramatically escalate the cost of superannuation plans. However, when I compared the present situation, 
where teachers are probably 21 years old before they go into the classroom, and I look at the total years 
service plus the age, adding to 90, and then look at the fact that this provision will allow, as I understand 
it, for someone to superannuate without having any age factor, as long as they have got 35 years service 
they are going to be able to superannuate. It’s really not going to change the picture because with the 
increase in training requirements we are going to have teachers entering the profession who are a 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1459 
 

year older and I suspect that the Minister of Education, within the next 12 months, will be announcing a 
four-year compulsory training program anyway, so that really won’t affect the scheme actuarially. 
 
I want to say, however, that from my point of view the entire question of the cost of this superannuation 
plan, along with all other superannuation plans that are funded by the Government, gives me a good deal 
of cause for concern. Partly I suppose, Mr. Speaker, because I have had the opportunity to take a fairly 
hard look at what the costs of pension plans are, particularly when viewed from the point of view of 
unfunded liability. I should like the Minister, in Committee, to give some indication of what the 
unfunded liability of this pension plan is; what the total payout of this pension plan is annually now, 
compared to the intake, if you like, that is keeping the plan solvent. I don’t think it is any secret, Mr. 
Speaker, that the total pension plans funded by the Government today are running in the order of 
between $300 million and a half billion dollars. That is a part of the financial picture of government, 
which is not made clear. I think there was a statement in the newspaper late last week from the Minister 
of Health, who has had a good deal of interest in pension plans, indicating those figures. And I would 
invite comment from the Minister and from his officials on the Superannuation Commission about their 
very realistic and practical views of how long this teachers’ superannuation plan is going to be able to 
continue to be a viable plan. And I want to go on record, Mr. Speaker, as raising a bit of a cautionary 
flag, if you like, about plans that continually provide additional benefits, and I can say that because I am 
one who stands, in the long run, to be a benefactor I suppose from the kind of negotiations that have 
taken place here. These plans look now like they are great, look like they are going to provide wonderful 
provisions at the end of a working career, but which may in fact not be able to accomplish that. 
 
As I understand Section 28, Mr. Speaker, it is a technicality to provide a change to affect a handful of 
people who had a reduction in earlier negotiation that was not intended by those who were involved in 
the bargaining. Section 28 (d) will provide benefit to long-service people to help the impact of inflation 
and again affects a relatively small number of people. 
 
Section 42, as I understand it, provides a new definition for what is meant by ‘being in service’. 
Apparently the old definition left a number of loopholes and this is something that members of the 
Federation, and I take it, members of the bargaining team on behalf of the Government, have indicated 
needs to be tightened up so that there will not continue to be those loopholes. 
 
I recognize, as the Attorney General says, that it is all negotiation. I happen to be at the last point that I 
wanted to make, at Section 49. As I understand it, reflects negotiations. 
 
We will, Mr. Speaker, be supporting the amendments. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1460 
 

Hon. E. Tchorzewski (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 68 — An Act to 
amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, comparing this speech to the last speech, made the last speech appears to be very 
long, because I am not going to take a great deal of time on moving second reading of this Bill 68, 
which is an Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance Act. I will just explain a couple of things, which 
also was a matter that was negotiated. The financial implications of it, from the point of view of the 
Government, compared to the superannuation plan, are insignificant, but the potential benefit to people 
who may be affected are, I might say, fairly substantial. 
 
Let me say that The Teachers’ Life Insurance Act came into force, as most of us will know, on 
September 1, 1960 and has provided substantial benefits to the beneficiaries since its inception. 
Amendments to the Act in 1974 made provision for group life insurance coverage to teachers working in 
Community Colleges and also provided for the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to have a voice in 
the awarding of the insurance contract. For years the Government paid the premium on the first $2,000 
and the teachers paid the premium on the remaining $8,000. In 1974 the level of insurance paid by the 
province increased from $2,000 to $4,000 in the group insurance coverage related to salary, which 
changed so that the maximum basic insurance increased from $10,000 to $15,000. 
 
The agreement just concluded and incorporated in this Bill by the bargaining committees established 
under the authority of The Teachers’ Collective Bargaining Act provides for an amendment to Section 6, 
an increase of insurance from $15,000 to $30,000 with the province to pay the premium on the first 
$5,000 effective September 1, 1976. 
 
The amendments to this Act in the past have not cost the province a great deal to implement, nor will 
this amendment. Most public responsive programs in recent years provide for greater government 
participation insofar as premium payments are concerned. This amendment is in keeping with the facts 
as they exist and as they are. 
 
Now the improvement to The Teachers’ Life Insurance Act, which I have just outlined, is a direct result 
of the success of The Teachers’ Collective Bargaining Act. I think, a major achievement for our 
province, and for this Government. It is a workable bargaining structure which places the decision 
makers in the process. It is an Act which accepts the facts and tries to make the best of them in the 
overall interest of our educational system. 
 
With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1461 
 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 69 — An Act 
respecting The Transportation Agency of Saskatchewan. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation being presented to the Assembly at a time of turmoil and 
upheaval across the entire spectrum of western transportation, at the Premiers’ Conference last week in 
Medicine Hat, one whole morning was devoted to transportation, which resulted in a very lengthy 
communique. 
 
Transportation has always been vital to the economy of this province and to the pattern of social 
development. Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces in Canada that is landlocked, with no outlet to 
water. Land transport is more costly than water shipment and our people are producers of bulk 
commodities like grain, potash and lumber. Saskatchewan is, therefore, acutely conscious of and 
sensitive to changes in transportation policy. 
 
Let me take a few minutes to outline the background against which this Bill to create a transportation 
agency has been drawn up. The railways are the backbone of our provincial economy. Railways created 
this nation, hold it together, railways shape this province, located its towns, gave them names and 
attracted their lifeblood of farm trade. Throughout the growth of Canada the railways have been used in 
the broadest and best sense of the word as political instruments. Their use in the early days, under Sir 
John A. Macdonald and Sir Wilfred Laurier knit Canada together, established a pattern of trade and 
industrialization that for good or bad is still with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now being proposed that rail lines be abandoned, the Crow’s Nest grain rates be 
dropped, that trucks replace railways as a means of moving grain within the West, that shipping costs be 
increased in many cases by several hundred per cent, and many smaller communities be phased out or 
left to die. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the development and application of policies in this area will be a major concern of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Agency. The agency will co-ordinate the development of policy in areas 
such as municipal transport, with a central policy issue of how we plan to move our farm products to 
market. One of the key challenges before the new agency will be the development of a strategy to 
defend the Crow’s Nest Rates. Crow’s Nest Rates provide a uniform shipping charge from all elevators, 
big or small, whether they are on a branchline or on a main line. Uniformity means the cost of grain 
movement is averaged out so it does not bear any more heavily on the farmer in a remote area than on 
someone next to the main line. Put another way, the Crow’s Nest Rate forces the railways to charge the 
same for shipments from all delivery points. Uniformity of rates helps to maintain shipping points in the 
face of service, rather than profitability. This is crucial to many small elevators in the towns and villages 
around them. It will be an overall goal of the Transportation Agency to prevent the shift of costs from 
federal and private sources onto the provincial and local tax base, without a corresponding shift in 
revenue sources. This is precisely what is happening now in the area of rail passenger service. Because 
of plans to abandon most regional passenger trains, and perhaps the 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1462 
 

transcontinental services as well, it is bound to shift more traffic to roads which is a provincial 
responsibility. 
 
We believe that the pressures of fuel economy will tend to make rail traffic more and more attractive in 
the years ahead and Saskatchewan must plan now to meet the requirements of the future. 
 
Air traffic is a third field in which the Agency will be deeply involved. We have begun talks with 
Ottawa in the form of a study of Regina Airport toward the goal of establishing international air service 
into the province. 
 
Our resources, and their growing value in importance justify the connection of international destinations 
from at least one point, perhaps two points, in the province. In particular terms the Transportation 
Agency will perform a policy development function, a liaison function, a research function, and offer 
assistance to organizations and communities wishing to improve or change transportation in their areas 
of concern. We have specifically directed in the Bill that the Agency will have concern for provision of 
equitable transportation facilities in rural areas, where the needs are great, and threaten to become acute, 
as policies of centralization and abandonment proceed. Provision is made in the Bill for offering 
financial support for research and development of policy in transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agency will require a strong research or monitoring component to keep pace with the 
changes in the many fields of its jurisdiction. Some of this, the major part, will be in-house but we 
anticipate a substantial use of services on contract from outside agencies, such as our universities. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, our Government believes a unified approach to transportation is vitally important 
in the interests of Saskatchewan. Some of the interests I have outlined. I urge all Members to support the 
new Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Minister a question? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the Minister wish to answer a question before he sits down? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Larter: — I notice you state here that in this Act that if anyone is doing work for a municipality, a 
corporation or by the municipality that you do have, the Minister or anyone directed by him, has the 
authority to go in and again under this Act, like many of the Acts, and check over the books, check over 
the records. Is this true? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps since it is relating directly to the Bill, we can discuss this in 
Committee of the Whole. 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1463 
 

Mr. S. J. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I want, on behalf of the official Opposition, to 
direct some rather brief comments to the Bill. 
 
It is not our intention to oppose the passage of the legislation in itself, but that isn’t to say that we don’t 
have at least some reservations about what the Government is doing, both with the Bill and what will 
follow later in consequence of the Bill. 
 
The Bill is adding, as all Members will appreciate, yet another Government agency to a multiplicity and 
host of Government agencies that already exist. It’s adding an agency in an area that is served at the 
moment by many other agencies. I refer to the Department of Municipal Affairs. I refer to the 
Department of Highways, the Highway Traffic Board and the Municipal Road Assistance Authority. 
There exists already a transportation section which used to be in the Attorney General’s Department, but 
is now under the Minister of Municipal Affairs. So one is, with this Bill, adding yet another layer of 
government on top of a government which we believe already has too many layers and is too large. So 
we have some reservations in that respect about it. 
 
Secondly, it is possible that the Agency can do some good work in the province, despite the fact that 
transportation is essentially an area of federal jurisdiction; I refer to railways, inter/extra-provincial 
trucking and aircraft; transportation in those respects is federal jurisdiction so that by and large we are 
talking about an area in respect of which the jurisdiction is vested in the federal level of government, 
rather than in our own. 
 
What I hope the Agency is not used for, is yet another arm in the conflict at the political level between 
the provincial authority and the federal authority. That it is not used, in part at least, as an instrument of 
propaganda in connection with those conflicts. There are two sides to the transportation questions that 
are going on in the province at the moment. One is the substantive side to which all of us should address 
ourselves, and in respect of which we should expect from our governments at both levels, not only some 
co-operation, but some common approach and some common willingness to solve the problems in a 
substantive way. The other side is the political side, which I respectfully suggest to the Minister, this 
Government tends to come down much harder on than does the other level of government. 
 
We have seen, and we saw a demonstration again today, and I say this to the Minister with respect, of an 
effort again to propagandize on the political level with respect to problems that are very real and 
problems that are very difficult of solution, but problems which nonetheless we are going to have to find 
some solutions to in this province before very long. 
 
The Minister spoke in connection with this Bill about rail line abandonment, and talked about the 
abandonment of rail lines which is going to take place in the province. What is going on in the province 
is not a wholesale rail line abandonment. What is happening is an indepth look preceding a 
rationalization of the rail services that are available in the province. There is clearly recognized by 
everybody a 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1464 
 

problem in respect of the transportation system in the province insofar as it relates to the transportation 
and handling of grain. The study that is going on at the moment, under Mr. Justice Hall, is a study to 
determine what the make-up of that transportation system is going to be in the future. It is rail line 
rationalization, not wholesale rail line abandonment. Despite that fact, in terms of substance, we keep 
hearing references by the Minister opposite in the main, and by others, that there is a massive wholesale 
rail line abandonment process taking place in the province. And that isn’t the fact. One cannot fault the 
process by which the matter is being pursued. As I say, the problems exist, most people recognize the 
problem as it is, the question is: what is the solution? How does one begin to attack the problem of 
finding solutions? The course that was pursued was to appoint a commission to undertake an indepth 
study spanning a year and a half or two years, of the grain-handling and transportation system in the 
three prairie provinces. 
 
Mr. Justice Hall, who is recognized I think by most Members opposite, and certainly most people in the 
province, as an eminently qualified and fair person to conduct this study, was chosen as the chairman. 
Then there were a number of assistant commissioners chosen, all on a non-political basis, all because of 
their particular backgrounds, which related to transportation and farming, and they are all prairie people. 
As Members know, the commission began by holding a series of global hearings to which they invited 
members of the grain industry and the transportation industry and farm organizations and the like to sit 
down with them and discuss with them what their views were with respect to the future of the grain 
handling and transportation system. That was the beginning. That then was followed by an extensive 
series of community hearings, public hearings to which communities and their organizations could come 
and submit their views. 
 
It will be followed shortly by a set of regional hearings in which the various regions of the prairies will 
be looked at again in a regional context, rather than in a community context. 
 
By the end of the year, Mr. Justice Hall and his commission will have made some report to the Federal 
Government and some recommendations on the rationalization of the system. 
 
One ought not at this stage to have to remind Members opposite, or indeed anyone else that that is the 
process that is going on in the province. But one keeps hearing these references to wholesale rail line 
abandonment. That, as I say, is the political side of the way in which this Government handles the 
political side as distinct from the substantive side. I say, I hope the transportation agency which is going 
to be created here will not be used as yet another instrument in that kind of political warfare. 
 
The Minister talked about the Crow’s Nest Rates. He said, there is talk about dropping the Crow’s Nest 
Rates. I think those were his words. He said, we want to devise a strategy to defend the Crow’s Nest 
Rates, and again, I ask him whether those are words again calculated to invite political enmity? They are 
clearly the latter. 
 
The province has received an assurance from the Minister of Transport and from the Federal 
Government, that the Crow’s Nest Rates themselves will not be amended in any respect unless 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1465 
 

producers themselves want some amendments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Members opposite continue to scoff at that because Members opposite continue to 
see in it some political advantage for themselves. They would rather, as a matter of fact, play the thing 
for its political advantage to them than to come to grips with the substance of the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — They know they received an assurance from the Prime Minister and they received an 
assurance from the Minister of Transport that the Crow’s Nest Rates would not be amended until 
producers themselves wanted some amendments for their own advantage. 
 
The second assurance they got from the Government of Canada, is an assurance not ever to remove the 
benefit of the Crow’s Nest Rates. There is a question that many people ask, including very responsible 
farm organizations, as to whether the benefit of the Crow’s Nest Rates should be retained in their present 
form or can be more usefully given to farmers in some other form. 
 
It is a question which I say responsible organizations are asking. This Government and the people of this 
province have received the assurance that the benefit of the Crow’s Nest Rates will continue, no matter 
what happens to its form. 
 
The Minister talked about the effort to transfer transportation of grain in the province from rails to 
trucks. And indeed, when we reach the end of rationalizing the rail system, it may be possible that some 
additional grain will have to be trucked rather than shipped by rail. It is a question which we in the 
province should legitimately be looking at in terms of assistance to communities in those events. 
 
What I ask the Minister is to look more often and talk more often to the substance of the issues and 
make an effort to come to some common approach on them, than always directing himself and the 
Government to the political side of them and never getting to the substantive side. That is the important 
thing. 
 
I hope the transportation agency which we will be creating and which I presume will be shortly staffed, 
will perform that function. I hope it will perform a substantive function, a real function in connection 
with those problems and not act either in whole or indeed in any part as simply an instrument of 
propaganda in the Government’s political warfare in connection with transportation issues. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Hon. G. Bowerman (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) moved second reading of Bill No. 71 — An 
Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act, 1974. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I won’t change my tradition in this House 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1466 
 

and extend my remarks beyond the few brief remarks on a very short bill. 
 
The Bill is clear in its intent. Those who have read it will observe that it raises two of the three advance 
accounts in The Economic Development Act having to do with the northern housing advance account 
and the construction advance account. 
 
There is another minor amendment which extends the northern housing advance account to cover staff 
housing and public buildings for staff and public use in the North. This was not previously part of The 
Economic Development Act, or not part of the housing advance account. 
 
I think it is important to point out, Mr. Speaker, that these are the two program areas which have 
contributed so much toward the improved employment opportunities in northern Saskatchewan and for 
northern people. They have resulted in the very favorable and much reduced Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan payments to the unemployed employables in the North. These employment opportunities have a 
multiplier effect on the income of the up-coming generation. And because they do they have provided an 
opportunity not afforded to northern people on other occasions, that of receiving after the completion of 
their employment, the unemployment insurance benefits which accrue to those who have been employed 
over longer seasonal periods of time. 
 
I think this has improved the morale and the outlook of northern people toward the work ethic, basically 
changed the status from that of welfare recipients to productive and contributing citizens in the North. 
The basic problem faced by the Department in both these advance accounts is the growing crystalization 
of the moneys advanced in the earlier accounts into what has become capital assets and thus it has 
reduced the working capital available and, therefore, the need to increase the advance accounts at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is not necessary to continue on the intent of the Bill. The Bill is clear, and brief, 
therefore, I move second reading of the Bill. 
 
Mr. E. Anderson (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a few words to this Bill. I believe 
the intent of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is not to create economic development. We find 
that this Bill is intended mostly to increase staff housing for an ever-growing army of civil servants. I 
think one thing that has never been mentioned, is that the housing in the North that is done under DNS is 
under the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and the money is three-quarters federal funding, and if 
they are on Indian reserves they are 100 per cent federal funded. 
 
I find it quite entertaining to see the Minister say that the great upsurge of economic development in the 
North has been mostly done by federal funds. I can see that with this Bill it provides a little more money 
for staffing and I see in the Bill they can use it to pay wages. I am sure that the Minister and the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan will go farther with their project of hiring more civil servants, 
housing with subsidized housing and sort of leaving the people of the North fending for themselves. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 
May 3, 1976 

 

1467 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The 
Tabling of Documents (Postponement) Act, 1975. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, during the last session of the Legislature, The Tabling of Documents 
(Postponement) Act, 1975 was passed. This Act was drafted with the intention that it should be drafted 
in 1975 but in fact it was not passed until 1976, due to circumstances beyond our control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — At that time a House amendment which would have changed the year 1975 to 1976 
was overlooked, that was a circumstance in our control and the Act passed the House with the 1975 date. 
We now must correct this date error and this is what the Bill will do. 
 
Secondly, the prorogation, rather than the adjournment, caused further difficulties. Rather than having 
one session with two sittings separated by the winter adjournment, prorogation gave us two separate 
sessions. First the Act allowed documents to be tabled at any time during the session rather than to have 
to strictly comply with the time limits within The Tabling of Documents Act, 1973. Some documents are 
required to be tabled during the first session which was expected to last until spring, were delayed in 
preparation and could not be tabled. The proposed amendment to Section 2 of this Act, therefore, allows 
these documents to be tabled during this, the Second Session of the Eighteenth House. 
 
There are occasions where a document may be tabled late, I think most of them are in now. The addition 
of the new Section 2A allows documents required to be tabled in this Session to be tabled during the 
Session rather than as strictly required by The Tabling of Documents Act, 1973. As I say, these are 
basically very technical amendments. I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Kaeding that Bill 
No. 50 — An Act to provide for the Conservation of Coal Resources in Saskatchewan be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — I don’t intend on speaking long, because I made most of my 
remarks the other day in response to the Minister when he introduced this Bill. 
 
As I indicated earlier, I think the Liberal caucus would not be supporting this Bill, not because of the 
content of what the Minister had to say in his remarks, not that we are against proper conservation 
techniques, but simply because the Bill is faulty in two things. First the record of the Government in 
connection with mineral resources of any kind, should leave one 



 
May 3, 1976 
 

1468 
 

at the very least to be suspicious of their intentions. I will not repeat my remarks of the other day in this 
regard. 
 
Secondly, the Bill is far too wide to accomplish the purposes set out in the Minister’s remarks. The 
provisions of the Bill permit the Government to do anything they want to do in connection with the coal 
industry in this province. The Bill already has caused a great deal of uncertainty within the industry, 
according to certain reports I have read in the Regina Leader-Post and the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. The 
Bill is far too wide as simply a conservation device. The record of the Government is such that anyone 
should look at their legislation in the mineral field with suspicion. For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal caucus will not be supporting the Bill. 
 
Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking against this coal Bill the Conservative caucus 
will also not be supporting this Bill, mainly due to the fact that we feel that it is another step towards 
nationalizing the coal industry in the near future. We have also spoken to this Bill previously and we do 
not support your entering into different phases in the coal industry. We are certainly as concerned as you 
are with the conservation of coal and the selling of coal in the province and throughout Canada. We will 
not be supporting this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 o’clock p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS

