
























































Hansard: April 08, 1976


 
955 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

20th Day 
 

Thursday, April 8, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO FORMER SPEAKER DEWHURST 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I know that all Members will join with me today in welcoming, behind the rail, 
former Speaker Dewhurst. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT: (Regina Wascana) — Mr. Speaker, in your name I should like to 
welcome students from the Elsie Dorsey School who are here with their teachers, Mr. Thompson 
and Mr. McDougall. I will be seeing them later and I hope they enjoy their stay here in the House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG: (Moose Jaw North) — It gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome 40 
students from Lindale School, from that great city of Moose Jaw once again. With them are Mr. 
Skorobohack, Mr. Mcready, their teachers, and their bus drivers Tom Creet and Marion Kaminsky. 
 
I might say to the students from Lindale, that it will be a pleasure to meet with you and please keep note 
of any questions you would like to ask me after 3 o’clock. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT: (Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, once again it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce a fine group of high school students from the St. Louis High School. They are brought here 
today by their bus driver, Mr. Topping, their vice principal Mr. Eric Harder, and one of their teachers, 
Mr. Richard Laycock. They have been touring the city today and I am sure that their tour of the 
Legislature today is going to be very educational and that they will take home very pleasant memories. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask the whole House to welcome this fine group of students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W. A. ROBBINS: (Saskatoon Nutana) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
956 

 

introduce to you and Members of the Assembly 94 students from Haultain School in Saskatoon, in my 
constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. C. Ulrich, Mr. B. Boehm and Mr. J. 
Longstaff. I hope they find the proceedings very educational and helpful to them. I hope to see them for 
a few minutes after the Question Period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER: (Saskatoon Eastview) — Mr. Speaker, if I, through you, could join the Minister 
of Health in welcoming the students from Haultain. They are not members of my constituency but when 
I was last in a school, that is while I taught, at that time the students in the gallery were in about Grade 
Two and Grade Three. I hope that they will have a good day and that they will take greetings back to the 
staff, particularly to Mr. Corey. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PORCUPINE CUBING CO-OPERATIVES LIMITED 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON: (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) — I have a question of the Minister of Co-operatives. 
Did the Department of Co-operatives or the Department of Finance either lend or guarantee substantial 
amounts to the Porcupine Cubing Co-operatives, Limited? 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON: (Minister of Co-operatives) — The Porcupine Cubing Co-operatives 
were given, I think, grants and the Government guaranteed loans. 
 
MR. NELSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is this company now in receivership and who is the 
receiver appointed? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, it is in receivership. I do not have the information as to who is the 
receiver. I would have to supply that at a later date. 
 
MR. NELSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Did the Government purchase $35,000 worth of 
shares in Porcupine Cubing Co-ops Limited, without proper authorization? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’ll have to take notice of this. I just don’t have the financial details with me. 
 
MR. NELSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is, or was the chairman of the Board of Directors of 
the Porcupine Cubing Co-ops Limited John Nitchelkov, who also was the campaign manager and 
president of the NDP for the Kelsey constituency? Did this influence the . . . 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
957 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The first part of the Members question is quite in order but I don’t think it 
is within the competence of the Minister to know whether that person was associated with a political 
party in that area. That constitutes giving information rather than receiving it. 
 
MR. NELSON: — A supplementary then. Did this particular deal influence the decision reached in 
making the loans to that particular company? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’ll have to take notice of that question as well. 
 

RISKS TO ENVIRONMENT OF POTASH MINES 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER: (Estevan) — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Minister of the Environment, 
does the Environment Department look after the monitoring of risks to the environment regarding potash 
mines? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS: (Minister of the Environment) — The Department of the Environment is 
associated with a monitoring program at the potash mines. They are associated with it. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to either the Minister of the Environment or the 
Minister of Potash. Does the Government know of the build-up of salt at these mines? 
 
MR. BYERS: — Yes, the Government is aware of salt build-up at some of these mines. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In entering the potash business, has the Government 
projected the cost of the disposal of this salt in the future? 
 
MR. BYERS: — I could not answer that question. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Could the Minister of Potash answer that question please? 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY: (Minister of the Potash Corporation) — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
designs which we have done in terms of facilities which we had contemplated constructing, we did 
contemplate the problem and the cost of salt disposal. With respect to any acquisitions we may be 
making in the future we will take into account the particular problems associated with mines we might 
acquire and costs associated with correcting these problems. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, further to potash, I wonder does the Government know that in ten 
years the salt build-up will be so 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
958 

 

expensive that it will cost millions of dollars to dispose of it? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think that is argumentative, debatable and giving information. Next 
question. Attorney General. 
 

SEDCO LOAN — SNOASIS PROPERTIES LIMITED 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Industry took 
notice with respect to a question asked by the Hon. Member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck), in respect of 
Snoasis. Mr. Speaker, I should like to report as follows: Snoasis Properties Limited has received a loan 
from SEDCO which was approved, the initial loan was approved on or about June 11, 1973. The 
shareholders at the time were one Don MacLaughlin — 40 per cent; one John Boss 20 per cent; one Dr. 
G. Mitchell — 20 per cent. Dr. Mitchell is now deceased. And Donald Todd — 20 per cent. A 
subsequent loan was also expended on or about October 24, 1973 and on or about the time additional 
shareholders were added, they being the following Dale Scrivens, Don Keith, Carl Chlopan, E. A. Kidd, 
Max Viminitz, Ken Hanson, Ken Lysyk, Ken Peal and Isabelle M. Randall. The total of those that I have 
just read being 16 per cent. 
 
This is really a question related to two civil servants. The civil servant, Don Keith, has five shares from 
Snoasis, which is 2 per cent or less of the shares issued. He is the Treasurer of Snoasis, having been 
appointed that in September or October of 1975, after Dr. Mitchell who was then the Treasurer and was 
the Treasurer at all material times with respect to the SEDCO loans, was killed in a plane crash. Mr. 
Keith had nothing to do, as the time will indicate, with the negotiating of a loan or any of the loans with 
SEDCO. 
 
With respect to Mr. Lysyk, he also has five shares, 2 per cent or less of the issued share capital at the 
same time as the additional shareholders entered, as I have outlined. At no time did Mr. Lysyk 
participate in any manner whatsoever, either by way of advice, transactions, arrangements or discussions 
of any kind between the company or SEDCO or any other department or agency of Government as 
relates to this matter. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — To the Attorney General’s statement. In regard to the Minister responsible for 
SEDCO’s statement yesterday to my question, that in his view it was acceptable to have civil servants as 
shareholders of companies that receive loans or grants from SEDCO or other Crown corporations, 
would the Minister or yourself be now willing to tell this House what other loans SEDCO has made 
involving civil servants or Members of this Legislature who are shareholders or serve at the executive 
level? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to do so because if I were to do that then I would 
feel that I would be obligated to tell this Assembly what loans Members of this Assembly might have 
with respect to Government agencies and the like. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is shaking his head and I would suggest that he should enquire of some 
Members first 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
959 

 

before he asks me to do so. But I simply say this, that I will not do this because, for example, there may 
be a company — to give an example — IPSCO, of which there may be shareholders, on the public stock 
exchange market, some of whom may be senior civil servants, some may be MLAs, in a company which 
receives SEDCO financing. And for me to do that or to say that that type of activity is excluded is totally 
unrealistic. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER: (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives) — A supplementary question, Mr. 
Speaker. Is the Attorney General today prepared to give some guidelines to this Assembly as to the 
extent to which the Government of Saskatchewan is in favor of civil servants and senior civil servants 
being involved, whether or not there is any impropriety in their dealings with SEDCO or any other 
agencies of government? Would the Attorney General be prepared to give some guidelines as to what 
extent the Government will allow senior civil servants to participate in corporations doing business with 
the Government of Saskatchewan? And would he include in that senior civil servants, MLAs, Cabinet 
Ministers and the like? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I have tabled in the Legislature a year and a half ago, a white paper 
which covered both MLAs and senior civil servants in this regard. That white paper was never translated 
into law. It is now the subject of consideration by a Law Reform Commission. 
 
I would suggest to the Hon. Leader that, indeed, there are specific guidelines, both in The Legislative 
Assembly Act and in the general code of ethics, which is clearly understood by senior civil servants, 
which may not necessitate any legislative action. 
 
I still prefer this to the legislative route, but we intend to follow through with that regardless of anything 
that may be involved here. It is under consideration by the Law Reform Commission. But I particularly 
regret any suggestions by anyone here, with respect to the Snoasis Property, referring to those, as were 
in the line of questioning yesterday, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that there was either a conflict of interest as 
some news reports indicated in CKCK Television or that there was impropriety, because if that is the 
case I will ask the Leader of the Conservative Party or the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) to 
give me specific allegations and outside of this Assembly, in which case I will take the proper course of 
action. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. At no time was there any suggestion of 
impropriety other than the impropriety of the Government having a policy that senior civil servants . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Member is making a speech. The next question. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — A supplementary to the Attorney General. Regarding your just stated policy 
which your Government has regarding the 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
960 

 

civil servant’s involvement in companies receiving loans from Crown corporations like SEDCO, do you 
not think it would be proper for your Government to lay down some guidelines, where you speak of 
conflict of interest. Then why not lay down some guidelines so that these civil servants are not placed in 
a position where they might be subject to conflict of interest? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, as far as I can see, on the example that has been given to me 
yesterday and today, the only way that civil servants are placed in conflict of interest are by some 
politicians and some political parties who seek to drag their names into political operations. 
 
So far as conflict of interest is concerned, the white paper is there and we will introduce law, but when 
you get up and make the type of insinuations that you did yesterday in Question Period, if this is akin to 
the questions of Ottawa, then I say there is no right or basis upon which this question should be asked. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 

WIRE TAP LINKS 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, if I might direct a question to the Hon. Attorney General. I gave 
him notice of my interests in this area. I understand that in the Province of Manitoba the police officials 
have a direct connection with Manitoba Telephones for the purposes of placing wiretaps. I wonder if a 
similar kind of procedure is carried on in this province, if there are continual and direct links between 
either the RCMP and Sask Tel or the Regina City Police, for instance, or such a link in this province? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised that in a sense of a direct link through some gadget or 
other implement which would allow an immediate connection, I am advised that that is not the case. 
Undoubtedly there will be a link in the sense of one or two individuals in Sask Tel, who are readily 
informed and know about such requests. They are duly authorized by the courts to be able to take the 
necessary actions. I think that is understandable, but in the sense that I took the Member’s question, that 
is to say something on a mechanical ready standby basis, I am advised that that is not the case. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I also understand from Manitoba that their 
operation is to have Manitoba telephone people actually listening as well as the police officials, is that a 
practice in this province? Are there people, therefore, who are privy to police business on a lengthy basis 
as the result of taking part as they do in Manitoba in that manner? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I think that is a fair question and I will have to take notice of it. I don’t believe 
the Member actually put it in those terms, if he did I missed it, for which I apologize. I will take notice 
and report back to him as to whether that indeed has happened. 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
961 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General has had notice, I know now that there are 
prosecutions taken for unlawful wiretaps. If that is a perceived or real problem in the administration of 
justice that wiretaps are going on which are illegal and I say though, it’s imparting information, that the 
Senate committees in the United States now feel that something in the neighborhood of 50 per cent of 
wiretaps undertaken by the police are in fact illegal though they don’t ever end up in the courts, they end 
up using that information. 
 
I wonder if the Attorney General might direct his view in that direction? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, that if the evidence in any one given case warrants a proper 
judicial action to be taken by my Department, we will so do. We have not uncovered anything in this 
regard yet. I will make the inquiries, as I indicated to the Hon. Member, with respect to Sask Tel people 
listening and will advise him in due course. 
 

WITHDRAWAL OF LEGAL ASSISTANCE FOR DESERTED WIVES & CHILDREN 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
You recently announced the withdrawal of financial assistance provided by your Department for legal 
actions under The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s Maintenance Act. This is obviously a restriction of 
individual rights to freedom of choice of their legal counsel. Can you tell us why you decided to do this? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES: (Minister of Social Services) — Mr. Speaker, I believe the explanation is in 
regard to legal assistance being available presently under the Attorney General’s Department and if they 
will receive assistance in that regard. It does not mean there will be any restrictions on any individual’s 
right. It is no longer financed through my Department, but will be through the Attorney General’s 
Department. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I understand that they are able to get legal aid 
through the Legal Aid Plan although formerly they were able to get legal aid from any lawyer for a 
minimal sum of $75, which was paid by your Department. 
 
Now, it is commonly accepted in the province that the counsel from the legal assistance clinics, because 
they are on a salary, have no obligation or any gain by arranging a good settlement or agreement. Would 
you agree Mr. Minister, that insisting that legal clinics be used will in reality force more people on 
welfare? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — No, I do not. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
962 

 

would not agree that the result is that social assistance benefits or beneficiaries are now faced with not 
having any choice about their lawyer and, indeed, being compelled to go to inexperienced, basically 
young lawyers — and I say that without any great disrespect to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I was just in the process of cutting the previous Member off because 
of the type of the phrasing of the so-called question. I think that the Member is giving information and 
debating the issue now. 
 
I will recognize the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 

ANSWER TO QUESTION OF FOOD BASKET PROGRAM 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, in replying to a question which I took notice yesterday. 
 
I am not even sure how it arose but, some time ago in the House I told the House that the cost of the 
Food Price Survey was $200,000. Then the Hon. Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) questioned 
that and as a result I took notice of the question. I am now able to give you the figures. They are 
considerably less than what I initially told the House. 
 
The cost of the Food Price Survey was $57,274.64. I guess the lesson in this is that it was a question that 
I think should not have been asked, it was a detailed question coming up in Estimates and I guess it was 
a question that I shouldn’t have answered either. 
 
But I assure the House there was no attempt to mislead the House. The information that I gave I thought 
was accurate at the time. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE: (Regina Lakeview) — Mr. Speaker, I would take exception to the fact that the 
Minister says that the question shouldn’t be asked, the question is entirely proper, but I question the 
answer of the Minister — you advised the House that the Budget for this particular program was 
$200,000. You said that you had spent $200,000. My question to you now is: where did those figures 
come from? You obviously had them in your mind somehow and that is what you gave to this House as 
information. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — They were entirely in error. 
 
MR. MALONE: — What was the error? I think we deserve an explanation from you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That is the whole explanation. I thought the cost was $200,000, that was the 
figure that I had in my mind and it was wrong. I am not sure where I got the erroneous impression from. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I don’t want to allow any more supplementaries on this, because I think we 
are pursuing something that 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
963 

 

the Minister has said he made an error on and in fact if Members recall, the Minister at the time he was 
being questioned, was saying that I will try and provide the information. So he has now provided the 
information. Now if it is not pursuing the error, you can go ahead. 
 

RECRUITING NURSES FROM GREAT BRITAIN 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON: (Souris-Cannington) — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. 
Is the Minister aware that a hospital agent in Saskatchewan is recruiting nurses in Great Britain? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I find the question vague, the next question. 
 

PROGRAM OF INCREASED GRANTS TO SCHOOL BOARDS 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER: (Saskatoon Eastview) — Mr. Speaker, a question I was going to direct to the 
Minister of Education, but I notice that he is not here, and I will therefore direct it to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
When the announcement is made of the increase in teachers’ salaries of 19.99 per cent and the increase 
in the allowance of 20 per cent, when that is made official will the Government be announcing a 
program for increased grants to school boards? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK: (Minister of Finance) — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of what the settlement 
is. My information is that negotiations are still being carried on. Any settlement, or tentative settlement 
that might be reached will have to be referred to the Saskatchewan Public Sector Prices and Incomes 
Board for quota rulings. In a case of our grants to the school boards, those have already been announced. 
The amount that we will be providing is $27.8 million. 
 
MR. PENNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware of the fact that school boards 
in setting their mill rates have had to set them with increases in the range of 8, 10 to 12 mill increases 
over last year? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the right of local governments to set their rates is there and it is 
inviolate. 
 
MR. PENNER: — A further supplementary. Would the Minister not agree that what in effect has 
happened is that the Government has clearly underestimated the cost the school boards have to operate 
under? 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
964 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! We are getting into repetition which we have been over a couple of 
times before. 
 

WITHDRAWAL OF LEGAL ASSISTANCE FOR DESERTED WIVES AND CHILDREN 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Social Services in 
connection with the new policy of paying under The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s Maintenance Act. 
 
Would the Minister not agree that if women who find themselves in an unfortunate position are 
restricted to getting assistance from only legal aid clinics, that they are being discriminated against 
because they do not have the freedom of choice of the solicitors that are available to them? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, no I don’t. I think anybody who has limited funds is really limited in 
the kinds of lawyers that they can afford to have. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary. I assume from what you say, would you not agree Mr. Minister, 
that you are saying that if you have limited funds it is all right to be discriminated against and go to only 
one certain class of lawyer? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — No, I did not say that. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The question is out of order anyway. 
 
The Member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I didn’t hear you say supplementary. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, I said it twice. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I didn’t hear it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is the Minister aware of the program in the Province of Alberta with reference to 
the provision for lawyers to people who do not have sufficient funds to pay? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Specifically no, I am not, but my understanding is that it is a very, very expensive 
program, but I will certainly take it under advisement and inform the Member of what the program is. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that in Alberta the 
lawyers are chosen from a pool of all the lawyers and the Legal Aid system . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Minister 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
965 

 

has answered that he is not aware of what the program of Alberta is. Now the Member for Nipawin is 
getting up and giving him more advice about the program. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I wonder if the Minister might give to the House, and I accept that it is not the 
kind of figure that you will have now, the cost of providing this rather measly amount of money, $75 per 
lawyer, what the cost is in a year? I think you will find it $50,000 or $60,000 and for that rather modest 
amount of money you are now depriving people of their right of freedom of choice. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I find the question out of order. It is argumentative and it is a question that 
has just been asked in the House. 
 
MR. PENNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it the practice of the Department to establish 
policy with as little research as has obviously been done into this one when what is going on . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The question is argumentative. 
 

STRIKE OF CONSTRUCTION AND GENERAL WORKERS’ UNION 
 

MR. R.H. BAILEY: (Rosetown-Elrose) — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Labour. 
 
Is the Minister aware of the strike that is currently going on now by the Construction and General 
Workers’ Union at the inland terminal site just east of Rosetown? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER: (Minister of Labour) — I am aware that there was a breakdown in the 
negotiations between the Labour Relations Council of the Construction Association and the International 
Labour Union. 
 
Some last minute efforts were made to avoid confrontation. The chief of the Industrial Relations 
Division of the Department of Labour, was in touch with the parties as late as last night. Apparently 
there was an inability at that time to resolve some of the outstanding differences and I expect that at this 
point in time there are a number of building sites that have been struck. This is my information. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is the Minister aware of the offer that has currently been made by the construction company to the 
union? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Yes, I am very much aware of the offer. I am not sure that the figure that would be 
suggested by the Labour Relations Council would be the same figure that is suggested by the Labourers 
Union. I expect in a matter of a short while the parties will have the opportunity again to come together 
and discuss further their differences and I look forward to an 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
966 

 

early resumption. I understand that the strike has not been a general one but has taken place in a number 
of selected areas. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Leading up to the current strike is the 
minister aware that last February the same union at this same site, that the business agent for the unit 
admitted before the Labour Relations Board that he had instructed the union members to work about 15 
minutes out of each hour in protest against the company’s foreman being on the job? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t have that kind of information. I expect likely that the Member is operating 
from some hearsay evidence that I have no way of verifying and I am not sure that he has, but I couldn’t 
begin to comment on that suggestion. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I don’t want to horn in on the 15 
minutes for the Member for Nipawin but there is a Point of Order that I wanted to draw to the attention 
of the House. 
 
I think that we are, in the Question Period, falling into a bad practice and not the practice of Ottawa, 
namely, because in the earlier going there were some supplementaries where Mr. Speaker didn’t hear 
them call supplementary and then another question was asked and then they were getting a little louder 
about their supplementary and the next time you would allow a supplementary. I suggest that to you, 
that in Ottawa no supplementary can be made after that particular matter is closed. It certainly is 
possible for a Member to rise and reopen the matter, but you can’t rise at some later time and say 
‘supplementary’ and cut off someone who is about to ask a question. 
 
Today, where in the past I thought perhaps they weren’t heard crying ‘supplementary’, today it was 
obvious on a supplementary that the Member gave 15 minutes or so thought to the matter and then asked 
a supplementary. 
 
I suggest to you that if that practice is allowed to follow there will be one or two questions asked and 
then we will search our minds for a way to cut out everyone else by getting up and saying 
‘supplementary’ and it is a bad practice to follow. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Any other comments on that point? 
 
Is this comment on that Point of Order? 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — No, it is not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well then I want to say to the Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) that I have 
some sympathy for the Point of Order he makes. I am sure that the Members of the Committee will take 
recognition of that point for their further deliberations. If the Member will recall at the beginning of the 
trial period I 



 
April 8, 1976 

 

 
967 

 

suggested the possibility of Members getting their supplementaries asked in direct relationship to the 
original question. However, I didn’t rule out the possibility that they could come back later with a 
supplementary. I said that they should try and restrict themselves from doing that. 
 

RECRUITING NURSES FROM GREAT BRITAIN 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I didn’t beat the Member for Wascana in the whining 
period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just ask why my question to the Minister of Health was ruled out of order, as vague. The 
question was: was the Minister aware that a hospital region in Saskatchewan is recruiting nurses in Great 
Britain, and I don’t see how a question could be put more specifically than that. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — At the point that I ruled it out of order, I said that the question was vague. In my 
view it was vague because there are probably a number of hospital districts and any one of them might 
be recruiting in Britain or somewhere else. I have doubt in my mind and this is nothing against the 
Minister personally, I am sure he has a lot of facts in his head, but I don’t know whether he would have 
all that information readily available. So, consequently, if the question was more pointed I would allow 
it. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Further, Mr. Speaker, with all respect, a simple answer of no, would have 
answered the question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am sorry, I didn’t hear that comment. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I said with all respect, I think a simple yes or no from the Minister 
would have answered that particular question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — That is beside the point because you can’t tell the Minister how to answer your 
questions and I don’t think that you should even waste the time suggesting to him how he should answer 
your questions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI: (Minister of Education) — I want to introduce a group of very fine 
people who are visiting this Chamber this afternoon from the United States. 
 
They are a group of eight students of architecture, seated in the Speaker’s Gallery, from the University 
of North Dakota, from Williston. They are here as a part of their tour throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
They are accompanied by one of their instructors. 
 
On behalf of the Members of this House I should like to extend to them a most hearty welcome to 
Saskatchewan, to this 



 
April 8, 1976 
 

 
968 

 

Chamber and hope that they will have an interesting and worthwhile tour while they visit with us here in 
our Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


