
























































Hansard: January 09, 1976


 
 

1883 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

33rd Day 
 

Friday, January 9, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

MEAT DELIVERY POLICIES OF INTERCONTINENTAL PACKERS 
 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to 
direct a question to the Minister of Industry. Is the Minister aware that Intercontinental Packers has 
instituted a rather discriminatory policy for meat deliveries to small businesses and restaurants in that 
they will not deliver meat in an order of under 100 pounds and that for every order under 200 pounds 
there is a $5 delivery charge, or if the small businessman goes to pick it up there is a $3 charge? He 
usually picks it up himself. Now in view of this, would the Minister not agree that this is hurting the 
small restaurants which do not have big storage facilities? I should like to direct this question and hope 
that maybe the Minister can provide us with an answer. 
 
Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Industry): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first I have heard of any such 
policy. I feel unable adequately to respond because I don't know whether or not it would be, in fact, a 
discriminatory action of Intercon or whether it has something to do with freight rates and changes in the 
rates of those goods that Intercon is delivering to the restaurants and the retail outlets that the Member 
for Rosetown-Elrose makes mention of. However, I will undertake to investigate it. I don't know 
whether the Member was talking about delivery of goods from Intercon within an urban centre or 
whether it is a delivery of goods from Intercon's operations throughout the province. There have been, 
on a number of occasions in the recent past, changes in freight rates on some commodities shipped and 
it may be that this is a charge to cover them. I don't know, perhaps the Member for Rosetown-Elrose 
has investigated that. But as I prefaced my remarks earlier, I am not aware of any such charge. If the 
Member can give me further information I would be more than pleased to undertake some investigation 
of it. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — My first supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I have every reason to believe, Mr. 
Minister, that this new policy is in fact true, and will the Minister, in the interest of the small business 
people within Saskatchewan once this becomes evident to him, would he then encourage the Intercon 
Packers, in which the Government has a stake itself, to withdraw this discriminatory policy? Because 
otherwise we will find that the only alternative that these people have is to order meat from Edmonton, 
probably from Burns. I found that they will deliver this at no charge and, of course, once the pork 
supplies 



 
January 9, 1976 

1884 
 

in Alberta improve, then many of the restaurants and businessmen in Saskatchewan will order directly 
from there in order to get around this charge of Intercontinental Packers. 
 
Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to investigate this accusation that the Member 
makes and upon the evidence that is found I will then undertake to make a decision as to what action 
should be taken, if any. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — The final supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister agree that this 
is a further example of the kind of service that the people of this province can expect from Government 
intervention into business? 
 
Mr. Messer: — No, Mr. Speaker, because the Member should be well aware that it is highly unlikely 
that Intercon would even be operating in the province had not the Government purchased the shares that 
it now holds in the company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

EXEMPTION OF FEDERAL TAX 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a couple of 
questions to the same Minister, the Minister of Sask Power. The Hon. Mr. E.P. Taylor, the Minister of 
Alberta and multi-national corporations and other good things. 
 
A couple of tax-related questions about the Many Islands purchase and the consumers purchase. Does 
the Government intend to try to present these companies, they are wholly-owned provincial companies, 
does the Government think that it may be possible to exempt them as quasi corporations? Do you think 
that you may be able to avoid federal tax on them and the same thing, of course, is true of Saskoil where 
you do believe you can avoid federal taxes. Part (b) of the question: when you moved into British 
Columbia on your brother socialists, did you advise them that you were moving into that province, into 
the Grizzly Field and that you were now taking your exploration out of Alberta and into yet another 
jurisdiction? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the answer to the first question is no, I am not aware of any 
discussions that took place with the British Columbia Government in regard to the acquisition of the 
portion of the Consumer Oil holdings that are in the Province of British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure that the Minister answered the first part of the question, 
that part which asked whether they thought that Consumers Gas and Many Islands was a quasi Crown 
Corporation and perhaps when he answers the supplementary he might address himself to that problem. 
 
The supplementary, again, deals with the tax situation for Saskoil and Sask Power operating in other 
jurisdictions. You 



 
January 9, 1976 

1885 
 

are exporting jobs. I wonder if you could indicate what kind of tax money you think you will be 
generating for the Alberta Government and for the British Columbia Government in a ball park way, 
and second, would the Minister indicate having gone into Alberta and British Columbia whether he 
might now be moving north into the Territories or south into the Dakotas following the rest of the oil 
industry that you have driven out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is a bit hypothetical to try and assume or predict what the 
tax revenues may be in regard to the undertakings that Consumers Oil provide us with. I guess it 
depends on the volumes of gas and the activity, the volumes of gas extracted and the activity in the 
developing of those fields, whether it be in Alberta, British Columbia or whether it be in the Territories. 
I don't think that I am in a position at this point of time to undertake any kind of prediction as to what 
levels of taxation — and there are a number of taxes, I guess, that we may be liable to pay because of 
our activity outside of the province. 
 
In regard to the latter part of the Member's supplementary question, in regard to the Territories, I think 
it is early to predict whether we will be undertaking any development in the Territories, I doubt whether 
we will with the Consumer purchase, but I think we attempted to with the announcement of the joint 
venture with our partners Soquir and Algas that we may well be exploring wherever our partners 
assume that there are reasonable chances of finding gas, which will acquire additional reserves for 
Saskatchewan. And again, I think that it is a bit early to say where we might be exploring and I don't 
think that one should assume that we will curtail the exploration of that company to simply the Province 
of Alberta or for that matter, Saskatchewan. If it seems legitimate to go elsewhere I would think it 
reasonable to assume that we would give consideration to also undertaking exploration in those other 
areas. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, possibly the Minister in answering my second supplementary could 
answer the question that I posed at first, of whether they think that these are quasi Crown Corporations 
and therefore may be exempt to federal tax? 2. Could he answer the question about the Dakotas. I 
would be very interested and I think the people of the Province of Saskatchewan would be interested in 
knowing of whether there is any possibility of Saskatchewan dollars going into the United States for 
exploration and my second supplementary . . . . I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this involves something to 
pose the question, because this is the same problem that utilities companies faced with investors in the 
’50s. 
 
How does the Minister expect, or does he not expect private companies which paid provincial, but 
particularly federal taxes, to compete with Saskoil and Sask Power in their explorations. And I wonder 
if the Minister would tell us which of the three possibilities the Minister thinks will emerge? One 
possibility is that the industry will just stay dead, if it is in Saskatchewan. The second possibility would 
be that the Federal Government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think it 



 
January 9, 1976 

1886 
 

is sufficient for the Member to pose the question and let the Minister answer it. 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to see the urgency in the content of the question. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, I haven't finished posing the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — On the Point of Order, the Member posed a question and then rhetorically began to 
answer the question and I suggest that is the responsibility of the Minister to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to see the urgency in some of the continuing supplementary 
questions that the Member alludes to. I will undertake to answer the first portion of his supplementary 
— the third supplementary, I believe, in regard to the position that we find ourselves with in regard to 
federal tax and whether or not we assume that our Consumers Oil Company, even though it is a 
subsidiary of Sask Power and is somewhat independent of the Sask Power's operations and therefore the 
Government of Saskatchewan, is a quasi Crown Corporation. I suppose in a sense it is, but I don't know 
just what situation that puts that corporation in as far as federal tax is concerned and I think that that is a 
situation that certainly my advisors will have to give consideration to. 
 

WINNIPEGOSIS FIELD 
 
Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct my question to the Minister 
of Mineral Resources. I should like to know: if to the best of your information the deep well that was 
drilled in the Winnipegosis field near Estevan has been proven by the Dome Oil Corporation? 
 
Hon. E. Whelan (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member's 
question, I understand that tests are still being undertaken both by the company and by our people, who 
are on the site, and the final decision as to the evaluation of the well and its capacity and the weight of 
the crude, and that sort of information, will be available in the next 30 days or so. 
 
Mr. McMillan: — Would the Minister be prepared to indicate if it is true that the potential production 
capacity of that well is in the neighborhood of 60 barrels a day? 
 
Mr. Whelan: — As I said in answer to the supplementary question, when the final tests are run and 
when the final decision is made I will be very pleased to make it available to the Hon. Member, but as 
yet the final decision has not been made. We don't have the final report on it. When it does become 
available you will be informed. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1887 
 

Mr. McMillan: — In way of supplementary. If the production capacity well proves to be in the 
neighborhood of 60 barrels a day and considering lifting costs from a field that deep, I would imagine 
that that would be a bit of a discouragement to oil companies. Will you be prepared, if that is the case, 
to offer new incentives in the exploration in the area of oil development in order that oil companies can 
maintain some sort of interest in the oil development in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, you will notice that the Hon. Member began his question with the word 
'if' and this makes the entire question speculative and I don't think that it is possible to speculate on 
what might happen, or when it might happen; when we have the information we will give it to you. 
 

KILBORN ENGINEERING — PROPOSED STUDY OF BREDENBURY MINE 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Is it a fact, Mr. Minister, that Kilborn Engineering of Toronto conducted the engineering study of the 
proposed Bredenbury mine, the Saskatchewan potash mine? Is it also a fact that the study indicated that 
a mine of the capacity of 3.8 million tons would cost a minimum of $3 billion and up to a maximum of 
$6 billion depending on inflationary construction costs and in relation to increased capacity? 
 
Hon. E.L. Cowley (Minister of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the name of the 
engineering firm is correct. With respect to the cost, I am not prepared to comment as it is not in the 
public interest. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question. Is it also a fact that Dominion Securities, a bonding 
company of Toronto, was given this study to do a financial assessment and could the Minister indicate 
what was their recommendation? 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, a part of the Kilborn study was financial analysis, which I believe 
Dominion Securities was involved in. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: — A second supplementary. Could the Minister tell me, is it a fact that when the 
financial assessment was done of all the studies in relation to cost engineering on the Bredenbury mine, 
that the recommendation was to the Government that they would be much better off letting private 
investment develop the potash industry and they would obtain more out of the reserve tax than by 
proceeding with the Bredenbury mine itself? 
 
Mr. Cowley: — No. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1888 
 

QUESTION ON CREIGHTON MEETING 
 
Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I believe yesterday a question was asked in the House 
about whether I was to be in Creighton, I think it was, on the 17th of January. 
 
First, I am not scheduled to be in Creighton, or Flin Flon, or anywhere in that area at that time and so 
far as I can ascertain I have no invitation to be there and have not been asked to be there by anyone 
whom we can find. 
 
Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, if I might, pose then to 
the Premier, a supplementary question. 
 
Is the Premier aware that the mayor and council of the village of Creighton are extremely concerned 
about the recent announcement in the Saskatchewan Gazette about the extent of DNS responsibilities 
and will the Premier give his categorical assurance to the councillors and to the mayor of Creighton that 
DNS, as the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan did in this House, that DNS has no intention 
whatsoever of taking over the administration of the municipality of Creighton, unless the municipal 
councillors request the DNS to do so? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that the village of Creighton or the town of Creighton is 
concerned in the manner that is suggested by the Hon. Member. I think that if they are concerned they 
would probably write or communicate with me. So far as I am aware they haven't done so. That doesn't 
indicate a high degree of concern. But if they do communicate with me, asking for assurances that DNS 
does not propose to take over the administration of the town of Creighton, we would be more than 
happy to supply those assurances. 
 

TABLING OF WHITE PAPER ON BUSINESS CORPORATION LAW OFFICE 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I'd like to place before this Assembly the 
White Paper on a new business corporation law office for Saskatchewan. 
 
Those familiar with The Companies Act of Saskatchewan will recognize the need for revision. With 
this in mind a committee was struck consisting of the Registrar of Companies, the Chairman of the 
Securities Commission and a senior Crown solicitor. 
 
The Committee has drafted and submitted its report and in order to stimulate discussion and 
consideration of the issues involved I am placing before the Legislature this report as a White Paper. 
 
Any person, group of persons or organizations desirous of expressing their views on the proposals may 
do so by directing their comments and their submissions to the Registrar of Companies. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a rather long and 



 
January 9, 1976 

1889 
 

involved document. I am tabling it at this time because I understand the Law Society has at the end of 
January a meeting at which they wish to go through this and make comments to the Government. I am 
sure there will be many individuals and companies in Saskatchewan who will be interested in it. I may 
say, also, it is modelled on federal law, new federal law, in an attempt to bring some conformity to 
corporation law across Canada. 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, speaking on behalf of the official Opposition, we 
welcome the tabling of the White Paper. I have a question I should like to direct on the matter . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the Member give me a moment please. 
 
Mr. Lane: — We welcome the proposals that the Provincial Secretary has given. Certainly company 
law in Canada and provincially is archaic to say the least. It doesn't reflect the realities. We find it 
somewhat strange though that here we have a White Paper on Business Corporations in the Province of 
Saskatchewan when the official Opposition has asked for two months for studies, white papers, reports, 
feasibility studies, marketing studies, financial studies on potash and we haven't been given one thing 
by that particular Minister or any other Member of the Treasury Benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 52 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
52 showing: 
 

(1) The Number of people spending 14 or more days in the Saskatchewan institutions for the mentally 
ill in the 1974-75 fiscal year. (2) The number of people held in Saskatchewan institutions for the 
mentally ill as a result of having been found not guilty of some crime by reason of their insanity, in 
the 1974-75 fiscal year. (3) The number of people committed to a Saskatchewan institution for the 
mentally ill in each of the mental health regions pursuant to Section 12 of The Mental Health Act, the 
cumulative total for the Province, and the number of people so committed under Section 12 who were 
held in the institution for the mentally ill as a result of a further order or a renewal certificate, and the 
cumulative total thereof for the Province. (4) The number of people seen by psychiatrists in each of 
the mental health regions pursuant to Section 18(1) of The Mental Health Act, the cumulative total for 
the Province, the percentage of such persons seen who were thereafter admitted in each of the mental 
health regions, and the cumulative total thereof for the Province. (5) The number of people in each 
mental health region who requested reviews pursuant to Section 24 of The Mental Health Act in the 
1974-75 fiscal year and the cumulative total for the Province. (6) The number of such reviews 

 



 
January 9, 1976 

1890 
 

pursuant to Section 24 of The Mental Health Act which were decided in favor of the patient and 
resulted in the patient's release from the mental institution shortly thereafter in each mental health 
region in the 1974-75 fiscal year, and the cumulative total for the Province. (7) The number of 
applications in each mental health region made to the Court of Queen's Bench pursuant to Section 26 
of The Mental Health Act in the 1974-75 fiscal year and the cumulative total for the Province. (8) The 
number of such appeals in each mental health region which were granted pursuant to Section 26 of 
The Mental Health Act in the 1974-75 fiscal year and the cumulative total for the Province. (9) The 
number of applications made by people held by reason of their having been found not guilty of some 
crime by reason of their insanity for release to the review panel for the criminally insane in the 
1974-75 fiscal year. (10) The number of patients taken into Saskatchewan institutions for the mentally 
ill without their permission who had not been found not guilty of some crime by reason of their 
insanity in the 1974-75 fiscal year. (11) The number of patients receiving ECT treatment (shock 
treatment) first with their consent and secondly without their consent in the 1974-75 fiscal year. (12) 
The names and addresses of the members of the review panels currently serving under Section 22 of 
The Mental Health Act. (13) The names and addresses of the members of the review panel for the 
criminally insane currently serving. 

 
He said: I'd like to congratulate the Attorney General on finding so many Cabinet Ministers for today's 
question period. He must be digging them right out of the woodwork. 
 
I will shortly be delivering to the Press a text of my remarks, a prepared text. I propose only to speak 
briefly about this matter . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The same text . . . 
 
Mr. Merchant: — No, you will get a text and they will get a text. Part of the reason that I decided to do 
that is because in dealing with this matter I am concerned to a certain extent that the position that I have 
asked be fairly clearly understood. I am asking for information. Let me begin by saying I asked for all 
of this information on October 1, by way of a letter to the Ministry of Health. I didn't even receive a 
reply to that letter, there was no reaction whatsoever. Neither did I get the information, nor did I see the 
letter from the Minister or from the Department saying why that information would not be forthcoming. 
 
I suggest again, to this House that that is really the way the Government operates when they receive 
questions, at least that is the way they operate with my questions. Nine out of ten questions, I get the 
answer, and I get the answer promptly, and when I ask a good question it is completely ignored. When I 
ask a question that the Government finds somewhat embarrassing they just ignore the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't propose to read each of the motions. The questions are all the same, except they 
deal in different 



 
January 9, 1976 

1891 
 

years. Mr. Speaker, these are matters which I find it difficult to get information on. It is difficult for me 
to get this information. It is difficult for private psychiatrists to get this kind of information. Indeed, I 
have talked to private psychiatrists who have advised me that when they were in the Government 
service could and did get into a great deal of trouble when they attempted to take out of the mental 
health region in which they served copies of information or information which they thought might be of 
advantage to them for two purposes: (1) in treating patients thereafter, and (2) for proving the suspicion 
that some psychiatrists have that the mental health regions, if not acting improperly, certainly have the 
potential to act improperly, if you follow what I mean. 
 
These questions will eventually be incorporated when I have the answers, into amendments to the 
legislation which I propose to make. Those are the only comments I have to make, Mr. Speaker. I hope 
that the information will be forthcoming. It is fairly straightforward. I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded 
by Mr. Cameron (Regina South). 
 
Hon. W. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I obviously took the opportunity to discuss 
with officials the implications of the requests made in the Order for Return. I am informed that the 
answers won't be readily available because it is a very difficult mass of material requested in the return. 
Also, they will have to do a considerable amount of investigation in relation to it. I have an idea that we 
should suggest it go before the anti-inflation board because the cost involved is going to be substantial. 
I assure you it is going to take many, many hours in order to tabulate all this information. I am informed 
that it is possible that some of the information may not be procurable at all, because it is requesting 
some information that is in the hands of private psychiatrists, which may not be available to the 
Department. Nevertheless we will be doing our utmost to answer all of the questions as best we can and 
I beg leave to adjourn debate on it. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 53 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
53 showing: 
 

(1) The number of people spending 14 or more days in Saskatchewan institutions for the mentally ill 
in the 1973-74 fiscal year. (2) The number of people held in Saskatchewan institutions for the 
mentally ill as a result of having been found not guilty of some crime by reason of their insanity, in 
the 1973-74 fiscal year. (3) The number of people committed to a Saskatchewan institution for the 
mentally ill in each of the mental health regions pursuant to Section 12 of The Mental Health Act, the 
cumulative total for the Province, and the number of people so committed under Section 12 who were 
held in the institution for the mentally ill in each of the mental health regions beyond 72 hours as a 
result of a further order or a renewal certificate, and the cumulative total thereof for the Province. (4) 
The 



 
January 9, 1976 

1892 
 

number of people seen by psychiatrists in each of the mental health regions pursuant to Section 18(1) 
of The Mental Health Act, the cumulative total for the Province, the percentage of such persons seen 
who were thereafter admitted in each of the mental health regions, and the cumulative total thereof for 
the Province. (5) The number of people in each mental health region who requested reviews pursuant 
to Section 24 of The Mental Health Act or the then comparable Section in the 1973-74 fiscal year and 
the cumulative total for the Province. (6) The number of such reviews pursuant to Section 24 of The 
Mental Health Act or the then comparable Section which were decided in favor of the patient and 
resulted in the patient's release from the mental institution shortly thereafter in each mental health 
region in the 1973-74 fiscal year and the cumulative total for the Province. (7) The number of 
applications in each mental health region made to the Court of Queen's Bench pursuant to Section 26 
of The Mental Health Act or the then comparable Section in the 1973-74 fiscal year, and the 
cumulative total for the Province. (8) The number of such appeals in each mental health region which 
were granted pursuant to Section 26 of The Mental Health Act or the then comparable Section in the 
1973-74 fiscal year, and the cumulative total for the Province. (9) The number of applications made 
by people held by reason of their having been found not guilty of some crime by reason of their 
insanity for release to the review panel for the criminally insane in the 1973-74 fiscal year. (10) The 
number of patients taken into Saskatchewan institutions for the mentally ill without their permission 
who had not been found not guilty of some crime by reason of their insanity in the 1973-74 fiscal 
year. (11) The number of patients receiving ECT treatment (shock treatment) first with their consent 
and secondly without their consent in the 1973-74 fiscal year. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in relation to the Minister's comments, I accept the Minister's comments at face 
value. As I had said I had intended only to speak briefly to the matter since I get the opportunity 
notwithstanding the fact that you adjourned the debate so I address you again, perhaps I will take that 
opportunity. 
 
As I said, I will be proposing amendments to The Mental Health Act and any information along these 
lines that is available I would very much appreciate. 
 
I don't believe with all due respect, that the information that I have requested is in the hands of any 
private psychiatrists. If I may, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate briefly some of the areas that concern me. 
 
For instance, the matter regarding people being held by reason of having been found not guilty of some 
crime by reason of their insanity. These are people who, and I have long said as a criminal lawyer, that 
you do a great disservice to your client in having your client found not guilty of murder by reason of his 
insanity. Because at least if you have him found guilty of murder, he gets out in six or eight or 20 years 
or whatever. If you have him found not guilty by reason of his insanity, he very likely never gets out. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1893 
 

That is the reason that I ask the questions about reviews of the criminally insane. And that for instance 
is an area where it is quite simple and easy for the Minister to provide that information. 
 
An area that concerns me, and I stress again that first, I don't believe that there is a particular problem in 
the Regina Health Region. Part of the reason that I don't think there is a problem in the Regina Health 
Region because there is a sufficient number at least of both private and public psychiatrists. So that in 
the larger population areas things work well. I know, however, and I have seen the documentation that 
establishes that there are abuses being committed under Section 11 and Section 12. I am not saying, 
Section 11 and Section 12, Mr. Speaker, Section 12 is a section by which a person can be held in a 
mental institution against his will for 72 hours on the signature of one doctor. If at the end of 72 hours 
they want to keep the patient in the mental institution, they have to get the signature of a second doctor. 
Frequently, though the sections clearly state that they have to indicate why they are holding that patient, 
frequently the material states nothing at all. The nature of the amendments that I am thinking of are to 
take the matters and have some sort of compulsory review by the courts. That is the reason that I then 
move to the requests for information, the questions about the review board under Section 24 and second 
review that is available to a Court of Queen's Bench under Section 26. 
 
Now again that information is completely available to you. You have to know within each region how 
many reviews were conducted and at what time the reviews were conducted. 
 
That information, Mr. Minister, I suggest shouldn't be difficult to come by. I am afraid that you will 
find that the review boards are failing in two ways. First, they tend to take as gospel, the opinion of the 
psychiatrists and so on in their region. That is part of the problem of having review boards in a region 
instead of having that kind of a review made a part of a review by an independent body or an 
independent judge, a judge of the District Court or a judge of the Court of Queen's Bench. 
 
The second problem is even a greater problem. A person is committed to an institution not voluntarily, 
is committed to an institution because he has mental problems. He may, if he likes, apply for a review. 
But he is unlikely to apply for a review. Indeed he may get comfortable in some ways in that mental 
institution. He may fall into the trap of not applying for a review. There is no provision for counsel or 
for legal assistance for him. In the review, again the Court of Queen's Bench is less likely because there 
is no provision for counsel and there is no automatic review and automatic consideration by the courts. 
 
The nature of the amendments that I am drafting will look at that area and probably be suggesting to the 
department that some kind of automatic reviews by the courts be possible. I don't think that that would 
be an onerous problem for the Department or for the institutions and that is part of the reason that I 
want to know the numbers of people who are held without their will who are not criminally insane. 
 
There is another area where I am sure the numbers are 



 
January 9, 1976 

1894 
 

available and it is important. Mr. Speaker, any wife involved in a martial dispute can go before a 
magistrate and swear out a complaint and have her husband picked up and taken to a mental institution, 
taken to a mental institution because she thinks he's crazy. And indeed, I tell you that I get the 
impression in marriage breakdowns when people's minds are pressed as hard as they can that many of 
them do appear to be a little crazy at the time. But that's not uncommon for these reviews to be taken. 
Now again I am not sure that there is that much abuse, I think the magistrates are careful, but I think 
that our Act should adopt The British Health Act. Our Act was taken almost holus-bolus from the 
British Act but for some reason under the British legislation only a social worker or a constable of some 
police force, or some other people in the health units and so on, are able to swear out the complaints 
before a magistrate, while under our Act anyone is able to swear out the complaints before a magistrate. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with all of these things we are not talking about large numbers of people being 
involved. It is a potential for abuse which affects a very small minority of people, but it does affect 
people who are mentally ill and it indirectly affects the freedom of all of us, it puts the freedom of all of 
us in jeopardy. We know and I think the Minister would agree that there are abuses in other 
jurisdictions, there are abuses in the United States particularly, the power of psychiatrists in mental 
institutions. And I think that before that kind of thing results here that we should be stiffening, 
tightening up regulations. I know, indeed, that the Minister is concerned about this matter and I know 
indeed that studies are being conducted and I have in fact discussed the matter with some of the 
Minister's officials as well as with various psychiatrists and so on in Regina and elsewhere. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has said that some of the information may be difficult to come by and I 
accept this. I wonder, in fairness, and indeed I am relatively satisfied that all of the Ministers are fair, I 
wonder if the Minister might consider and he will have an opportunity to speak on each of these if he 
likes, I wonder if the Minister might consider informally forwarding to me the information in a 
piecemeal way if indeed he is saying that it may take a month or two to get all of the information. I 
think that some of this information is probably readily available. Some of it may well be available 
within a week or ten days and I hope that the Minister might consider forwarding that to me in a 
piecemeal manner although at some point you'll have to reply in a formal and proper way in the House. 
I assume, Sir, that this will be the last time that I will speak, unless something comes up with regard to 
these matters. I must say I should rather like having an opportunity to speak last. I repeat, I am not 
pointing any fingers at either the psychiatric services in general or any particular psychiatric health 
region, but I do think and I expect the Minister shares my concern that there are reasons for legitimate 
inquiries and potential to tighten the Act and it is for that reason that I have asked for that information. 
 
I now move this Motion for Return No. 53. 
 
Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make only a few brief 
remarks with respect to this one as well. I would be the first 



 
January 9, 1976 

1895 
 

to admit and I am not very familiar with all the implications and problems related to psychiatry, by any 
means, that this is a very difficult field. I think even psychiatrists often are not unanimous at all in terms 
of their methods of treating people, etc. I am not the least bit critical of the Member for wanting to get 
information with respect to this particular field and we will do our utmost to get all of the information 
as quickly as we can. I am informed by the officials of the Department that it is a horrendous task to get 
all of this information and I have only talked briefly to the head of Psychiatric Services and also to the 
Deputy Minister with respect to it. However, on the basis of an assurance to us that we will do our 
utmost to get the information, I hope this will satisfy the Member. Therefore, again, I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RETURN NO. 51 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu'Appelle) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 51 showing: 
 

(1) The names of all Government Departments, Branches, Agencies or Boards which supplied mailing 
lists to any individuals, political parties, partnerships or corporations in the year 1975. 

 
(2) In cases where the Department, Branch, Agency or Board maintains records of such information, 
the names of those to whom such mailing lists were supplied. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I would ask this question of the Government to supply the Legislature with the 
names of all Government departments, branches, agencies or boards which supplied mailing lists to any 
individuals, political parties, partnerships or corporations in the year, 1975. I would be very surprised if 
I did not get the information from the Government. I am a little surprised it was made into a Return, the 
question was tabled some days ago. The reasons are obvious, in 1974 the Government of Saskatchewan 
passed legislation which is designed to protect the privacy of individuals. My argument and the 
argument of the official Opposition is quite simple that, in effect, the law and the intent of the law of 
privacy should apply to governments and in particular apply to governments. 
 
The Privacy Act was introduced with great fanfare by the Attorney General at that time and one aspect 
of privacy is the use of the name, the use of letters, diaries or other personal documents of a person, the 
use of a name or likeness of a person. Basically supplying information that that person's private 
information could not be made. People supply information to the Government, either because they are 
required to or voluntarily. In most cases they supply to governments because they are required to and in 
the past the Government has supplied information on mailing lists for motor vehicle companies to give 
them a record of individuals in Saskatchewan. It has been somewhat of a profitable venture on behalf of 
governments and I am not just referring to the Government opposite but past governments, but I think 
that the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know if their name is used by the Government or if they 
are on mailing lists of governments, to what use their names are being put. I think that two years ago I 
asked this question 



 
January 9, 1976 

1896 
 

with very little modification of the Government opposite and got a reply. The Government was getting 
anywhere from one or approximately one-quarter of one cent per name. As a result of that question the 
understanding was given to the Legislature by the Minister that the Government was going to review its 
policy on the supplying of mailing lists and make sure that the supply was not abused and anybody who 
wanted to come out and just pay for it wouldn't necessarily get it. There had to be some good and 
reasonable reason for the supplying of the list of names. As I say, two years ago in this Legislature the 
information was supplied based on precedent in the undertaking of the Government at that particular 
time. I am sure that all Members will join with me as I move this Return 51, seconded by the Member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart) in order to ensure that the privacy of individuals is protected 
and the privacy laws are applied to governments, boards, agencies and commissions as well as to the 
average citizen. 
 
Hon. E.L. Cowley (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am going to be very brief here. I think I 
agree with the Member that there should be no difficulty in providing this information. Just to advise 
the House, I had a telephone message from one of my officials yesterday who indicated some difficulty 
on the note that I got. In reading the note I think he must has misread the question, but in any event with 
due caution I am going to ask it to be adjourned. I don't think there will be any difficulty in passing it 
later. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 27 — REPEAL OF GIFT TAX ACT, 1972 AND THE SUCCESSION DUTY 

ACT, 1972. 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Prince Albert-Duck Lake) moved, seconded by Mr. Cameron (Regina South): 
 

That this Assembly requests the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately introduce legislation to 
repeal The Gift Tax Act, 1972 and The Succession Duty Act, 1972. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move this Resolution. I should like for the benefit 
of the new Members, just to review some of the history of this particular Act, how we arrived at this 
position. 
 
For years and years we had a Gift Tax Act and as a companion piece really, we had The Succession 
Duty Act or Death Duties or Inheritance Tax, or whatever you wanted to call it and as a companion 
piece of legislation we always had The Gift Tax Act. This was federal legislation, a federal tax but in 
fact in later years I think 75 per cent of it was returned to the province of origin. In other words the situs 
of an estate whatever province that was in when that individual died and the tax of his estate or her 
estate, the results of that tax, the money taken in from that tax was returned, or 75 per cent of it, to the 
province of origin. The gift tax, of course, as we know it, to avoid or to close an obvious loophole that 
would allow people as they became 



 
January 9, 1976 

1897 
 

older and decided they wanted to avoid the death duties or the succession duties to hand over their 
estate to their heirs before they died and as a result would avoid paying this tax. Now I think there may 
have been at one time a good reason for this tax. The principle behind it being that if you allowed 
people generation after generation to accumulate wealth and hold onto it, that the wealth tended to end 
up in a very small number of hands, of very few people. The money had been earned by the efforts 
usually of many people, and a great deal of the profits that had gone into the establishing of this wealth 
and the estate had been the results of the labors of a great many people and so it seems reasonable that 
that money be shared among all Canadians. I think that it was also reasonable that you gave each 
generation the opportunity to earn their own money, to start fresh. 
 
When we have a fairly straightforward economy and a relatively simple economy, not as complex as it 
is today, and when the tax structure was not nearly as great as it is today, the tax rates were not nearly 
as great as they are today, I say I think there was a great deal of merit in this tax. But any need for this 
tax and any fairness and equity of this tax actually disappeared after the Federal Government 
introduced, sometime after 1969, the taxation reforms based on the White Paper that was debated from 
one end of this country to the other for a great many months and resulted in a great change in the whole 
principle and the bases of taxation in Canada. Things like capital gains were put on, just as one 
example. A great many people at the bottom end of the income tax rolls were excused from paying 
taxes and the rates, the actual amounts that people in the higher income tax brackets paid were 
increased as a result of things like the capital gains tax. 
 
The Federal Government then decided to remove themselves from this field and a great many provinces 
followed suit, including the Province of Saskatchewan and the Province of Alberta. 
 
After the NDP were re-elected in 1971 they subsequently in 1972 reintroduced The Succession Duty 
and Gift Tax Act and I think, five other provinces went along with them and as a result for a while the 
Federal Government, very foolishly in my opinion, did the collecting for them. Now I understand the 
province does the collecting themselves. 
 
I should like to review some of the things that I said on speaking to the Act bringing back succession 
duties in 1972 here in the Province of Saskatchewan. I would remind some of the newer Members of 
the thinking that went on then by the people of this side of the House and I would hope that they would 
take it into consideration and join with me and with Members of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in 
requesting and urging the Government to reconsider this tax and remove it. 
 
I said at that time, in part: 
 

I think we need to take a look at the history of tax reform in Saskatchewan because this is all part of 
the entire package as far as Saskatchewan people are concerned. We had the White Paper introduced 
back in October of 1969. We had hearings, committees, representation, provincial conferences and 
then the House of Commons considered it, debated it in the resulting Bill. The result, a new system of 
taxation. The result was new rates, the elimination of hundreds of 



 
January 9, 1976 

1898 
 

thousands from our tax rolls. The addition of capital gains tax and the elimination of estate and gift 
tax as part, and I emphasize as part of the package which was accepted. The result for Saskatchewan, 
however, which has eliminated 75 per cent of the succession duties is now to add a full and tougher 
tax which was not part of the tax reform. I feel this is a breach of faith for present and future earners 
and savers in Saskatchewan who accepted tax reform based upon the elimination of death duties or 
death taxes only to find out these were not the terms that they thought they were accepting. I think it 
makes a mockery of tax reform, Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Federal Government has vacated the field that tax reform apparently intended to tax all increases 
of wealth by the income tax and corporation tax and the new capital gains tax which was levied at a 
progressively higher rate as a person's income increased. On this philosophy which was considered an 
unnecessarily heavy burden to tax additionally a person's life savings, every dollar which will have 
already been taxed sufficiently and in this regard it is in fact double taxation. Three provinces in 
Canada have and continue to have succession duty taxes, namely British Columbia, Ontario and 
Quebec. We know that B.C. and Ontario are considering lessening the tax by increasing exempt 
transfers from husband to wife and by increasing exemptions on total estates. Six provinces, including 
Saskatchewan, have invaded this field as a result of Mr. Benson's offer to administer the tax collection 
temporarily and I emphasize temporarily. Already the Government in Nova Scotia has indicated this 
tax is a temporary revenue. Any withdrawal by one Maritime province could force withdrawal by 
others and the two socialist governments of Saskatchewan and Manitoba could find themselves alone 
with the necessity of collecting the tax themselves. 

 
I want to stop there, Mr. Speaker, and point out that this has happened, that the Government of 
Saskatchewan now has that responsibility themselves. 
 

Most important for Saskatchewan is that our neighboring wheat, cattle and oil producing Province of 
Alberta is staying out of this taxation. I think this is a very, very serious situation. They are staying 
out of this taxation. Already they have a great growth and large revenues and offer their people a 
better standard of living and, in fact, in most areas a gentler climate. Alberta is a 'have' province, but 
similar in so may respects to Saskatchewan that our people can easily decide to spend their lives 
working there in order to keep their savings for their families. I'm sure that Alberta officials knowing 
all this are quietly laughing at Saskatchewan's stupidity and rubbing their hands in glee at the 
prospects of a shift of productive population to their province. 

 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that this has happened and it is continuing to happen. 
 

Now in all the years that Saskatchewan shared the Federal 



 
January 9, 1976 

1899 
 

Estates Tax I don't think we ever collected much more or even as much as one per cent of our total 
budget. So while the proposed tax is very heavy for some estates, the total collection has meant little 
to the province. Now, regardless of any person's view on what should happen to estates, any tax 
which collects relatively so little I don't think is a worthwhile tax when you consider the results that it 
might and I think probably will have (in people moving out of Saskatchewan.) 

 
Now why has Saskatchewan collected so little. It has been a Saskatchewan economic fact of life that 
most people with productive careers who have earned and saved a lot of money have retired and 
moved to less rigorous climates to enjoy the balance of their lives. We only need to review this 
winter's climate to know why. They also take their savings with them however acquired such as 
pension benefits, the result of the sales of their farms or business, sales of their house and all their 
insurance policies, investment in bonds and shares and all else that they have. As a result when in due 
course they die all estate tax, succession duties, are collected by other governments and none by 
Saskatchewan where the money was earned. Unfortunately every person who moves vacates a house, 
an apartment and a newcomer, if any, occupies what has been vacated. Hence the economic activity 
of a new house or apartment is created in provinces like British Columbia and Saskatchewan again 
loses out. Additionally, all sale tax on furniture, the purchase of cars, clothes, other essentials are 
collected elsewhere. So, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan loses twice. 1. The estate or succession duty tax 
which we do not collect on the savings earned by formers residents. 2. All of the taxes from the 
economic activity which leaves with the person and is lost to us for as long as they live. It is also an 
economic fact that the people with the largest businesses are also the people who can most easily 
move to milder climates. So now to the already rugged climate, if this Government adds a tougher 
economic climate, surely it guarantees that people whose death it is intended to tax simply will not be 
here to have their estates taxes. Indeed, if they can move to B.C. where such taxes can be less, or 
Alberta where there is no such tax, why in fact should they stay? How this can help Saskatchewan 
which needs population, which needs taxpayers, is beyond me. It is clear, however, that this 
philosophy and this punitive taxation will help the provinces in Canada which are already better off 
than we are, based upon the obvious fact that such a tax chases people away. It chases away much 
needed investment from Saskatchewan and because they will collect a relatively small amount of 
money, the previous government, which was a Liberal government, abolished, the provincial share of 
the tax. 

 
This present NDP Government, at that time, placed it back on the statute books. 
 
Now that tax has been on for three years, 1972-73-74-75 and if you look at the Estimates they have put 
an amount in the years before and for this year right now of $4 million. Four million dollars, they say, 
the Government opposite says we collect from these two taxes. Well I don't know if they collect $4 
million, I don't believe they do. They say that is the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1900 
 

average. I seriously doubt that that is the average, I seriously doubt if they succeeded that much or have 
collected that much or they would raise the amount each year. The amount is just an estimate and I 
realize that no one can tell and foresee how much they will collect in that particular tax, but we know 
that they are not collecting any more than $4 million or very little more. This means that with a budget 
of over $1 billion we are collecting less than one-quarter of one per cent of our revenue. 
 
I think another new factor has emerged that makes the consideration of this Resolution even more 
important and that is the change of government in the Province of British Columbia. There is no 
question that the Province of British Columbia or the new government, will do away with this tax. So 
now we will have the situation where both the Province of Alberta and the Province of British 
Columbia don't have this punitive type of tax on the estates of people. With the result they again create 
the incentive for successful energetic people to move out of Saskatchewan, if they can, and locate their 
headquarters and themselves in those other two provinces, the incentive now is even greater. 
 
The Government opposite says let's talk about how many people we have lost. Well, we have lost, I 
think, a great many people. Why wouldn't we lose people, why would people stay here in this climate 
and in this province, with a government which by its every action is anti-business, whether they are 
small or large; why would they stay here when on top of all this when upon their death and trying to 
hand over these assets they have acquired, they will be taxed by the Province of Saskatchewan, when 
they can avoid that by simply moving to Alberta or to British Columbia? 
 
I think we have to look again at the philosophy of why the Government opposite insists on this tax. It 
cannot justify this tax by saying that it is a great revenue producer. They never could, but when the 
budget was $500 million or $600 million, if the income from this source of taxation was again three or 
four million, as it now is, the argument was it's up a little. But today with our budget and the budget we 
will be looking at next year, probably 1.2 or 1.3 billion dollars, you are down to less than one-quarter of 
one percent. By no stretch of the imagination can anyone say, with any reasonable fairness or accuracy 
that they need — the Government of Saskatchewan — needs this source of revenue. So they do it for 
another reason obviously and the other reason brings out, I think, more clearly that anything else they 
do, it brings out more clearly as even in Bills 1 and 2 they are moving to seize wealth just as they go to 
the potash industry. It brings out their philosophy even more clearly than it did in Bill No. 42 where 
they moved in and seized the oil rights. It brings it out even more clearly than when they brought in the 
amendments to The Forest Act when they again moved in on business and seized and took over control. 
Because when they attack these businesses they could lay some claim, but they could lay some claim to 
the fact that they were attacking large business, multinational corporations which of course upsets them 
a great deal except when they try to get them back in here, but they could lay some claim to the fact 
they were attacking big business and business whose headquarters were outside of Saskatchewan and in 
many cases outside of Canada. 
 
I don't agree with this philosophy. I don't agree with this narrow philosophy that says we keep other 
people out because they are large and successful or they don't happen to be headquartered 



 
January 9, 1976 

1901 
 

in Saskatchewan, or even necessarily in Canada. It we continue this kind of philosophy we are in for a 
great deal of difficulty of attracting investment, sound investment, in the years ahead in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But when you talk about succession duties, any pretense of attacking large business, any pretense of 
attacking business that is headquartered outside of Saskatchewan, of course, is gone, because this tax is 
aimed at Saskatchewan people and is aimed at small businessmen, farmers, ranchers, Saskatchewan 
businessmen. No question about that! And how the Government opposite can stand up and say, we must 
do everything we can to encourage local business, we don't want to continue to see our economy 
handed over to large multinational corporations or people outside of Saskatchewan over whom we have 
no control and at the same time, year after year, force Saskatchewan business people to sell out their 
businesses to these same large multinational corporations or large corporations not based in 
Saskatchewan, just to raise the money to pay the succession duties or the gift tax. And that is what 
happens, of course it happens. We have a few people left in the retail business in Saskatchewan who are 
headquartered in Saskatchewan. We have some large ranchers; we have some large farmers and thank 
God we have them and the only way they will continue to be large and continue to be able to stay in the 
marketplace, the only way the people who are in the hotel business in Saskatchewan can compete with 
the chain multinational large corporations which are building hotels all over this nation, all over the 
world, if they could stay successful it is because they would be able to hand the assets over from one 
generation to another. 
 
When you tax them, you don't tax Eaton's; you don't have a succession duty tax on Simpson's; you don't 
have a succession duty tax on any multinational corporation or any corporation that is not headquartered 
in Saskatchewan. The only people whom you get at are the people who are here. And anybody who 
thinks that you are not driving them out of Saskatchewan, you are just living in a dream world so why 
do you do it? You know that as well as I do. You know what the landlords would do if he could put his 
headquarters at Edmonton or very soon in Vancouver as against Regina or Saskatoon, or Moose Jaw, 
but naturally it is the other things all being equal, and I suggest they are not equal — but if all others 
things were equal he would naturally go and anyone else would, and locate where the tax climate was 
better; the tax rates were better and where I could hand over my business to my wife or my sons or 
daughters or whomever I choose to without paying a heavy penalty in the form of estate tax or a gift 
tax. But other things are not equal, that's the other side of the coin that makes this tax even more 
reprehensible, more regressive as far as Saskatchewan is concerned. The climate is not equal; they have 
a better climate in Alberta and they have a much better climate in British Columbia. The economic 
opportunities to do business in the three western provinces are not equal. There is more money and 
there are more people and there are better markets in Alberta and in British Columbia. 
 
So we start off with the deck stacked against us in Saskatchewan no matter who is the government. 
Well then, if we even stack the deck further, or to a greater extent, by placing on the statute books a 
very unfair and very unnecessary tax like this we are doing ourselves irreparable harm and this is, in 
fact, what's happening. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1902 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Government knows this as well as I do, and yet the tax stays on. Let's look at the facts. 
They know they don't take any money in from it. When you balance the cost of collecting the tax, the 
trouble they have to go to against the net return to them which is under $4 million, less than one-quarter 
of one percent of the budget, they know that this is an added disincentive for people of energy and 
initiative to stay in Saskatchewan. They know it adds to the advantage they have in Alberta and British 
Columbia for example. Why do they do it? Well, Mr. Speaker, the only reason they do it, if they 
continue it on again this year when they know British Columbia is going to take it off, the answer has to 
be their ingrained hatred for financial success. That's why they do it, they can't stand the idea of 
successful people. 
 
I've got a part of a speech here where one of the Members is talking to this debate and he says the 
following: 
 

If we fail (this was an NDP Member speaking in favor of reimposition of this tax) to tax great 
concentrations of wealth we can guarantee that future generations will not exercise an equality of 
opportunity. To be against succession duties is to be against the equality of opportunity. We ought to 
say we can't have one without the other. To be against succession duties in my mind is to say that you 
are against small farmers, to say that you are against small business. 

 
I will just end the quotation there. That was Mr. Cody. Well we know what happened to Mr. Cody in 
the election after that. He is now working — well I guess he didn't do too bad. First he was defeated but 
he is doing far better financially than he ever did when he sat on that side of the House, or ever did 
when he'd sell three insurance policies every year up there wherever he came from. 
 
But I want to point out, that was his philosophy, that's what he believed in. He believed somehow that if 
they taxed successful people in Saskatchewan, or successful estates that you are helping small farmers 
and small businessmen. What sheer absolute nonsense! What absolute drivel! What is a small farmer, 
what is a small businessman? It depends on what you are comparing them to. But it doesn't take a very 
large farmer or a very large rancher, or a very large businessman today to have his or her estate qualify 
for estate taxes under The Succession Duty and Gift Tax Act now in force in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. So, by the very nature of things, especially with inflation, with the value of land, with 
the value of buildings, with the value of equipment, it makes the statements he made there, it shows 
them up to be the absolute nonsense they are. So you come back to the only valid reason that this tax is 
still in force and it is not suggested up to this point that it will be taken off by the Government opposite, 
and that is revenge. That is what the basic philosophy of the Members opposite is still, and I go back 
and say it is envy and it's greed. If they can't make it themselves, they will make sure that no one else 
makes it. They are going to take it away from them, what they don't get when they are alive, they'll get 
them when they are dead. 
 
Somebody said that you can't take it with out. Well it must have been the original NDPer who said that, 
the socialist, 



 
January 9, 1976 

1903 
 

you can't take it with you and they even follow them when they are gone. They get it off them after 
they've gone. But it's so stupid, it's so unnecessary, if there is one tax that is on the books of the 
Province of Saskatchewan that could be called unnecessary, stupid and hurtful, it's The Estate Tax, the 
Gift Tax. And I know the speeches will come. I know they will say — "there's the Liberals, friends of 
the big business, friends of the wealthy". Well, you've got Members over there who when they pass on 
their estates will be subject to The Estates Tax, and don't tell me that when the time comes those same 
Members are looking at their sons and daughters, many of whom helped them develop that estate, and 
they can quietly move their assets over to Alberta or British Columbia, don't kid yourself that they won't 
do it. Again, it's typical of the socialists. You tax everybody else, but if we can get away with it, get 
away from it, that's what we will do. 
 
This isn't the case if you are in favor of the removal of this tax or if you are against this tax that you 
favor big business. It's in fact that shows that you favor small business. We talk about big business, 
when I do at least, I'm talking about Imperial Oil and I'm talking about Shell Oil, I'm talking about large 
business — Safeway or Dominion Stores. But this tax doesn't hit them. This tax hits the fellow who has 
accumulated one or two good-sized filling stations. This tax hits the fellow who has been a successful 
car dealer. This tax hits the individual who has been a successful hotel operator. This tax hits the 
individual whose family have been successful farmers, and who has a couple of sections of land, or 400 
or 500 head of cattle, or 300 or 400 head of cattle. That's whom it affects. And if the head of the 
household happens to die, and they hit a tough year and they haven't got liquid assets, you and I know 
exactly what they have to do, you can go and check the record because it happens all the time, you 
people want your pound of flesh and you want it in cash. So they are forced to do what has been done 
over and over again to pay Succession Duties, they have to sell off all or part of the business as a result 
— who buys it? Who has the ready cash? The ready cash is in the hands of the big people, of big 
business people. So in fact what you people are doing in your short-sighted greed, you are almost blind 
with bitter hatred of anybody that's successful, in your determination that you are going to make 
everything equal, what you are doing is playing into the hands of big business. And I think this is a 
terrible mistake. I think this is a bad tax and I wish you would seriously consider and take a hard look at 
taking it off the statute books. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the Members opposite and they can get these facts far easier than we can, 
they can get the facts, they know who pays the succession duties, I don't exactly know. I've got no way 
of finding out who pays the succession duties. Or if there is, I don't know about it. They can find out 
and I wish they would honestly do a study of all the people they have collected succession duties off the 
last four or five years and then do an honest study and see what has happened to the estate, to see what 
has happened to the business or the farms. If in fact they haven't been forced to sell out, if in fact this 
has broken up some businesses, some estates, then lay the cards on the table and be honest enough to 
say 'yes' that tax might have been all right ten or 15 years ago, it might have been all right when it was 
right across Canada, but now with it off in Alberta and it is going to come off in 



 
January 9, 1976 

1904 
 

British Columbia, it has outlived its usefulness. And if it has done that, take it off. All the money you 
will lose, net money you will lose, if you take off the cost of collecting this tax from the gross revenue 
you take in, it won't be drop in the ocean as far as the budget of the Government of Saskatchewan is 
concerned in the next year and the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the Members on both sides of the House to take a look at this tax, under today's 
conditions. Take a look at this tax in consideration of the value, the increased value of assets, of farms 
and ranchers and local businessmen, take a look at it in view of the fact that we know that British 
Columbia is going to take if off and now this will set the stage for the other two provinces west of us to 
be an even more attractive haven for people to locate, people with energy and drive and people with 
assets to generate business, to generate jobs, to generate tax revenue. Take a look at that and remove it 
from the books. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Mr. S.J. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to second the Resolution introduced by the 
Leader of the Opposition. In doing so I wish to direct attention particularly to some provisions of The 
Gift Tax Act and as my colleague before me anticipated I too will anticipate some of the response 
which is likely to come from the other side. I would ask them when they do respond in respect to this, to 
respond with regard to two matters that I'm going to raise that affect not big business, not wealthy 
people, but they affect average, small Saskatchewan citizens in a discriminatory and unjust kind of way. 
Bear in mind the two examples I'm going to give you and the operation of some provisions of The Gift 
Tax Act. I'm going to suggest to you that these sections that I'm going to refer to are first, 
discriminatory. They are secondly unjust, and therefore ill-conceived in principle and that they are in 
addition, in practical terms, working to the detriment of some social objectives of the province. 
 
Let me state my case for those points I have just made, that there are some provisions of this taxing 
statute which are discriminatory and unjust in principle and which are bad for some desirable social 
objectives in the province. I am most pleased that the Minister of Finance is here so that I can make this 
submission to him, because what I want to do is conclude by asking you as a minimum, if you cannot 
accept the removal in total of these two statutes, which you are not likely to do, unless you have had an 
unusual change of mind, we would ask you at least as a minimum to begin to look at some of the limits 
which are now unrealistic. Secondly to begin to remove some of the discriminatory and unjust 
provisions that I will refer to. 
 
Let me explain first of all the matter of principle that I said I wanted to discuss with respect to some of 
the provisions. One of the long held historical principles with respect to tax Acts is that a tax law must 
fall fairly and evenly and even-handedly on all people without discrimination and without preference. 
All people ought, as a matter of fundamental principle with respect to tax laws to be treated the same, 
without preference or priority to one group or one individual over another. I think that's long been 
accepted as one of the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1905 
 

fundamental principles of good taxing statutes. 
 
As members will know who have had some dealings with The Gift Tax Act, the general rule is that one 
cannot give property to another in Saskatchewan beyond the value of $2,000 without paying tax in 
respect of that gift. So the general rule is any gift to an extent greater than $2,000 attracts a tax. Now if 
one looks at Section 11 of The Gift Tax Act, one finds an exception to the general rule. One finds a 
special allowance in respect of some special circumstances and some special people I suggest. 
 
The law permits some classes of persons in Saskatchewan under that Section to make a 
once-in-a-lifetime gift to the extent of $20,000. So, therefore, we see the usual rule of $2,000 being set 
aside permitting a person to make a once-in-a-lifetime and only once per lifetime, gift up to $20,000. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Is this Motion consistent to the new society? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Indeed it is. It is very consistent with the new society and I'll come to that in a 
moment and show you how very consistent it is with the new society, because I'm going to talk about 
some attitudes as well. Some attitudes, I want to tell you that you in part fostered and which are good 
ones in which you put forward in principle but are not following up in practice. I'll come to that, Mr. 
Attorney General. In a few minutes with respect to The Gift Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I haven't heard one Saskatchewan Liberal talk about the new society. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — All right, let me tell you something. I'll make my point with you. Let me put to you 
the provision of The Gift Tax Act with respect to marital property. It wasn't very long ago that you 
people brought in amendments to The Married Women's Property Act. You fostered in our province the 
attitude and a good one, that by and large marital property should be in the ownership of husband and 
wife in equal shares. There was to be partnership economically in a marriage as well as partnership in 
other respects. A good principle. An attitude which has changed only in the last five years and certainly 
within the last decade because the old attitude and the old value was quite different. Well now, let me 
show you how one provision of this Act is acting as a deterrent to bringing that laudable principle into 
practice. 
 
The Married Women's Property Act speaks of property by and large being owned half and half. Take 
the case of a farmer, and I had a case of this kind, who in the spirit of that Act and in the new attitude 
wants to transfer a quarter section or a half section out of his four or five to his wife. The quarter section 
is worth some $26,000. The half section would be $52,000. That man is permitted to transfer only 
$5,000 to his wife without paying gift tax. It's true under The Gift Tax Act. Therefore, while we have 
said to him as legislators in this province, your wife is entitled to half the marital property and that's 
what you should be doing as a husband, when he finds he goes to transfer it, he can't do it without 
paying a tax. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1906 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — The point of that is that it deters property being transferred from husbands to wives 
in the marriage. That's one of the things I want you to look at, genuinely and seriously. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The Law Reform Commission has something coming on this. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — I don't think one has to await, if I may say it, the Report of the Law Reform 
Commission in this respect. It's a very simple straightforward proposition. It was, when we legislated in 
respect to The Married Women's Property Act, I think overlooked. This provision by which we are 
deterring transfers of property from husband to wife in keeping with the marital arrangement that we 
now want to foster with respect to property is bad. I'm going to ask you to look at that and I'm going to 
remind you as time goes by, from time to time, when I get the opportunity again about this because it's 
clearly discriminatory in the first place. Secondly, it is clearly a deterrent to a desirable sociological 
objective of which I talked about a little earlier. The law operates in this same unsatisfactory way in 
other circumstances as well. I said there was this basic one-in-a-lifetime gift exemption of $20,000. 
Once in a lifetime. That exception, to whom does it apply? It doesn't apply to all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. It applies only by and large in two circumstances. One is with respect to a transfer of 
farm land from father to son or parent to child, once in a lifetime of farm land for farming purposes. I 
pause and underline my point there. 
 
If a farmer, under this Act, wants to transfer a piece of farm land to his son, he can, once in a lifetime, 
give a portion of that land to his son to the extent of $20,000 without paying a tax. The reason for that is 
obvious because we saw this as a socially desirable objective to have land transfer from one generation 
to another and not put obstacles in the way of that objective. So we gave to farmers this special right to 
transfer property up to the extent of $20,000 without paying a tax, to facilitate transfer of farm land in 
this way. 
 
Now there is one other circumstance to which that once in a lifetime exemption applies as well, and as 
Members know it is the transfer of a principal residence from husband to wife, or spouse to spouse. And 
again, we saw that as a socially desirable objective and we therefore did not put the obstacles of the 
usual tax, which is a tax of value in excess of $2,000 on that kind of a transaction in order to encourage 
and facilitate common fifty-fifty ownership with the principal residence of the marriage. 
 
Those are the two circumstances in which that special exemption applies. 
 
I said earlier, to whom does it not apply? It does not apply to anyone else. It does not apply to small 
businessmen in small communities. It doesn't apply to professionals. It doesn't apply to people engaged 
in other occupations. What I 



 
January 9, 1976 

1907 
 

am going to put to you, is why do we give to farmers a special exemption and a special treatment that 
we are not prepared to give other people in Saskatchewan who are in exactly the same economic 
circumstance? 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Like purple gas! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — The Hon. Member is apparently not yet appreciating my point, the former Minister 
of Finance (Mr. Robbins). I said to you earlier one of the basic principles of sound tax law is that it not 
discriminate. I said in fairness that we have built into this Act a special allowance for farmers to meet a 
sociological desirable objective. We have therefore singled out the farming community for preferred 
treatment in respect of this Act. It is equally desirable socially to have small business in small 
communities transferred from one generation to another. That is an equally sociological desirable 
objective, if you are sincere in what you say so often about preserving little business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Why, then do we put an obstacle in the way of transferring small business property from father to son. 
Because what we say in that situation is that we are going to tax anything over $2,000. We say to a 
farmer, you can transfer up to the value of $20,000 and not pay tax. We say to a little businessman who 
wants to transfer to his son, you pay tax on anything over $2,000. So there is a genuine and real obstacle 
which is there. The result of it is that one has to try to find ways and means to get around some of these 
provisions. Fortunately there are ways one can do it lawfully. But it puts people to a great deal of 
expense and it takes a very long time. I am sure the Attorney General is aware of the kinds of 
arrangements to which I refer. 
 
That is why I said to you at the outset that what I am going to put to you is that some sections of this 
Act are discriminatory, some sections are unjust and they are deterring socially desirable aims in this 
province. That is why I said to you as a minimum let us at least examine that fairly and take a look at 
amending some of these sections. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You are talking about amending, it says repeal here. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — I am trying to put to your Ministers, and you ought to be able to do it more 
successfully than I because you sit with them, what I think is a very genuine matter here for them to 
consider. I gather from some of the interested faces, that they seem to have some interest in what I am 
saying. Perhaps you would do me a favor, Mr. Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie) by taking up the 
same cry and trying to convince them in the corridors and your caucus room of the desirable objective 
that I am trying to put forward as a minimum with respect to this matter. Because, you, as with me, 
work with this thing every day among farmers and small businessmen. 
 
I want to refer to an example of an actual case again where this Act is having the effects that I submitted 
to you. In the little community that I come from of some 200 people . . . 



 
January 9, 1976 

1908 
 

Mr. Malone: — Albert South? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Not Albert South, in fact, it is a very fine little community, it has produced a number 
of MLAs and MPs and the like, including one NDP MP, I am sorry to say. A little community of 200 
people. I am sure that there are hundreds of examples of this kind around the province. A man in his 
early 60s who has an SGIO insurance agency and a little dealership, a garage, wants to transfer that 
business to his son and retire. The son is about 30 years old. 
 
Now, it is to the advantage of that community, and to the advantage of this province for that boy to take 
that business and continue to operate it in that little town. Because in the end those little towns survive 
or die in no small part by the number of young people who remain in them. The father wasn't aware that 
he didn't have the same civil rights as what his farmer customers or farmer friends had. He thought he 
could transfer his business to his son and not pay tax on the first $10,000. Remember, the old limit was 
$10,000. He saw his farmer friends had that right and he thought he had that right. So he made an 
arrangement with his son to have his son remain in the town to take on the SGIO insurance agency and 
the dealership and he transferred it to him, thinking the first $10,000 was free of tax. Unfortunately that 
view was confirmed by some professional advice he sought and got. And he made the transfer. Well he 
found to his sorrow not very long after that he was mistaken. He found that his civil rights were not the 
same as the civil rights of the farmer. Because he found he had to pay tax to the provincial treasury on 
everything over the value of $2,000. And he, in his modest kind of circumstances, paid a rather hefty 
tax. 
 
He raised it with his Member of the Legislature who was at the time Eugene Flasch. He raised it with 
the Minister of Finance. He raised it with the Ombudsman. He was told the law is the law. He said, 
"Well, is it fair that a farmer who is just down the street from me can transfer farm land to his son and 
have an exemption to the extent of $20,000 and I can't do the same thing for my boy with respect to my 
little business? That isn't fair". He was told the law is the law. He asked. "When are you going to amend 
the law?" Well, we will take a look at it in due course. 
 
What the result of that in the first place is, that you put a stumbling block in the way of that man trying 
to transfer his little business to his son in that little community, which I said to you earlier, is a socially 
desirable objective. One that we ought not to be deterring, one we ought to be fostering in every way 
that we can. Is it little wonder that occasionally we wonder about the sincerity of some Members 
opposite when they presume to have some concern for the preservation of small business enterprise in 
this province? 
 
I say to you and ask you to back your professed concern now with some action in respect of some of the 
provisions of this Act. 
 
In that same little community that I talked about of 200 people, and I am sure as I say, there is example 
after example of the same thing around the province, there are two other small businesses, one is a bulk 
fuel dealership, an Imperial 



 
January 9, 1976 

1909 
 

Esso dealership and the other is a GMC dealership. Both these businesses are now run by men who are 
about to retire and who would like to induce their sons, one of whom is 24 and one of whom is 28, or 
thereabouts, to remain in the town to take on the bulk dealership and to take on the GMC dealership. 
They are trained to do it. 
 
Why should we put before those two men, who now want to retire and keep those young boys in that 
little community, an obstacle by saying to them, if you make the transfer you are going to have to pay a 
tax on everything that exceeds $2,000 in value? Why do we do that particularly in respect of those small 
businessmen and not do it in respect of farmers? There is that discrimination that I talk about in 
connection with these sections. 
 
I can't think of anything more sensible or commonsense or logical than that. As I say, I draw it to your 
attention and I am sure that each one of you has similar experiences in the communities from which you 
come. We ought to be doing something about it, we ought to be changing the law in that respect. 
 
I want to give one other example to show to you that it doesn't only apply in respect of rural people but 
it applies in a discriminatory way to urban people as well. If one takes an example of a young couple 
who are getting married and want to buy a home, again a socially desirable objective, Members 
opposite would agree I am sure, homes are very expensive, prohibitive almost, for young people, and 
suppose the parents were prepared to help the children buy a home; or suppose the parents were 
prepared to put up $10,000 to $15,000 by way of assistance to his daughter or his son to buy a home. 
Well they couldn't do that without paying tax to the Provincial Government on the value of the gift to 
the extent that it exceeds $2,000. Again, this is a deterrent to mothers and fathers helping their children 
to purchase homes when they are so very expensive these days. One can't argue with that. Those are 
very clearly the conclusions that have to be drawn from these sections of this particular Act. Again, I 
say it is a socially desirable objective which we all talk about. We all talk ad nauseam almost about it. 
We ought to be doing something about it in a real way by, as I say, a minimum at least of amending if 
not throwing this Act out. The practical consequences which I talked about a little earlier in addition to 
the principle. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Don't overdo it! 
 
Mr. Cameron: — My friend says don't overdo it. At least I am pleased I brought him some distance 
along the way. I don't want to lose him, so I won't overdo it I assure you. 
 
I talked about the matter of principle in itself, in terms of pure principle; I talked about the matter in 
terms of its practical application and how I think it is unsatisfactory for those reasons. That has been of 
course with respect to the once in a lifetime gift provisions under this Act. The other one I referred to a 
little earlier in response to the Attorney General was the provisions of this Act that apply as between 
transfers of property between husband and wife. This Gift Tax Act and this general tax regime was of 
course put in place long before we amended The Married Women's Property Act to provide for the 
basic principle of ownership of marital property fifty, 



 
January 9, 1976 

1910 
 

fifty. We did not in the process, as I was indicating earlier to the Attorney General, I think reflect on the 
effect of this statute upon the amendment we were making to The Married Women's Property Act and 
the general attitude which we were trying to foster in getting husbands and wives to own marital 
property jointly and in equal shares. 
 
I gave him a very real example. It is one that exists some 80 or 90 miles east of Regina where a husband 
of very modest circumstances would like to transfer a quarter or a half section to his wife. He finds 
problems in doing it because this Act stands in his way. His attitude is, why should I be deterred from 
doing something which the law says I really ought to be doing. He too, in his sort of commonsense way 
is mystified as to why we continue some of these taxing provisions. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by asking the Minister of Finance and the Attorney General and those 
other Members of Cabinet who have concerns in financial areas to very genuinely go back and have a 
look at the sections in the terms in which I have put them to you as being discriminatory and unjust and 
effecting in their practical result, socially undesirable consequences. I ask you as a minimum on the 
assumption that you are not prepared to repeal the statutes, as a minimum to look at repealing these 
sections and giving the small people of Saskatchewan some far better break than they are currently 
getting. I will support the Resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, my remarks will be relatively brief with 
respect to this particular motion. I listened with interest to the Member for Regina South (Mr. 
Cameron). I think he presents some reasonably valid arguments in relation to the problem that arise in 
relation to The Gift Tax and The Succession Duties Act. When I made a remark with respect to purple 
gas, I was simply attempting to point out that in any tax there is often a measure of discrimination. I 
think you could argue purple gas tax free for farmers and not available to the fellow who runs a small 
paint shop, or a plumbing establishment, etc., shows a measure of discrimination. 
 
I suppose there is a philosophical difference with respect to this tax between the philosophy of the 
Liberal Party and I presume also the Conservative Party. I think I am not being immodest when I say 
that perhaps I will have as large an estate as anybody in this Legislative Assembly with the possible 
exception of the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) and perhaps the Member for Nipawin (Mr. 
Collver) who have silver spoons rattling around in their mouths. Sometimes I think it rattles their 
brains. Nevertheless, I want to make it very clear that I agree with the Hon. Member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Steuart) when he says that The Gift Tax of course is simply a means of reducing 
succession duties and as the Member for Regina South, I think properly pointed out there are anomalies 
anomalies in that particular Act. 
 
However, I think it irrational to change an Act without looking at all the implications because often 
when you change an Act and remove one anomaly your create other anomalies. It 



 
January 9, 1976 

1911 
 

does take a little bit of time and study in relation to actual effects that may result from it. 
 
I notice also that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Steuart) argued that pretty soon British Columbia 
would be removing the tax, I knew the Liberals and Conservatives had a pretty close relationship with 
Social Creditors in British Columbia in the recent election, but I wasn't aware of the fact that they had a 
pipeline to the Leader of the Opposition in Saskatchewan as well. He may be right, they may remove 
the tax, but it is pretty presumptuous to work on that basis while the tax actually exists. Succession 
duties do exist in British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Quebec and Ontario on about 19 million 
out of 22 million people in Canada. 
 
I think it is fair to say that it should be reviewed and is being reviewed periodically. It was reviewed by 
this Government after it was instituted in relation to the inflationary trends in society and the fact that 
some difficulties were arising in relation to the exemptions applied under the Act. 
 
However, I categorically deny that I as an individual, and I think this is true of Members on this side of 
the House, feel that the Succession Duties should be applied simply because we want to apply it out of 
revenge or envy or hatred of people who are successful. I want to make it crystal clear that I have no 
anti-business feelings myself and I am sure this is generally true in relation to the Members on this side 
of the House as well. I may have some further remarks to make with respect to this particular motion at 
a later date and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 30 — SHORTAGE OF HOUSING AND RENTAL ACCOMMODATION 
IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu'Appelle) moved, seconded by Mr. Merchant (Regina Wascana): 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure to take any provincial 
government action to alleviate the crisis of shortage of housing and rental accommodation in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
He said: I am glad you reminded me to stand up, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will at the end of my remarks today, move this Resolution. It is interesting to note I think 
if I can put down at the outset what the basic problem is facing, not only Saskatchewan citizens but 
citizens all across this great country, the basic outline of the problem when it comes to the housing and 
rental accommodation shortage. 
 
First, I think it is an obvious statement we are not building fast enough or enough moderately priced 
houses. 
 
Second, I think that people basically can't afford the cost of the housing that now exists in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. I did some research and the average cost in 1974 in Saskatchewan of a three-bedroom 
house in Regina is $24,500. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1912 
 

In Saskatoon it is $21,769. Obviously figures like these and the inflationary costs have brought those 
figures up at least another ten per cent so that we are looking at roughly $27,000 in Regina and $24,000 
in the city of Saskatoon for a three bedroom bungalow with a minimum of amenities. 
 
We also have a problem that no government has grasped or has done anything about and that is the fact 
that many people already housed and people with adequate existing shelter that they own or are in the 
process of buying and in which they are living are making severe demands upon the housing market by 
wishing to upgrade themselves. I don't know, I have been unable to find other than a statement of the 
obvious problem, I have been unable to find any government that has done research into the very 
question of what effect on the cost of housing existing homeowners are making, as they try to upgrade 
themselves. 
 
In 1974 in the city of Regina only ten per cent of the houses, new houses were purchased by first time 
homeowners. In other words, 90 per cent of the new houses purchased in 1974 in the city of Regina 
were purchased by people who already owned or were living in their own homes. Now what effect has 
that particular segment of the buying market had on the high cost of housing? 
 
I would hope that in debate on this particular motion that the Minister responsible for Municipal Affairs 
and the Housing Corporation would table for the benefit of the Opposition any studies that the 
Government may have on this particular aspect of the problem. 
 
The other major problem on the overall question of housing is the fact that without a doubt the housing 
sector of our national and provincial economy has contributed to inflation. 
 
Dealing with the problems that I have set out, of course, is a complicated and complex matter. My basic 
premise, this morning, Mr. Speaker, is basically this. That although housing starts in Saskatchewan are 
at the highest level they have ever been in, that the problem in Saskatchewan is that the Government 
opposite has had nothing to do with that. I will document in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, I think, 
evidence that shows that the Government opposite, although it has tried to take the political benefit of 
the record of housing starts in Saskatchewan, has not contributed anything, I submit, to the creation of 
the number of housing starts. I will admit and make it quite clear to the Minister responsible for the 
Housing Corporation that more moneys were spent by this Government than by any previous 
government, including the Liberal government. I will admit because without a doubt he will say it, that 
more money has been spent for unconditional grants to cities, that if they wanted to use them they could 
go into land assembly projects, that he has spent more money, his Government, than any other. I will 
grant, because he will repeat it, housing starts, there are more housing starts in the Province of 
Saskatchewan in the last three years than in any other three years I believe, in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I will grant, will state that those statements are I think valid, that the Minister will repeat them. 
When he does repeat them I think, Mr. Speaker, that all Members of this House will take it as read, 
because surely the Members opposite  



 
January 9, 1976 

1913 
 

when they are concerned about being repetitious wouldn't want to repeat what I have just set out before 
the Members of this Legislature. 
 
The problem also has another interesting aspect. That is the fact that under the constitution of the 
Dominion of Canada, housing, shelter and real property are solely within the jurisdiction of the 
provinces. I think it would be unfair for the Minister in reply, if I may anticipate him to say, that the 
housing problem is all federal, it's all up to them to solve the problem, because constitutionally he 
would be wrong to say that, because without a doubt and I don't think it's a matter of debate, real 
property and the matter of housing is purely within the jurisdiction of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, to sum up my basic premise, the problems are four-fold. That we are not producing enough 
moderately priced housing, secondly, that people can't afford the housing, that there is a problem with 
people already in adequate housing insisting and desiring to upgrade and finally the housing and 
construction industry has created, or added to inflationary pressures. I submit that by constitutional law 
the governments that should be solving the problem and showing the initiative are the provincial 
jurisdictions. 
 
But provincial governments have either been incapable or have refused really to solve the problem. As a 
consequence the Government of Canada has been forced, I think, to intervene and intervene in a pretty 
dramatic manner. The federal programs, I think have not been successful in supplying an adequate 
degree of shelter for Canadian citizens. But I think that the real problem and the real failure to supply 
adequate shelter and adequate housing to the people of this country is the failure of the provincial 
governments, including the Government opposite who have failed to show imagination, who have failed 
to put the necessary priority on the supply of proper shelter and proper rental accommodation. 
 
The Federal Government has been forced, because of the failure of provincial governments, to take an 
aggressive and an active, although granted, insufficient role. The Government of Canada has been 
forced to establish a secretary of urban affairs, not a full department, because it is not within Federal 
Government's jurisdiction. However, the only government as far as Saskatchewan citizens are 
concerned that has shown any initiative in the question of new housing starts is the Government of 
Canada. 
 
I'm going to read into the record some of the recently announced federal programs, all of which have 
been implemented, every one has been implemented because provincial governments, including this 
one, have failed to take any adequate action. There is no reason with any of these programs that it 
couldn't have been done by any provincial government and in particular, this one. 
 
The first step on the federal direction to cool excessive demand for increasing expensive housing and to 
channel moneys into more moderate housing: 
 

Lenders will be required to restrict the high ratio loans (that is loans with low down payments) to two 
homes that fall within the NHA limits that are set in each province. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1914 
 

The Federal Government has established a mortgage review committee to establish targets for the 
various individual lenders and to monitor their activities. 

 
The Government, to make residential mortgages more liquid and more attractive as an investment, 
will establish and activate the federal mortgage exchange corporation and that becomes effective 
tentatively, I understand, by April 1, 1976. 

 
There is no reason, I submit, Mr. Speaker, while the Government opposite, when it has already stated in 
this Assembly that the major residential lender or one of the major residential lenders are the credit 
unions of Saskatchewan, that a system could not be utilized and developed in the Province of 
Saskatchewan to make residential mortgages more attractive as an investment and there is no reason 
why the Provincial Government could not have taken action in this area. 
 

The Federal Government has established new land incentives. They make a federal grant of $1,000 
per unit available to municipalities which approve moderately priced, medium density housing. 

 
I think without a doubt that this is a direct encroachment on the jurisdiction of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I think without a doubt that the Province of Saskatchewan could have had a similar 
program and a program as expansionist as the Government of Canada was forced to implement by 
reason of the failure of the provincial governments. 
 
The Federal Government has a rental assistance program. Again, there is no reason other than an 
establishment of priorities why the Government of Saskatchewan couldn't have a rental assistance 
program to encourage the development of rental accommodation in the Province of Saskatchewan. No 
reason whatsoever. 
 

The capital cost tax allowances have been extended through until 1977. 
 
We had suggested publicly prior to the Session that one of the best things the Province of Saskatchewan 
could do to alleviate any housing shortage crisis in Saskatchewan was to give tax incentives to the 
private developers to encourage them, to construct rental accommodation. What we have in 
Saskatchewan of course, is rental control legislation which will not, will not assist in the development 
of new rental accommodations. And in fact, the threats made by the Government opposite to go into its 
own construction business and its own apartment business is more of a deterrent than an incentive and I 
don't think any Member of the Government opposite would object to that criticism. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — I'm going to. 
 
Mr. Lane: — You're going to. The assisted Home Ownership Program has been extended again. A 
federal program into hew housing. Again, I think frankly that it's fairly close to being a dereliction of 
duty that the Federal Government should even be involved in the housing field. I think in the matter of 
financing that certainly it has a strong role to play, but the program development for new housing, for 
rental accommodation, should 



 
January 9, 1976 

1915 
 

come from the provincial governments in all parts of Canada. 
 
What do we have in the Province of Saskatchewan? Again, I've made it quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Government opposite has spent more money, the housing starts are greater, but a problem still 
exists. 
 
The Housing Corporation was established with great fanfare and had a new Minister appointed, 
responsible for it. The new Minister has his picture on several different pages of the annual report of 
1974. I don't know whether it hurt him or helped him and my advice may be to the new Minister, that 
he may want to cut back on the ego tripping a little because we all know what happened to the last 
Minister. 
 
The Government has a municipal program, a department was established, research and information 
department and I've already alluded to that aspect. I would hope that if the Minister's department has or 
if the corporation has studied the matter of pressures on the high cost of housing by people with existing 
accommodation, I would hope that he would table that, at least for my information. 
 
The House Building Assistance Act is a program of the Provincial Government. It is restricted and I say 
unfortunately basically to people with a family income level of $10,000, which is totally inadequate 
when I refer to the figures of the average cost of a three bedroom home in 1974, probably 1975 of about 
$27,000 in Regina. I don't think and I urge the Minister to revert back to the previous Liberal program 
when that was not restricted to family income level. I think it's an unnecessary restriction with the high 
cost of housing, the inflated cost of housing. 
 
We have a Neighborhood Improvement Program which is basically to try and improve older areas of 
communities. It's interesting that that program is a federal program, not a provincial program, a program 
in which the Provincial Government now participates to a much lower level than does the Federal 
Government. The initiative and the development of that program was purely federal, had nothing to do 
with the Provincial Government and I would hope the Minister would not take credit for that particular 
program. 
 

1974 (here are the program results and I am quoting from the annual report of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation) 1,935 house building assistance grants were issued during the year. 

 
That's to a $1,000. If we take the average cost of $24,000 or $25,000 for a house, one twenty-fifth of the 
total cost of the housing, not counting mortgage costs, is all that the Government opposite contributed. I 
fail to see as a matter of priorities in the province how the Government opposite could choose to put 
nationalization of the potash industry ahead of solving this matter, the housing crisis and the lack of 
rental accommodation in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have two figures for some particular reason. According to the Annual Report of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, Saskatchewan had 7,684 starts in 1974, that is about 1,000 more than Statistics 
Canada has allotted to the Department, referring to their record, single detached housing was 6,390. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1916 
 

There is a discrepancy there. I am prepared, notwithstanding the lack of credibility of the Government 
opposite when it comes into this field, I am prepared to ride with the figures of 7,684 starts in 1974. 
Approximately 8,000, approximately 2,000 house building assistance grants were given. All that the 
Government opposite can take out of that particular program is that it was involved in a fifth or 
one-quarter of the housing starts in the Province of Saskatchewan, that's all! With the fanfare and the 
publicity that you have gone into and how you are always patting yourselves on the back with all the 
great housing starts, by your own reports, you were involved in only 20 per cent of the new housing 
starts and I think in light of the problem that that is a sorry record indeed. The official Opposition again 
urges the Government opposite to take off the income requirement of The House Building Assistance 
Act and restore it as an open program as it existed prior to your becoming the Government to expand 
the size of that grant to make it a meaningful grant. There is no reason why the Government of 
Saskatchewan should be involved indirectly with grants, 50 per cent of the housing starts in the 
Province of Saskatchewan. To date, 20 per cent is your record. 
 
I can go through the subsidy and self-help programs referred to on page 8 of the Annual Report, it 
makes mortgage subsidies available to low and moderate income families. I should like to know the 
duplication between that program and the house building assistance program. I think that the 20 per cent 
figure of direct Provincial Government involvement would stay static and that is the maximum number 
of new houses that the Government can take any credit for and the credit being one twenty-fifth of the 
actual cost. I think that is not much credit to really go around to tell the people about. This program has 
to operate in conjunction with the federal program. 
 
Here's another example of the initiative coming from the Federal Government and not the Provincial 
Government. Residential rehabilitation program, same thing again. I think the residential rehabilitation 
program is something that the idea and concept came from the Government of Canada and not from the 
Provincial Government. 
 
The one program that I am prepared to give full credit to the Government opposite, I think the Minister 
will agree, is that the grant is to be improved, and that is the senior citizens' home repair program. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — . . . Federal initiative! 
 
Mr. Lane: — The Premier obviously is not listening. I think it is unfortunate because I just prefaced 
my comments that I am prepared to give the Government opposite full credit for the senior citizens' 
home repair program. 
 
I don't know if I am going to have to keep repeating for the Premier, but in that particular case I don't 
mind giving him credit, because I know the Minister will refer to it later. 
 
The interesting thing about that program is that it doesn't deal with new houses, it deals with existing 
structures, granted that is all that particular program is designed to do. I am quite prepared to get off that 
particular program if the Minister doesn't want to refer to it. The Minister doesn't want 



 
January 9, 1976 

1917 
 

to refer to that program as one of his great programs in helping the housing crisis in the Province of 
Saskatchewan because I don't think he can take credit for solving the housing crisis with the senior 
citizens' home repair program. It doesn't deal with new housing, it doesn't deal with the shortage of new 
housing in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We go into the matter of public housing. Low rental public housing is provided by the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation in conjunction with municipal government and with most of the money coming 
from the Federal Government. The very suspect co-operative housing program is a provincial program. 
I say suspect, because when the matter was debated in the Legislature it was quite clear that the 
successful co-operative housing program deal with those areas where there were the construction skills 
within the members and that co-op housing has been a failure when people without the technical skills 
became a dominant part of the housing co-operative. 
 
Program after program, housing for people of Indian ancestry, rural housing assistance, neighborhood 
improvement are all Federal programs that the Provincial Government pays its 25 per cent basically to 
get 75 per cent federal money. 
 
We look at the land assembly. I think that the Minister opposite will remember statements made by the 
former housing Minister about how he was always crying to Ottawa because they needed more money 
and there were not adequate grants for land assembly. Most of the land assembly around the city of 
Regina was done by the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation. The land was subsequently bought 
by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation after last summer. As a bit of an aside, it is very interesting 
to note that prior to the cancellation of the Westridge sub-division by the Government opposite, it had 
purchased most of the land assembly from the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the city 
of Regina has no alternative now but to grow in the direction where the land is owned by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. I think there was a slight conflict of interest in the cancellation of the 
Westridge sub-division. I am sure the Minister will have some comments denying that particular 
allegation, either a conflict of interest or a very strange coincidence, one of the two. 
 
We go into the matter of rental accommodation. The lack of rental accommodation is so severe in the 
Province of Saskatchewan that for all practical purposes there is no rental accommodation available to 
the people. .what has the Government opposite done about it? Obviously nothing. There was an 
opportunity in the rental control legislation to come out with a positive indication from the Minister in 
charge of that particular Bill of what the Government is going to do to encourage rental 
accommodation. Nothing was said, new rental accommodation was exempt from rent controls, but the 
lack of rental accommodation existed before the imposition of the rental control legislation so I don't 
think that is going to be effective. I think the Members opposite will agree that the exemption will not 
be effective in creating new rental accommodation. I think in reality there is nothing. 
 
We have urged the Government of Saskatchewan to give tax credits to private developers as the Federal 
Government has done to encourage the construction of apartment buildings and rental 



 
January 9, 1976 

1918 
 

accommodations. We think that that would be a positive approach by the Government, there is no 
reason why the Government opposite cannot come out with an apartment assistance program like the 
Federal Government . There is no reason why the Government opposite cannot give mortgage subsidies 
to private developers to encourage them to go into rental accommodation, no reason whatsoever other 
than the misplaced priorities of the Government opposite. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that tragedy exists in the province of Saskatchewan, because by constitutional law 
this is within the jurisdiction of the Province of Saskatchewan and yet the initiative for new housing in 
this province has come from the Federal Government because the Government opposite has failed to 
show any imagination, any initiative and any concrete suggestions to solve the rental accommodation 
crisis and has failed to take any action to expand the number of new housing starts in the province. As I 
said, you can take credit as you are wont to do of the record number of housing starts. You can slice that 
matter any way you want, the true facts are that only 20 per cent of those new housing starts had any 
participation by the Government opposite, by the record set out in the Annual Report of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
We heard an awful lot of talk prior to the last election about the Saskatchewan option, the only option in 
housing in Saskatchewan is whether the Government opposite decides to enter into a program because 
the Federal Government pays 75 per cent or the option not to participate in the program. There is no 
option of the Government opposite to as I say show some initiative to develop its own program to 
encourage new housing starts. I think that the Government opposite is to be soundly condemned for its 
failure to take any action whatsoever to solve the rental accommodation crisis in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, the Government has deterred new rental accommodation by its threat to go into government 
constructed apartment buildings, to set up its own construction company. The failure to add to a rent 
control program incentives and tax credits to private developers was a threat to them and failed to give 
the necessary encouragement to the private sector to build rental accommodations. I think it is time that 
the Government opposite quit riding on the coattails of the Federal Government when it comes to 
housing and rental accommodation. I think it is about time that the Government opposite showed some 
leadership and initiative to solve the rental and housing crisis in the Province of Saskatchewan, a crisis 
which is solely within the jurisdiction of the Province of Saskatchewan by constitution. 
 
I think that many of the backbenchers will join with me when I say that I think the Government 
opposite is showing some pretty warped priorities when it's prepared to sink $1 billion into the potash 
industry without one new job to take over, out of a fit of pique and refused to give one red cent to 
solving the rental accommodation crisis in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) this 
Resolution. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, quite obviously I would be more lengthy than the 30 seconds allotted 
to me. It takes that long for me to gargle my throat in the morning. I wonder if I might call it 12:30. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o'clock p.m. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1919 
 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 36 — TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO BUY WESTERN CANADIAN BEEF 
 
Mr. E. Anderson (Shaunavon) moved, seconded by Mr. McMillan (Kindersley): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to encourage wholesale and retail 
meat outlets in Saskatchewan and meat consumers in Saskatchewan to buy western Canadian 
beef in preference to lower quality Australian and New Zealand beef. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this Resolution encouraging the Saskatchewan Government 
to put on an advertising program to encourage the consumers of this province, both the people who 
consume meat out of the meat markets and the wholesale retail chains to use Saskatchewan beef rather 
than the Australian and New Zealand beef. The merit would be that a lot of the consumers of this 
province do not realize the high proportion of offshore beef coming from Australia and New Zealand 
that is being used in the hamburger trade and in the various steak house chains. A larger portion of the 
steaks used in the steak house chains and a large proportion of the hamburger used in hamburger chains, 
and in the general retail meat trade, is made up of offshore beef. 
 
This beef is of a lower grade standard than the beef that comes off our markets because our grain fed 
beef usually grades out at a higher actual quality coarseness and fat cover. I think it is not realized how 
heavy the pressure on the prices of our domestic producers is by the large amount of imported offshore 
beef. Right now there is quite a trade going into the United States of cull cows. There is quite a trade 
coming on the market of cull cows, as herds are culled and even reduced in view of the lower prices. 
This is the market that the Australian beef competes with. This competition therefore has a doubly bad 
effect on our producers at this time, because if this price on the cull cows were a bit higher we'd have 
more of the producers right now culling the herds which is a very necessary thing in this time of 
increased production in common herds. By holding back for heifer calves which would then come on 
into production, two to three years from now when we would need the increased beef. So I do believe 
that if we could put on an advertising program to get our consumers to realize this, to keep our cow kill a 
little higher right now and still hold back in our calf crop to make up the cycle when we need it. 
 
The Australian imports came at a very bad time for oil companies raised their prices of oil and thus they 
forced countries which were very large importers of beef, especially from Australia and New Zealand to 
cut their imports from these 



 
January 9, 1976 

1920 
 

countries. 
 
For instance, Japan, a large user of Australian beef virtually closed their borders for a 12-month period 
to imports of beef to save their foreign exchange to buy needed energy reserves. Italy, which was a large 
importer of both beef and petroleum products, closed her borders, or virtually took her buyers off the 
markets for beef and this surplus beef had to go somewhere. Where did it go? It started to pour into our 
North American market and help to further depress our prices at that time. They still have a depressing 
effect although the imports are down over this period of the last few months. 
 
To illustrate the impact upon our beef prices that Australian beef imports do have, or did have, I should 
like to go back and trace the history or the off-loading, of Australia to Canada of beef and veal in metric 
tons for 1973, 1974 and 1975. 
 
In January of 1973 you must realize that these loadings come in six weeks shipping time for them to get 
here, was 1,069 metric tons of beef and veal, loaded from Australia and New Zealand. That off-loading 
has jumped in the following of January to 1,407 metric tons and in 1975 to 1,878 metric tons. When we 
go back to February, 1973, we find that there was virtually no off-loading of Australian beef destined for 
Canada, but when you go to 1974 you find that in the year from 1973 to 1974 from a nil tonnage you 
come to 1,523 metric tons. Surely, you will agree with me that this must have quite an effect on our 
market, especially on the market where we are trying to sell culled cows, when in a two-year period 
from February, 1973 to February, 1975 you go from nil or no off-loadings to over 2,600 metric tons of 
Australian beef imported. 
 
You go to March, 1973, you will find that there was no beef imported from Australia; in 1974 this came 
up to 656 metric tons and in March of last year it came up at 3,593 metric tons, which again is a 
substantial increase in imports in a two-year period for a market or a country of our size to absorb, from 
nil off-loadings to over 3,500 metric tons. The same is true for April 1973, no beef was imported and in 
1974 this had jumped to 942 metric tons; in 1975 to 2,290 metric tons. In March, 1973, nil off-loading; 
in 1974 - 1,459 metric tons to 1,825 metric tons today. 
 
This decline of beef prices began in 1973 with monthly increases of imported beef from Australia and 
New Zealand. Nil before July; July - 2,111 metric tons; August - 3,105; September - 2,814; October - 
3,722; November - 4,498 and December, 1973 - 3,740 metric tons. This rise came at a time when our 
calf run and yearling run is on the market and when our cull cows are coming on the market and it 
proved at that time to be disastrous. 
 
I think we could have probably survived a small import of that type of beef if it had been slackening off, 
but it didn't. It is still holding up and I think that we would be foolish to believe that it is going to 
slacken off in the next year. The European Common Market, Australia and New Zealand are in a surplus 
condition of beef production right now and there is no indication that this continual rise in beef 
production can even be reversed in 1976 or 1977. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1921 
 

It is interesting to note that the Australian marketing board has been making every effort to cut their 
production, cut back on production, and yet with the calf crop coming this year in Australia there is 
going to be a one million calf surplus over last year. So their buildup is increasing and our buildup hasn't 
started to decline, but they are increasing at a much faster rate, although it looks as though Japan has 
started to ease their import restrictions on beef and that will take some pressure off. Italy yet is still in a 
foreign exchange position problem so that, even if she wanted to import beef, she just hasn't got the 
spare foreign exchange to do it. The European market is flooded with beef. There is no place to put it 
there. England is a member of the Common Market now and it is very difficult to push the beef into 
there, so it is going to have to come onto our North American market. 
 
One of our problems too is that we are running into the end of our global quota system terminated as of 
December 31st and that quota system that we had against imports was 125 million metric tons, or 85,000 
live cattle per year, which we allocated to beef producing countries on a past performance quota. Now 
this has expired and a new one will have to be negotiated this year and there is going to be a lot of 
pressure from the Australia-New Zealand countries to ask for a higher export of beef. 
 
We have another problem, that it is not possible to say that we will put an import restriction on the 
Australian beef because Americans have left on their legislation, their old traditional legislation, that 
allows them to put an import quota against us. They have removed the quota, but they have not removed 
the legislation. If we put a quota against Australian beef that surplus that is in transit will turn to the 
United States. The United States then can impose a quota that is still on the books that, by presidential 
proclamation has been, you might say, put in abeyance, but it is still there. 
 
The sad part is that our quota of beef exports to the United States, our traditional one, ran out on 
November, 1975 and the quota ran from August, 1975 to August, 1976. We now have it filled. If we put 
a restriction against Australian beef, we automatically leave the United States to impose that restriction, 
which would virtually close their borders. Bang, you can't do anything about it. So rather than ask for 
something which is impossible to achieve, a quota system or something against Australian beef, I think 
the best we can hope to do is to make the consumer aware that when she goes to the market or to a chain 
store, ask the people that you are dealing with, are you serving me off-shore Australian beef, is that what 
you are serving me, or are you serving Saskatchewan beef? Because not only is the quality better, I think 
that if the program were put out to the consumer, if they would concentrate on Saskatchewan beef now 
we would probably avert a shortage that will show up in a couple of years and make beef much higher at 
that time. By that time if the economies of Japan and Italy improve and Australia goes back to its 
traditional markets we will be in short supply of beef if we cut back our herds too much. And in keeping 
the prices for the cattle up, matured cows, we can take the calves off the market that would come on the 
market next fall and yet in doing this I am quite sure that most of the producers who sell cows will be 
keeping heifer calves which will then come on stream 
 
Therefore, I would hope that we could receive support for the Resolution, asking Saskatchewan people 
if they could 



 
January 9, 1976 

1922 
 

institute an advertising plan, state this position to the consumers in the province. I would hope that it 
would do some good to alleviate the problem for the producers in the province and in the future prevent 
an undue shortage and a very high price. 
 
I should like to move this Motion, seconded by the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan). 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. N. Shillington (Minister of Co-operation): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a few words on 
this. I think it is regrettable that the Conservative caucus did not go forward with the Resolution No. 32, 
because I think the two are intertwined to some extent. 
 
It is interesting that the beef producers are all in favor of a free market when it comes to marketing 
boards but not in favor of a free market when it comes to things like import quotas, encouraging the use 
of Saskatchewan beef. It just goes to prove to me that nobody really believes in free enterprise or free 
markets as such. What they believe in is the freedom to seek the best advantage for themselves. As I 
said, I don't think the two can be discussed separately. I am sure that the Hon. Member for Thunder 
Creek (Mr. Thatcher) would have, and has given us a speech on the necessity of leaving the beef 
producers free of any sort of a marketing board. I am equally sure that the Member for Thunder Creek, 
on this Resolution, will, in due course, tell us the necessity of government action to save beef producers. 
 
I guess what they are doing is talking about socialism for the rich and free enterprise for the poor. As I 
say, the two are really intertwined and I should like to deal with Resolution No. 32 just very briefly and 
I'll make the connection within the two, although I think it is obvious to most Members of the House. 
 
The Prime Minister in his Christmas address, or somewhere close to Christmas, spoke of what I think is 
a new economic order and I think that the old order is dead and is dying and I believe what the Prime 
Minister is saying, that the increase in oil prices, inflation, shortages of natural resources, 
unemployment, the problems which beef producers face, are not the signs of a world gone mad, they are 
part of a developing pattern. I believe what he was saying was that we live in a time of fundamental 
economic change. And if anyone in this decade really believes . . . 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I think the tradition in this House for the past two 
months has been one of speaking clearly and concisely to the Motion which is at hand and I fail to see 
the relevancy to Australia and New Zealand beef and the Prime Minister's speech and I would ask you to 
call the Minister to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think that all Members are aware of that and I am sure that all Members will aid me 
by practising that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
January 9, 1976 

1923 
 

Mr. Shillington: — What the Prime Minister was saying, of course, was that there is going to be an 
increasing involvement of the Government in the business community and in marketing. That is not only 
true for wage earners who are going to find their right of free collective bargaining restricted, it is also 
true of businessmen who are going to find their right to do as they please in the business community 
restricted. 
 
It is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Members opposite were as silent as the very hills when 
the anti-inflation program was brought in and the wage earners pointed out that their their freedom was 
being restricted to bargain collectively. Now that the Chambers of Commerce have wakened up and 
found out that the anti-inflation program affects them as well . . . 
 
Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — On a Point of Order please. Would he please stay to the Motion that is 
on the floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I didn't get the Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — He is not speaking to the Motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, if the Member for Regina Centre is speaking to Resolution No. 36 . . . 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order, asking the Member to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, I knew it, but I wanted the Member for Regina Centre to assure the House that 
he was speaking on that and intended to relate his remarks to the Resolution. 
 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I understand and you will 
correct me if I am wrong, that once a Motion has been placed on the Order Paper and the Motion has 
been stood, I understand that if there is any further discussion on that particular Motion it then must 
wait, of course, until the next Private Members' day. What the Member is now doing, of course, is 
speaking on Motion No. 3 (Resolution No. 32), the Motion under discussion is Mr. Anderson's Motion 
No. 4 (Resolution No. 36). 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. What I am doing is developing the background 
for Resolution No. 36 and as I pointed out earlier it is not unrelated to Resolution No. 32. It is just 
coincidence the two happen to come together. But what I am doing is to develop a background for 
Resolution No. 36. I think that the Prime Minister comments . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I assume that the Member is in fact dealing with Resolution No. 36 and he says that he 
is. I can only at this time take his word that he is developing background for his remarks. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1924 
 

Mr. Shillington: — This is my first Session in the House and I assume by what has gone on, Mr. 
Speaker, in this House, that Members are allowed quite a lot of liberty in developing background. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, something like 40 days and 40 nights. It is interesting that the Members 
opposite are as silent as can be when working people complain that their freedom is restricted. When the 
Chambers of Commerce wake up and find out that their freedoms are restricted then all of a sudden the 
Conservative caucus comes to life. I, frankly, was not convinced that there was a lot of life in the 
Conservative caucus but I guess when the interests of the Chambers of Commerce and the businessmen 
are concerned we find a little life breathed into the Conservative caucus. The general place of the 
Government in the world of the farming business, I think, is going to increase as time goes on. I think 
that we do not disagree with the goals which the Hon. Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Anderson) seeks to 
attain. We certainly don't have any quarrel with the involvement of the Government in the beef industry 
to attempt to encourage more consumption of Saskatchewan beef. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — The Liberals . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That's right. The Hon. Members opposite clearly seem to believe in that sort of an 
approach. I want to go on to point out to the Hon. Member for Shaunavon that there may be some 
problems with encouraging Saskatchewan consumers to consume Saskatchewan beef. He talked about 
quotas and he talked about public statements and it wasn't entirely clear to me exactly what he expected 
the Government to do to encourage consumption of Saskatchewan beef. 
 
Let me make a few comments. The free market economy which I assume the Members opposite are 
concerned about in light of Mr. Trudeau's statement is operating in the beef trade in Saskatchewan and it 
doesn't provide a mechanism for identifying western beef. The present market system doesn't identify 
the beef by its point of origin and it would be difficult in the current structure . . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The Hon. Members opposite are very interested in what I am saying and that 
certainly pleases me. I know that they will all be in the debate later on and all contributing to the 
understanding of this problem. Due to the lack of compulsory labelling of all meats as to the source of 
origin of the Canadian orders for beef, the Government can only encourage the buying of western beef 
by public statements to consumers. 
 
If the Members opposite are suggesting that we do something more than simply make public statements, 
(I assume they want something more than that), then I suggest that there must be some change in the 
manner in which beef is labelled when it comes into the province. 
 
Tariff and trade restrictions have significant implications 



 
January 9, 1976 

1925 
 

for trade and for the beef industry. Border restrictions may not always be in the best interest of the beef 
producers, complete isolation from world markets may encourage inefficiencies in our beef production. 
Governments must recognize and I think this House must recognize that short of complete isolation 
from the beef market the consumers and the wholesales and the grain traders will respond to the price 
changes faster. I should point out to all Members and I am sure the Hon. Member for Shaunavon is 
aware of this, consumers have a very direct interest in how we encourage the consumption of western 
beef. If indeed the beef that comes from the southern hemisphere is cheaper, the consumers of 
Saskatchewan obviously have an interest in precisely what form the encouragement takes. If it takes an 
appeal to your sense of nationalism and "buy Saskatchewan", I guess that's one thing, but if the 
encouragement takes any other form then it might mean the consumers' interests are adequately 
protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have further comments I should like to make in a further debate and I should like to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 37 — RECENT PURCHASE OF CONSUMERS OIL LIMITED, CALGARY 
 
Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley) moved, seconded by Mr. Merchant (Regina Wascana): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to instruct the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation to provide full particulars with respect to its recent purchase of Consumers 
Oil Limited, Calgary. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this Resolution has been placed on the Order Paper for obvious reasons. I think all 
Members of the House are aware that I asked a question during Question Period the other day requesting 
information from the Government that I felt was of an urgent nature and that was information that would 
lead me to have a little more understanding of the events surrounding the purchase of Consumers Oil. 
That information was denied me. The Minister involved, I believe, suggested or intoned that it wouldn't 
be in the public interest to receive it. As the Opposition is in this position as well with the potash debate, 
we don't have enough information to make a decision on behalf of the majority of this province as to 
whether or not this Government is acting in their best interests. We have been asking for information for 
30 some days in the Legislature regarding the potash question and this Government refuses to give us 
any. We have now taken another major step in the petroleum field in the purchase of Consumers Oil 
Limited of Calgary, and again we asked for information that might shed a little light on the events 
surrounding this purchase. The Government has again denied us this information. 
 
Now, I should like to discuss the purchase of Consumers Oil for a few minutes and try and outline here 
the position that the people of Saskatchewan are in as far as this purchase goes. And I want you to sit 
there and compare this when I speak because I think you will find that it is a particularly uncomfortable 



 
January 9, 1976 

1926 
 

position at best for the people to be in. They have to look on this purchase and the Minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has stated that it is a necessary purchase, well, they have to ask 
themselves that question. No government is going to be right all the time and on every major question of 
policy there are people in this province that question that Government's ability to make proper decisions 
and so it is the case in the purchase of Consumers Oil. 
 
Now people ask themselves two questions regarding the purchase of Consumers Oil. The first one is, is 
that purchase necessary? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — . . . long time ago for a song. 
 
Mr. McMillan: — It must have been a long time ago, Mr. Attorney General, and I look forward to you 
entering this debate on your feet rather than on your butt. Now the people ask themselves is it necessary 
and it may in fact be necessary. It is indeed an honorable approach to take to assure people in 
Saskatchewan that they have a long-term supply of natural gas. No one in this province would argue that 
point with you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Why did you sell the Hatton Mine Field then? 
 
Mr. McMillan: — If you would quit interrupting me, Mr. Attorney General . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMillan:— The people are asking the question, was this purchase necessary? And under some 
circumstances it may have been necessary. It may have been necessary if all methods for extracting 
natural gas out of Saskatchewan soil had been exhausted. Apparently the Minister in charge of SPC and 
the Government opposite believe that's true. What they are admitting, if they say that there is no more 
natural gas that can be developed in Saskatchewan for people of this province at a reasonable price, what 
they are suggesting is that all potential gas in this province has been discovered and proven. I don't think 
that is the case. I know the people in the petroleum industry don't think that is the case and they are the 
experts. 
 
However, let's operate on the assumption that that was the case. This Government has gone and moved 
into reserves of natural gas and petroleum outside the province and as I say, if in fact all petroleum 
reserves in Saskatchewan had been proven and we were well aware of the situation we were in, then that 
move may have been understandable. We are aware that they will be creating jobs in exploration outside 
Saskatchewan, spending I suspect millions of dollars outside the province. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — . . . couldn't be better spent! 
 
Mr. McMillan: — I hope you are right, that that money couldn't be better spent in this province, 
because if you are not right you have made a serious mistake. You haven't to this date given us the 
information to make that decision and that was some of the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1927 
 

information we asked for. Give us the information that told you that it was necessary to move outside of 
our borders to search for natural gas and to buy reserves. That is the first question people ask and they 
don't have that information. 
 
The second question they ask, I think, is just as natural and that is, is it a good deal or not and that 
question is being asked more and more often in these last four years and particularly since the purchase 
of Intercontinental Packers. The people of this province are of the consensus that you made a bad 
business deal there, maybe your intentions were good, I don't question that. Maybe in fact, as the 
Minister suggested earlier today, that Intercon would have fled the province had it not been for the 
Government's intervention. I doubt that, no one ever proved that to us. They are suspect about the kind 
of deals that this Government gets in because you have a poor track record. You are naturally suspect 
about this deal with Consumers Oil and I think legitimately so, so the second question they ask 
themselves and they want to ask this Government is, is this a good business deal. And I'll tell you 
something, on the information that you have provided the official Opposition with, those of us who 
represent 60 per cent of the population of this province, the Liberal and Tory Opposition, on the basis of 
the information that you have provided us, this is a bad deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMillan: — Now I have talked to people in the petroleum industry, I have talked to people in 
Sask Power and they assure me that it is indeed a good deal and I don't have enough information to 
disagree with them on that and I hope that if I did have the information that I wouldn't have to disagree 
with them. But the people of this province can't make that decision. They don't know if it is a good deal 
or a bad deal. All they can see is what is on the surface. They see that this Government has purchased 56 
billion cubic feet of proven gas, a six month's supply for the Province of Saskatchewan, for $10 million. 
That is proven recoverable gas. In order to recover that gas for the use of the people of this province a 
good deal more money is going to have to be spent. So in fact, to buy 56 billion feet of recoverable gas 
we may in the long run spend many tens of millions of dollars. And in that light alone this is a bad 
business deal. You have to set up compressing stations and draw that gas out of that gas field. If you 
intend to run it into the Trans-Canada Pipeline you have to build compressing stations to take it up to 
900 pounds in order to put it in the Trans-Canada Pipeline. I can only assume because that is a 
tremendous cost that you are going to develop your own pipeline, and we have heard that intimated. 
Laying a pipeline and compressor stations along that field is a tremendous cost. And if we are spending 
this kind of money only to recover 56 billion cubic feet of gas, a six-month's supply in this province, it's 
a bad deal. Now I suggest that the people I talked to in Sask Power and the petroleum industry say, well, 
we hear it's a good deal. But I want to know why. Give us that information. If there is more gas in that 
field and I suspect there had better be, tell us how much more gas. 
 
The Minister intones that there may be a thirty year supply of gas there. I want to know on what you 
based your decision. We have that right as the Opposition. This is no different, this entire situation, than 
the people of Saskatchewan saying to the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1928 
 

Government or one individual saying to another, I need transportation, I haven't got the time or you are 
the expert in this field, why don't you go out and buy me a car and they give him a blank cheque. You go 
out and you go to somebody and I have suspicions that this somebody was an excellent salesman, but 
you went out and you bought a car and you brought it back and these people went out to look at this 
great car that you spent $10 million for and it looked like a wreck. Shabby. And that's the kind of 
information I get about the kind of wellhead equipment and the surface assets you bought from 
Consumers Oil. That the equipment is shabby. The cementers that have worked on those wellheads in 
the Loverna and North Hoosier areas tell me the assets are shabby. It is no different than this person 
going out and looking at that car that you bought on their behalf for a sizeable sum and they see a piece 
of rusted out junk. Now they say to you, what have you done to us? This looks like a piece of junk, it 
looks like a bad deal and what does the Government say, no, no, no, trust us, we are never wrong. This 
is a good deal. And the public says, well tell us why it's a good deal. Let us in on it. Maybe it's got a nice 
engine in it. But the Government says, oh no, I'm sorry, we don't want to lift the hood, it's not in the 
public interest. Maybe its only got first gear in a great big standard transmission and they say let's see, 
let's have a look at the car. And the Government says, no, no, I'm sorry, it's not in the public interest. We 
are going to have to wait how many years in this province to find out if this is a good deal or a bad deal? 
 
That kind of information I suggest to you, if you were dealing with your neighbor on that basis in buying 
a car, you would not accept that and there is no reason why the people of Saskatchewan have to accept 
your posture on this question. You've refused to provide us with the information. Now, I don't know if 
you are going to have a change of heart in the near future or not. We have a gas field here that to the best 
of my knowledge, part of it, the average producing well is 180,000 cubic feet a day. That's poor, that's 
shabby, that's rust, a piece of junk, and I understand that the wellhead equipment that is used to pump 
that is shabby. That's not a good deal right there. I suspect, and I am told by Sask Power and other 
people that it is a good deal, so there must be more than that. There has to be more than the equipment 
you have bought. There has to be more than that 56 billion cubic feet of potential recoverable gas. We 
want to know that. I asked you if you would tell me who did the independent surveys, that told you that 
this was a good business deal, that there was potential there. We asked for the last financial statement of 
the company to show that this company at least in its own right operated at a reasonable level. You 
refused that information for us. No different than if you refused to lift the hood on the car that you 
bought for somebody. What have you got to hide? Maybe there is no engine under that hood at all. The 
people of Saskatchewan don't know that. Maybe we have only purchased 56 billion cubic feet of gas and 
shabby assets for $10 million. We have the right as representatives of the people in this province to get 
that information. I tried on their behalf in Question Period to get that information and you refused it to 
us. I am trying here again by standing on my feet and urging you to supply us with that information and 
I hope that you don't refuse us the next time. If you don't have anything to hide lay that information 
before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that all Members of this House will 



 
January 9, 1976 

1929 
 

consider the right to this information as a right of the people of this province. I suspect the vast majority 
of Members in this House would prefer to operate with a clear conscience. I would urge them and I 
would expect them to support the Motion. I therefore, move this Resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in seconding the Resolution 
and I advise the Minister now that I don't intend to adjourn the debate and certainly I expect we will hear 
from the Minister and indeed I have some specific inquiries to the Minister. 
 
What the Government suggests to us from time to time both in the potash debate and when they deal 
particularly with Sask Power transactions is that so much is not within the public interest for the 
Opposition or the public to know. I wonder indeed when we review the Consumer Gas purchase if the 
three standout occasions, the three important ingredients that the Minister didn't communicate to the 
House, aren't of interest both to this House and his reason for not communicating them. 
 
First, when I asked why the Consumers Oil deal had gone through in mid-December, asked why that 
wasn't announced, his reaction and perhaps quite logically so, was that the deal was that it would be 
announced in early January. I might well be able to accept that. Except that when the Minister did 
announce the deal in early January, how did he announce it? Did he announce it in this House, knowing 
that it was a large deal, an interprovincial deal, a deal involving three provinces, something about which 
this side of the House might well have had some thoughts? No, he announced it instead through a Press 
release. He announced it in such a way and at such a time that there was no opportunity for the 
Opposition to question him about it and no opportunity for the people of the province to be given an 
opportunity to judge the value of the deal or not. 
 
When he did announce the deal, he held back the BC portion of the acquisition. Held back that there is a 
three per cent gross override in the Grizzly Field. A portion of the purchase which I'm advised is worth 
something in the neighborhood of $3 million. On this side of the House we were convinced until that 
came to light that it was a terrible deal. Now, we suspect it may not be a good deal, but at that time we 
thought it was awful. We then discovered that there were British Columbia holdings of which we had no 
knowledge. Not a very candid open way to present matters either to the Press or to this House. 
 
Then, lastly, the Minister wasn't here yesterday. Yesterday, I asked about a pipeline that has to be 
constructed. We don't yet know the length of the pipeline, where it is going. We know that there is an 
application to service central Saskatchewan, we don't know the cost and we don't really know what the 
Government has in mind. 
 
I leave it, Mr. Speaker, to you and to others to judge the candor of the Minister in presenting this 
transaction to the House in the way that he has. I think you have to look back to my submission, and I 
have a comment to make about it, to what I suggest is not a very candid approach of the Minister when I 



 
January 9, 1976 

1930 
 

was questioning him about some problems in the East Cantuar field, close to Swift Current. The same 
kind of process, it is like pulling teeth out of a squirming pig. Mr. Speaker, why is the Government, 
through Saskoil and through Sask Power putting such an emphasis on exploration outside of this 
province? 
 
I have, for instance, the figures on oil and gas exploration in Saskatchewan for the last six or seven 
years, and every year it has gone down. I have the same figures for Alberta during the same tax years of 
the Federal Government and every year it has gone up. Indeed the Grizzly field which is 17,000 - 18,000 
feet wasn't profitable until the price was changed, paid by an NDP Government in British Columbia, at 
65 cents for a thousand cubic feet. Paid by that Government in its marketing agency. And I have said 
before to this House, there is an example of us not buying a product but in fact losing any right to 
control the produce that we produce. 
 
I asked the Minister today, would we be going into the Territories and into the Dakotas? He indicated 
they might to into the Territories. I asked him again, does the Minister — I remind the Minister you 
haven't dealt with the question of the Dakotas. You haven't told us whether this Government will invest 
Saskatchewan Government money in the United States exploring. He didn't answer again. Then I asked 
another supplementary and again he didn't answer. Not, I suggest, a particularly candid approach and a 
particularly candid way of dealing with the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are three specific questions that I will be putting to the Minister when I conclude. 
Before I do that I wonder if the Minister might in his remarks tell us the direction that he expects for 
investment in this province with the great activity if you like of Sask Power in doing its own 
exploration. We already know that new gas in Alberta pays about 60 cents, that's net after royalties. We 
know that in British Columbia it is 65 cents, paid by an NDP Government there, when it set the price, 
and that is net again without royalties. While in Saskatchewan the price is about 22 cents and after 
royalties it is 10 cents or 11 cents, making it impossible financially for any exploration to go on in this 
province. 
 
If the Government proposes to continue in the way that it has with Consumers Gas and Many Islands, 
and that is what we are asking for is figures, asking to know the direction in which the Government is 
going, then I ask the Minister how you expect any private enterprise in gas and oil to continue in 
competition? 
 
The last time that this kind of a situation arose, was about 1958 or 1957. It had to do with a utilities tax 
on shareholders, a tax on earnings of utilities companies in the Province of Alberta. What the Federal 
Government did on that occasion, was, they said, we will not tax the utilities' shareholders we will allow 
their development, their investment to go tax free. If that doesn't happen, if the Federal Government 
didn't back off in dealing with all oil and gas and I suggest that there is no possibility that they will, then 
only two options are available. Either the oil and gas industry will be completely destroyed and the 
figures show that it is certainly on its last legs in this province, or secondly, the provincial government 
will have to accept and start to pay federal tax. It is part of the reason indeed that I was asking questions 



 
January 9, 1976 

1931 
 

today from the minister about Many Islands in a tax way. 
 
I said I had three specific questions. First, I understand that your conversations with Don Getty, the 
Alberta Minister that took place three months ago. You told us that you believe you have the assurances 
of the Alberta Government that it will be possible to get the product out of Alberta. You have told us 
that you never even discussed it with the British Columbia Government. I can imagine the hue and cry 
of Members opposite if a Government from outside of Saskatchewan were investing money here without 
ever discussing it with you. But I am told that your discussions with Don Getty, the Minister in charge 
were three months ago. I wonder if the Minister would tell the House whether those discussions have 
been updated or whether the concerns that I have and the concerns expressed by Mr. Larter of the 
Conservative Party are legitimate concerns, concerns that the Opposition might well be placing before 
you. 
 
Secondly, let me say and I suspect to an extent I am saying it almost to the Attorney General, whenever 
these kinds of questions are asked they hurl it back in our face, to ask them in Crown corporations. As 
the Attorney General well knows, but some of the Press may not know, to put this into Crown 
corporations would mean that it would not be open to discussion until April or May of 1977. If I am to 
get the kind of information that I suggest the people of the province are entitled to know about the East 
Cantuar field, that won't come up until April or May, 1977 in Crown corporations. As the House well 
knows Crown corporations only deal with the year under review. There is one exception, and that 
exception is that if a question is placed on the Order Paper and the Government then indicates that 
matter will go to Crown corporations, it may then be questioned in Crown corporations in that year. It 
would be possible if the Government allows it to happen. But I could, in Crown corporations debate, 
receive the information about the East Cantuar field and Members on this side could obtain the 
information that I suggest we are entitled to have about the Many Islands purchase and the pipeline and 
the whole Consumers Oil proposition. 
 
I ask the Minister specifically about Don Getty. I secondly ask the Minister specifically, I will be 
placing questions on the Order Paper, asking for information about both of these matters, would the 
Minister now indicate to the House that you will, to facilitate those matters going into Crown 
corporations, direct that the answers go to Crown corporations? I can't put the matter before Crown 
corporations, only the Government can do so in this year. And I suggest that that would be the 
appropriate and fair thing to do for the open government that we hear so much about. 
 
Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I had assumed up to the time 
that the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) moved the Resolution that all of the used car dealers 
were in British Columbia, but I found during his remarks in regard to the purchase of the Consumers Oil 
Limited, that he knows much more about automobiles than he does about gas and the exploration and 
development of gas fields. Had he taken the time, Mr. Speaker, to acquaint himself somewhat better in 
regard to gas, gas exploration and development, reserves and consumption in the prairies he wouldn't 
have shown his ignorance as he did in his brief remarks 



 
January 9, 1976 

1932 
 

in introducing his Resolution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is strange that the only people we have heard comment about the Consumers Oil deal 
being a bad deal are the Members who sit to your left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — The general public, Mr. Speaker, and they may be excused because they may not be all 
that knowledgeable of what the transaction really means to Saskatchewan, but there is no opposition 
there. We go to the public sector that has some knowledge about gas and oil or to the media, take for 
example the Star-Phoenix, an article that the Attorney General just passed to me, indicating that the 
purchase has to be a very good one. Independent comments from the industry, not only in Saskatchewan 
but in Alberta, have given credit to Saskatchewan Power for having foresight in buying the reserves that 
Consumers Oil had. Mr. Speaker, the Member for Kindersley should also acquaint himself with the kind 
of deals that the Liberal Party and the former Liberal government of Saskatchewan made before he 
undertakes to criticize the deals that this Government is in the process of making before they have ever 
had an opportunity to prove themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — I would suggest to the Member that he acquaint himself with the sale of the Snakehole 
Sodium Sulphate resource by the former Liberal Government. Surely the Member for Qu'Appelle can 
inform him of some of the background in regard to the sale of that resource for I believe the figure was 1 
cent per ton, is that correct? One cent per ton, 200,000 tons of sodium sulphate that is now valued today, 
at, using the Attorney General's figures, $17 per ton. If people want to know about bad deals in 
Saskatchewan, they only need to look at the deals that the Liberal Party made between 1964 to 1971. I 
would suggest that the Member for Kindersley, along with the other greenhorn Members that sit to your 
left, Mr. Speaker, look at . . . well the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) may have some better 
information in regard to the bad deals over some of the others, I am sure he is not going to bring them to 
the attention of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — But I suggest the new Members look into the performance of the Liberal government in 
its sale of Saskair. I suggest they become more acquainted with the deal that the Liberal government 
made or had going with Athabasca Pulp. I would most importantly, Mr. Speaker, suggest that before 
they start to talk about whether or not the purchase of Consumers Oil Limited was a bad deal for 
Saskatchewan or not, I would suggest that they acquaint themselves with the Hatton Gas Field sale. 
 
The Member for Kindersley asked the question Mr. Speaker, do we not have sufficient gas in 
Saskatchewan? Well, if we are talking about a supply of gas for 25 to 30 years, I don't want to stop at 
this point in time to remind the Member 



 
January 9, 1976 

1933 
 

that I said that we were trying to obtain a 30 year supply, but I did not want that to be interpreted to 
mean that the Consumers' purchase would provide us with that supply. Certainly, it will not. It is only 
one step in obtaining an additional reserve of gas in order to obtain that 30 year supply. 
 
He asked, do we have a sufficient supply in Saskatchewan? The answer to that is, No. And I think any 
informed person or persons in regard to gas knows that we don't have that kind of gas potential in 
Saskatchewan. We might have had that kind of gas, or at least we would have been closer to it, had not 
his former colleagues sold that Hatton Gas Field for a song some years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — He talks about 55 billion cubic feet of gas, that was a pittance in comparison to the 
amount of gas that was sold in that sale, for no good reason whatsoever. That action of the former 
government, Mr. Speaker, has forced this Government to explore and develop outside of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in a more concentrated way, to try to recover some of those needless and senseless losses 
of the former Liberal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to convey to the Members opposite that I have some 
extended remarks to make on this debate and I am therefore going to adjourn the debate so that I can 
answer with some precision some of the questions that not only the member for Kindersley advocates, 
but also the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant). But I want to say at this point in time that the 
Member for Wascana criticizes the Government for saying some of these concerns that he registers, or 
has registered, can be discussed better under Crown corporations. I say that in some instances, if it is of 
an immediate concern, he is probably right. Some of the answers and some of the debates should take 
place in the House. But as far as his track record is concerned in regard to some of the questions and 
some of the innuendoes that he has made in this House before the Orders of the Day, it would simply be 
ridiculous to try and answer them in this form. He mentions, for one, Mr. Speaker, the release of gas in 
the East Cantaur field. I don't think that any Member in the history of this House has undertaken to 
misinform the Members and the general public in regard to the seriousness of that outbreak of that 
natural gas. 
 
And there was absolutely no immediate concern or emergent concern to debate that issue in the House, 
but the Member got up before the Orders of the Day, playing to the Press, trying to say that we were 
losing millions, perhaps billions of dollars in natural gas because of a release which has proven to be 
very minor when it was reviewed. 
 
Now I am saying to that Member that if he wants to have some co-operation from Government Members 
then he should undertake to be sincere in the kinds of questions that he asks, because it will not take 
long for the general public to realize that it is simply nonsense that the Members opposite are referring 
to, when they try to illegitimately expose certain issues that are not in fact issues of concern within the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1934 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) and the Member for Regina 
Wascana (Mr. Merchant) have asked a number of questions and I assure them that I want to answer 
some of those questions, including the information that I believe, especially the Member for Kindersley 
needs, in regard to the Hatton Gas Fields sale and I think this is a most appropriate Resolution to do it 
under. 
 
I also want to assure the Member for Regina Wascana that I shall answer his questions in regard to Mr. 
Getty and the Crown corporations and its intent to explore and develop outside of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. And I am going to adjourn debate so that I will have the opportunity to do that in a fuller 
way then I would by answering at this point in time. 
 
But I do, briefly, want to respond in regard to the Member for Regina Wascana's reference to the 
meetings and discussions or correspondence that I had with Mr. Getty, Minister of Energy in the 
Province of Alberta. Yes, the last meeting that I had with him was some three months ago, but it was not 
to discuss specifically the purchase or the removal of gas from the Consumers Oil holdings. Certainly 
we were negotiating with Consumers Oil at that time. We were also discussing with Soquip and with 
Algas our partners in the Joint Ventures Limited program. We were also looking at exploration 
development in other areas, at other levels of activity in the Province of Alberta, so that the discussion 
was more general in regard to the receptiveness of the Alberta Government to the Province of 
Saskatchewan and its Crown corporation developing and exploring for gas and/or oil in the Province of 
Alberta. 
 
I indicated to this House several days ago, before the Orders of the Day, that Mr. Getty on behalf of the 
Alberta Government, assured me that the province and its Crown corporations was most welcome to 
participate in the development of Alberta's resources. 
 
I also inquired as to whether or not there would be any problems as to the exportation or the removal of 
gas, if and when it was found and proven in the Province of Alberta. And the Minister, again, assured 
me that if those Crown corporations that had activities that the province was responsible for and abided 
by the regulations of the province, there should be no problems in obtaining an export permit. 
 
I don't want the Members opposite to assume that we have a guarantee, a carte blanche guarantee that 
we will be able to remove all gas that is developed in Alberta, because they have some guidelines, 
legitimate guidelines, legitimate criteria that all removers of gas and oil have to respect when they make 
application for those removal permits. And we respect those guidelines and those criteria and we believe 
that we will be able to live within them and make realistic applications which will allow the removal of 
gas from Alberta to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that I wanted to comment in some further detail in regard to this Resolution, so at 
this point in time I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, will the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1935 
 

Minister permit a question? The Minister, when we first talked about East Cantaur indicated that he 
wasn't sure that it was a Sask Power breakout at all. I wonder if the Minister would indicate how much 
money it cost Sask Power to pay for Gustafson Drilling to drill a relief well and how much it cost for 
Bata Petroleums to drill a relief well, and I understand two wells were drilled and I wonder if the 
Minister knows approximately how much they cost Sask Power? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I know approximately, but from past experience with the Member for 
Wascana, I think that I should give him the precise figure and I will do that at a later date, rather than 
give him an approximation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 39 — ESTABLISH A STUDY WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL 

SERVICES. 
 
Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana) moved, seconded by Miss Clifford (Wilkie): 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to establish within the Department 
of Social Services a study to consider the policies and operation of those policies regarding; (a) 
adoption of children; (b) placement and removal of foster children; (c) aid and assistance to 
handicapped and retarded children either staying with their parents or not, and adults; and 
report the recommendations of that study to Members of this Assembly within nine months of 
the passage of this Resolution. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak to this Resolution which concerns 
itself with some of the procedures of the Department of Social Services surrounding the adoption of 
children, the treatment of foster children and the approach of the Department to handicapped and 
retarded children. Part (c) of the Resolution asks the Department to look into the policies and operations 
of those policies regarding aid and assistance to handicapped children and in some ways that doesn't 
quite fit with parts (a) and (b), which concern themselves with the procedures surrounding the adoption 
of children and the placement and removal of foster children. But because the nature of the Resolution is 
to ask the Government to review its policies I hope the House might include two related areas of subject 
matter (a) and (b) with (c), although the matters, as I have said, aren't precisely on all fours with one 
another. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, will principally be raising areas of concern. Members, I suggest, must be made aware of 
the problems surrounding the Department's policy in these three areas. 
 
The Resolution asks the Government to look in upon itself, to do an in-House study. I suggest there are 
none so blind as those who refuse to see and, frankly, within the Department of Social Services I get the 
impression that they justify the way they operate simply because that is the way it has been operating for 
many decades. The very inertia of departmental policies have tended to blind people within the 
Department who should know they are off the track. I suggest they should redefine their 



 
January 9, 1976 

1936 
 

goals and should be looking in these specific areas. 
 
The area of concern about the way the Department handles the placement and removal of foster children 
is really a concern because there is an absence of, what I would call, fair and even justice. No rule of law 
exists within the Department. A different problem from the handicapped children problem, but with 
adopted children and with foster children my concern is that injustice is sometimes done and when it is 
done there is really no right of review. 
 
The Doucette case surprised the whole province and I don't think that the message that we should have 
acquired from that case should be lost. No one realized, for instance, that there were no appeal 
procedures set up by the Department of Social Services, and there still aren't. If someone obtains a 
judgment against you for $25 there is an appeal. If you get a driver's license assessment, an additional 
assessment on your driver's license, an appeal lies; of you are refused unemployment insurance, a couple 
of appeals lie. Even within the Department of Social Services itself if you are refused benefits, or you 
think the benefits are too low, two appeals lie. What I am saying is that within our system we have 
always believed that it is possible for a review board or a committee dealing with something to get off 
the track and make a wrong decision and that is the reason we have always relied on appeals. We have 
always said, not just in the courts but in most of our deals and in most of our government departments, 
that an appeal should lie in some way. 
 
We believe within our administrative tribunals and certainly the Department of Social Services operates 
in that way sometime, that it is possible that errors can be committed by people making decisions and it 
may be that prejudice may lie. Then, lo and behold, along came the case of the Doucettes. It got a lot of 
publicity. Three foster children were living in Prince Albert. They had been with that family for a long, 
long time. They were taken from the family. The fact that they ended up in an American home and that 
the Americans then turned the children back, I don't think really matters. That would be going sort of to 
the specifics of the case and I don't think the specifics of the case are so vitally important. 
 
The acting Minister at that time, I believe the Minister of Labour as I recall, the acting Minister at the 
time, chose not to meddle and he may have been wrong, but what we should do is remember that the 
Doucette case goes beyond the personal injustice that may or may not have been made out and it goes 
beyond because it demonstrates an injustice within the system, an injustice within the Department. 
 
The committee studying the Doucette case, studying what to do with those children had spent eight 
months reviewing where they would send the three children, deciding what to do with the children 
without ever even talking to the Doucettes. They didn't ever even tell the Doucettes that they were 
considering taking the foster children from the home. So what will now be a shock to the province, it 
now comes to light that there is no provision in law and no provision in the policies of the Department to 
compel the committee in such a situation to talk with the people who are involved, in that case the 
Doucette family. The family wasn't consulted and there is no onus on the Department and no onus in law 
to force them to consult. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1937 
 

The Saskatoon region which decided the Doucette case, and I gather they said this when dealing with the 
Judge Hughes report. Judge Hughes report incidentally was then kept from this House. As far as I know 
no disclosure was ever given. It was buried, if you like. First the Government said of the Doucette case, 
if I wander a little from my notes, what they said was, don't worry about it as justice will be done. They 
will give it to a very well known and qualified judge. He is! And we will put some good people with 
him, and they were. And the report goes into the Department, and that was the end of it. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — . . . a copy of which was sent to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — I wasn't aware of that and I am pleased to be corrected. 
 
The Saskatoon region, which decided the Doucette case, said that the Department occasionally invites 
the foster parents whose children are being discussed to meet with the Department; to meet with the 
committee, but that is the exception to the rule. And that is what the committee itself said. To the shock 
of the province over the Doucette case, it became apparent that there is no provision under The Family 
Services Act for an impartial hearing before a board or committee which would permit foster parents to 
present their case before foster children are removed from their home. There is no provision in the Act; 
no provision in law for them to answer allegations that may be made against them, and indeed they may 
not even know that allegations are being made against them. 
 
The examples that I have gone into which allow an impartial review in every other area of government 
are almost endless, yet with the lives of children and the lives of the families who are so completely 
involved with those children, there is no review. 
 
I know of a particular instance where the Department, after some years, this instance happened in the 
Lakeview constituency, came in and took a foster child, who had grown to three and a half years. No 
offer for adoption. Indeed, they refused the couple the option of adopting. It was a Regina case. The 
couple applied to adopt and they were refused. They had older children, the Department, perhaps for 
whatever reason, said that there are good families with younger children or no children at all and the 
Department refused to allow that adoption. No one ever knew — and that couple when I talked to them 
continued to be under the impression that some allegations may have been made about them. No one 
ever knew if things had been said about them. That is not information to which a couple is entitled. The 
woman in that case was so tormented by the problem that her mental health was damaged and she was 
receiving treatment because the doctors thought she might have a mental breakdown. 
 
I know of another case in the Lakeview constituency, where the Department simply rolled in one day 
and took out three children without any notice. One child was 13 and had been in that home for over two 
years. They didn't have any other adopting family, they were just taking the children. They placed them 
in another home and I expect, and indeed I hope, that I will remember for the rest of my life, sitting in 
their home talking to the couple and being told of how the boy, who had 



 
January 9, 1976 

1938 
 

come out of his shell was going to school, the boy was taken from the home and put into another home 
and that shortly thereafter — they kept in touch with him and the boy would come over and visit them 
— that the boy shortly thereafter stopped going to school and started working in a service station. It 
probably ended any chance of following the usual course of action that leads to success and that is 
higher education or at least finishing his high school. 
 
I don't know why those decisions are made. I don't know what was behind those decisions, but neither 
did the foster parents. They were not given an opportunity to defend their reputation before a committee; 
they were not allowed to meet the allegations which may have been made about them or even to make 
representations before the committee, which made such crucial decisions about their lives and the lives 
of the young people in their homes. 
 
If the Department thinks that these people are fit to have the foster children in their home in the first 
place, at the very least the Department should believe that they are fit to make representation to the 
Department when any changes are going to be made with those children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been talking about foster parents. Unfortunately the same procedure applies to 
children in the homes of couples who propose to adopt and the problems in both areas are the same. 
 
I assume, frankly, that the Department ordinarily acts properly. I assume that for adopted children and I 
assume that for foster children. I am sure that that is the case in the greatest majority of cases. I, indeed, 
doubt there is ever any intention to do wrong deliberately by the Department, but I suggest that 
inadvertently the Department may well be doing wrong and not hearing the foster parents or the 
adopting parents is a mistake. Again, as an example of the way the Department may act, I want to tell 
you a story of a particular couple who live in Gladmer Park in the constituency which I represent. 
 
They had a girl by the name of Christine. The mother is 43, he is 40, neither of them drink nor smoke. 
As far as I can tell they are a good average family. They know that they can't have any children, they 
know that they are older than the age when one may ordinarily adopt, so they adopted a Métis child. It is 
harder I gather to find homes that will adopt Métis children. They were delighted to have the child. For 
whatever reason the Department came in and took the child away after some months. I forget how long 
it was, frankly. Bit it sticks in my mind that it was about 8 months. 
 
Allegations had been made that they categorically denied. But the Department didn't discuss the 
allegations with them. They came in, they made a decision and they took the child. They, to this day, 
don't know specifically what those allegations were. The situation in that case was and indeed I believe 
continues to be most improper. 
 
Again, as with the Doucette case, though the decision of the Department may have been wrong, the 
importance I suggest to this House was not that decision. The importance to this House was the direction 
in which the Department moves and the way in which the Department operates. What is important to 
this House 



 
January 9, 1976 

1939 
 

is that the Department acts without any controls either established by legislation or established within 
the Department as far as I am able to tell. They came in, they took the child, this couple had no right of 
review, didn't even have any right to be heard by the Department before the Department made its 
decision. Didn't have any right to present their case and have departmental officials hearing their matter 
to know what their side of the matter might be. 
 
I stress the word right, because the Department, under a great deal of pressure after the fact purported to 
review the matter. 
 
Now what did the Department do? First, and it is a legal phrase that perhaps the Attorney General will 
understand, but we had in that review called 'nemo judex' I believe, the same people reviewing after they 
had made the decision. A legal principle that says and it has existed two thousand years, that the same 
people can't review themselves, because even if they try they come in with a prejudice and a 
pre-determination. And that is what happened in that particular case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department, in dealing with that matter, ran what I choose to call and perhaps 
somewhat unfairly, a sort of kangaroo court of appeal. Kangaroo court, not because it was intended to 
run that way, I suggest, but here were the people who had already made the decision. 
 
The second thing they did, I forget the Latin phrase for this principle, but they didn't allow them to be 
heard in advance but even on their re-hearing, they didn't allow them to have any advice of counsel, nor 
did they allow them on their re-hearing to have the accusations presented to them. What the re-hearing 
did was it heard the allegations that were to be raised against this particular couple, heard them in the 
absence of the couple, hearsay evidence at best, I suggest from a neighbor or whatever. They really 
didn't know what allegations they had to meet. Then they were brought into the room before the group 
that were to deal with the matter with sort of the flavor of the Spanish Inquisition, and then the 
Department questioned them about these allegations, and then the Department made a decision again. Of 
course, what was that decision? It was the same decision again. That particular couple went to the 
Ombudsman, but the Ombudsman had to tell them it was quite right. I have told them, the legal aid 
authorities have told them, that there is nothing in law that requires the Department, I don't overplay 
this, to deal justly with adopting parents. I don't say that they don't ordinarily deal justly with adopting 
parents, but using that phrase, in a legal sense. They don't have any duty either in law or by the 
procedures established by this House to grant any appeal and to go through any review. 
 
I have a letter for instance dated July 18, from Mr. Charabin, the acting Deputy Minister of Social 
Services at that time regarding the particular matter. He said we will hold an appeal sometime. They 
pointed out that there was no appeal procedure. They don't know when there will be an appeal 
procedure. But as soon as they have an appeal procedure then the appeal will follow. 
 
Of course, there is no appeal procedure to date. And that has been going on for 10 months. I don't 
believe that without some spurring from this House or from the Minister, that there 



 
January 9, 1976 

1940 
 

ever will be an appeal procedure within that Department unless some kind of pressures are created. 
 
Mr. Charabin told me in that letter that they had decided that the couple wasn't suitable to adopt a child 
and they won't allow them to apply for another until they win the appeal. Then in the very same two 
paragraphs, the letter sort of reminiscent of the book, Catch 22, he told me that there was no appeal 
procedure. 
 
I have been trying to do something to help that couple. I stress that the importance is not this specific 
case or any of the half dozen specific cases that I have presented, but the procedure of the Department. 
A procedure that I am sure grew up at a time when they said we have to deal in camera and we have to 
deal as quietly as we can. 
 
I don't think that the Department will stop running this sort of star chamber hearings about foster 
children and adopted children, situations like the Gladmer Park example, and the Doucette case and the 
examples from Lakeview. I don't think they will stop unless there is some impetus from this House. 
These things come to the attention of Ministers, and come to the attention of Members and I dare say 
that all of you at one time or another in your travels have run into claims of injustice along these lines. 
But we tend to think that they are exceptions. What would be so heinous and so horrible for the 
Department to have some form of appropriate appeal to allow a fresh hearing or a re-hearing of these 
situations? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that a secondary resolution would address itself to handicapped and retarded 
children. I say again that the areas are very different. 
 
For handicapped and retarded children in general there is very little departmental aid. Very little, no in 
specific terms, but very, very little in relation to what is done in other jurisdictions. The Department 
interestingly enough can't take a handicapped or retarded child out of a home and put that child in an 
institution at $400 or $500 a month. The Department can't, under the way our system works, give $100 a 
month to a family keeping the handicapped or retarded child in their home even where need lies. Here 
we have situations where families find that they cannot meet the added expense of a handicapped or 
retarded child. I am not saying there should be an allowance for handicapped or retarded children. But it 
is ridiculous that the Government is able to pay to break up a family but can't subsidize to keep a family 
together though they know that these children cause added expenses and they do require extra care and 
extra assistance. Particularly with retarded children as they grow older, they sometimes need more help 
and sometimes it can be relatively expensive. 
 
This Resolution again asks the Government to look in upon itself in this area. In doing that I suggest that 
amongst other things the Government should be looking at Ontario which subsidizes the delivery of 
services to handicapped and retarded children in their homes and keeps them with their families in the 
community. The Ontario Ministry of Community and Social Services provides a number of family 
support services for the mentally retarded and handicapped children and the parents of those children. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1941 
 

Four years ago that government decided that the development of community services would be less 
expensive and more appropriate than the institutional system. But we haven't made that jump. They have 
a number of programs. They have a day nursery program for children between the ages of two and five. 
There are 79 programs licensed under The Day Nurseries Act for retarded children in Ontario. Under 
that Act, from two to five, the Department pays 87 per cent of the fees or more if there is need, a 
minimum of 87 per cent of the cost. Once a child reaches five, and goes into the standard school system, 
the nursery system, then the child if there is need gets 100 per cent subsidy from the provincial 
government. 
 
They have a system of developing centres with day attendants that they are working on. Children of 
school age up to the age of 18 who haven't been accepted in the school system and are not trainable, or 
children between the age of two or five who are profoundly retarded attend those centres. They can still 
stay in their homes while attending those centres, while those same types of children tend to become 
institutionalized under our system. 
 
The fees under this system are subsidized by the government again 100 per cent. There are 14 such 
centres in the province at the present time. Up until four years ago, as now exists in Saskatchewan, those 
children almost always found themselves going into institutions. They have nine half day programs 
available for physically handicapped children. They provide homemaking and babysitting within limits 
to assist families who might otherwise become forced (and I think that is really what does happen), 
forced to allow their children to go into institutions because they find that they cannot meet the added 
financial responsibility of holding the child in their own home. 
 
Ontario has some pilot projects and they include early infant stimulation. A program which tries to go in 
at a very young age before the child is two, almost from birth. Teach the family how to deal with a child 
from birth to age two. The objective is to reach the children at a young age to provide parents with 
information regarding simulation and training so that the children will grow up to be less seriously 
handicapped than they might otherwise have become. The province is working towards the integration 
of mentally retarded and handicapped children with normal children. Trying to develop regular 
programs with a component for retarded children. Their new buildings, 15 of their latest buildings in the 
last few years in Ontario have all been done close to or as a part of existing school buildings, or 
municipal nurseries so that the new buildings always go up in the same school yards, trying to bring 
those children within the system of all of the other children in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what can we learn from Ontario's leadership? I know full well that Ontario over the years 
has had money to spend that simply hasn't been available I suppose to the Province of Saskatchewan. 
But we have been shirking badly in this area. If Ontario is presenting a Cadillac program, we can do a 
lot better than we are doing now. 
 
The program in Ontario, if you view it in its intent, seems to be more prescriptive than our system. It 
seems to be a system that tries to deal with the problems as individual 



 
January 9, 1976 

1942 
 

problems. I am afraid that our pattern and perhaps it was that way under the Liberals as well, but our 
pattern certainly now under this Government is to deal with them almost as numbers, and not to deal 
with them in the individual prescriptive way Ontario does. I think Ontario's lead is the lead we should be 
following. 
 
But in Saskatchewan even such basic assistance as the assistance given to the Saskatchewan Council for 
Crippled Children and Adults to help with transportation in Regina seems to have been given by the 
Government almost grudgingly. The subsidy for instance was cut off for some period of time in 1975. A 
subsidy that I would have thought was almost automatically given. It was then renewed with pressure 
from a number of quarters, including pressure, I might mention from His Worship Mayor Baker. The 
province provides limited spending for special transportation of the handicapped in this province. It is 
better than nothing, but certainly not as good as it could be. I suggest that that cut-off in 1975 was 
indicative of the attitude of the Government. 
 
Now what does the NDP say about the problem? And what does the NDP as a party say about what I am 
now saying to this House? That is the NDP party as opposed to the NDP Government. It always seems 
to me, and I review your policies fairly regularly, good ideas there from time to time, unlike the kind of 
rule that exists in the Liberal party when the Liberals in convention pass a position or a resolution, you 
will find that becomes a part of our policy and you will find that we have made good on our policies 
when we have had the opportunity to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — That's not the way the NDP has operated. Here's a resolution, it wasn't the policy of 
the entire NDP party, which came out under the signature of the Hon. Ned Shillington in May, 1974: 
 

Whereas adequate support of programs for parents who are caring for a handicapped child are 
not yet available under the Saskatchewan Act Respecting Family Services. 

 
Whereas the program should meet such special needs as: (a) adequate income for all 
handicapped children and adults; (b) subsidized housekeeping services; (c) subsidized suitable 
transportation services for handicapped people of all ages; (d) effective rehabilitative and 
education programs for the seriously handicapped; (e) the availability of orthopedic shoes, 
prescriptions, vitamins and nutritional guidance, etc., at minimal costs; and whereas the lack of 
family support encourages parental rejection of handicapped children, be it resolved that the 
Government of Saskatchewan be respectfully urged to establish new and realistic support of 
programs which will encourage parents to maintain mentally and physically handicapped 
children in their own homes. 

 
That is an NDP resolution. May, 1974, in the city of Regina. In the city of Regina. I said in my 
comments that it is not the policy of the entire NDP party. But I suggest to you that that is an example of 
saying to your people we are moving in that 



 
January 9, 1976 

1943 
 

direction. That is a good direction to move and it is a good thing to say to your people. But now I should 
like to see you moving a little further and taking the steps that you should be taking. 
 
Now I have spoken in the House from time to time about the way the NDP seems to say one thing at one 
time and do another at another and this seems to me to be a classic example of inaction. This Resolution 
quite simply put and I don't oversell it and I don't want to press you into feeling as if you are in a corner, 
says look in at yourself. It says to the Department, look in, re-examine the direction in which it's going. 
It asks the Department to examine its priorities in these very narrow areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have pleasure in moving, seconded by the Member for Wilkie (Miss Clifford) this 
Resolution. I thank Members for their consideration and I hope that the Minister may consider these 
matters and that we may well hear from the Government in due course. 
 
Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. 
Merchant) seems to have the unhappy faculty of taking a reasonable motion and presenting it in an 
abrasive and obnoxious fashion so that he virtually destroys what should be support for that particular 
motion. 
 
I was rather surprised that at this point in time he chose to re-introduce in the public view the Doucette 
case which I think was a highly emotionally charged case which was I think a very sensitive one, one 
that embroiled people such as the Leader of the Opposition who, not being in possession of the facts, 
was prepared to take a public stance, only to find himself painted into a corner pretty badly after Judge 
Hughes' report was delivered up and which virtually vindicated the position of the Department. 
 
I have a good deal of sympathy for some of the suggestions that are entertained in the Resolution which 
we are discussing. I think perhaps the Doucette case itself tended to bring to the fore some of the 
deficiencies in the adoption program. This was not only recognized by myself for that short period of 
time when I was Minister of Social Services following June 11th, it was acknowledged by the former 
Minister, Alex Taylor, who had put some wheels in motion for a review. He had given consideration at 
the same time to an appeal mechanism to overcome some of the complaints that have been expressed by 
the Member for Regina Wascana. 
 
For him to suggest however, that somehow or another the Hughes report was delivered up and then 
hidden in some kind of an obscure corner is surely stretching a long bow, Mr. Speaker. If the Liberal 
party opposite should decide to caucus at some point in time they might discover that a copy of the 
Hughes report was delivered up, not only to the Leader of the Opposition, it was also delivered up to 
John G. Diefenbaker who also had injected himself into the matter. 
 
The report itself was the basis for a news release that was presented, received I think a degree of 
prominence, both 



 
January 9, 1976 

1944 
 

in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post, if my memory serves me correctly. 
 
As I said before it's a delicate, it's an emotional and a sensitive area and I think the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) will appreciate the fact that the Department of Social Services is 
always at a disadvantage in terms of attempting to protect themselves when unpopular measures such as 
the removal of foster children from foster parents is concerned. He will know, as do other Members I'm 
sure, that files, departmental files are confidential in nature. Accordingly to air these in public would be, 
I think, a feature that would be most unpalatable to most Members of this House. 
 
I think it should be remembered and acknowledged that the Department of Social Services has over the 
last number of months been reviewing its policies and practices concerning the adoption of children and 
the placement and the removal of foster children. Because of the significant reduction in infants which 
are available for adoption a phenomenon has been noted, not only in Saskatchewan, but across the 
country. We have initiated a provincial waiting list system for applicant couples in order to ensure that 
applications are processed in orderly fashion and the waiting period is still about 30 months. I'm not sure 
whether that's a reasonable period of time but that's the current situation. 
 
I think it should be acknowledged also that the Reach Program which was developed by the Department 
of Social Services, an outgrowth of the former program, the Adopt Indian Métis Program, was initiated a 
little over a year ago and I think it has to be said that that's proven to be relatively successful. Through 
this program we have seen a large number of hard to place children placed for adoption and these are 
youngsters who might otherwise have been without permanent placement. 
 
I understand the Department is currently involved with other provinces in the establishment of what is 
referred to as a "national adoption desk" in order to arrange for correlating all of the information and 
disseminating information and co-ordinating adoption procedures as between different provincial 
jurisdictions. I think this will provide a greater scope for adoption and placement of children within our 
own country. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, while I was still the Minister of Social Services, a temporary moratorium 
was placed on the adoption of children outside of the country by what was referred to as the Arena 
Program. To give credit where it's due, this was a program, the Adoption Resource Exchange of North 
America was developed when the Minister of Social Services, Mr. MacDonald was still the Minister. A 
number of children were placed outside of the country during his term of office and the program was 
accelerated during later years, particularly in situations where family groups were difficult to place for 
adoption. 
 
In regard to the removal and placement of foster children the Department established permanent 
planning committees in each region in September, 1975. The committees you may know are comprised 
of departmental personnel as well as representatives from the Foster Parents Association which has 
placed an invaluable part in this program. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1945 
 

Before a child is moved, the case is now reviewed by the committee so that the best plan possible will be 
realized for that child. The department's first consideration has to be for the welfare of the children who 
are placed for adoption. Included in this process has been the separation of permanent and temporary 
wards so that appropriate planning can be done in each particular case. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, at the request of the Department of Social Services a preliminary study has 
been done by Doctor Norman of the University of Saskatchewan which took place some time ago, 
concerning a special appeal mechanism. A committee has been structured to bring the report into 
implementation and this procedure will ensure that the rights of clients are thoroughly protected in their 
dealings with the department. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, before I beg leave to adjourn the debate, it should be noted that of the many 
children who are in care, a large number of them are of native ancestry and the Department of Social 
Services is working on a proposal to be negotiated with the Métis Society of Saskatchewan which would 
enable native people to begin to find their own resources and to be involved in direct services in 
planning for the placement of native children. There are some additional remarks that should be added in 
light of the remarks of the Member for Regina Wascana. I know that the Minister of Social Services has 
some comments that he wishes to add at a later date and accordingly I would beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RETURN NO. 21 
 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 21 
showing: 
 

(1) The number of principals appointed to the Community Colleges that were previously (a) 
former NDP MLAs or MPs; (b) defeated NDP candidates, federal or provincial; (c) candidates 
who contested a nomination for the NDP provincially or federally; (d) known campaign 
workers for the NDP, provincially or federally, or both. (2) The annual salary for each. 

 
Mr. J.L. Skoberg (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, in picking up the debate on this particular Order 
for Return it is somewhat discouraging to look opposite and see any Member in any party who would 
introduce this type of an Order for Return. If we look at the actual Order and we realize the type of 
inference that's contained in that particular Order, I think that any Member with any honorable instinct 
whatsoever would think it's repugnant and disgraceful for this House. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if in fact this Order were completed and if it were ever possible to start a witch 
hunt which is contained in this Order, then you would see the individual people in this province driven 
underground, the ordinary civil servant who likes to participate in a parliamentary process 



 
January 9, 1976 

1946 
 

would be driven underground and these people then would not be able to assist in the democratic 
process in Saskatchewan. 
 
Not too many years ago we had a party that used to go around this province and liked to find out if 
individuals had membership in a particular party and if those members did have that type of membership 
they could expect to be treated very shabbily and in fact many, many of them lost their jobs in that 
particular era of our history. 
 
I should like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that not only by driving the people underground and probably 
putting them in a position of embarrassment, it would also create a system of fear in this province that 
has never been seen before. I'm also suggesting that that type of fear is not what we need in the 
democratic society and this type of Resolution and this type of Order is one of course, that is completely 
unnecessary and is one that is a disgrace and one that should never have been placed in this written 
form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting that this is a clear example of people who aren't prepared to treat the 
ordinary citizen of this province fairly. I am suggesting that we have no need for this type of an example 
in this province and I'm suggesting that we look at the ordinary Bill of Rights, both the Canadian Bill of 
Rights and also the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights and we shall realize that there is protection for people in 
this province; realize that people are entitled to protection for whatever belief they want and in reading 
the Bill of Rights, the Canadian Bill of Rights, and the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose should be 
well familiar with the Bill of Rights that was drafted, it says in this Bill of Rights: 
 

It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there have existed, and shall continue to 
exist, without discrimination by reason of race, national origin, color, religion or sex, the 
following human rights and fundamental freedoms, namely . . . 

 
I won't bother the Legislative Assembly to read all of these, but the ones that are pertinent to this 
particular Resolution: 
 

Freedom of assembly and association. 
 
And freedom of the Press of course follows that one. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, it clearly spells out that: 
 

The Parliament of Canada affirming that the Canadian nation is founded upon principles (and 
by the looks of this Resolution there is very, very little principle involved there by the one who 
introduced it), upon principles that acknowledge the supremacy of God, the dignity and worth 
of the human person and the position of the family in a society of free men and free 
institutions. 

 
I hate to think, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member who introduced this Resolution had anything sinister 
or any motives behind that Resolution other than perhaps trying to bring some information out, but if I 
could find out what information would do any benefit to that Hon. Member and to his constituency then 
I might be able to accept what I see in front of me. 



 
January 9, 1976 

1947 
 

There is no question in my mind that this is a strict fascist type of a Resolution that will be well 
explained in the constituency that the Hon. Member comes from. 
 
I'd also like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at this Resolution and we see what it's asking 
for, the number of principals appointed to the Community Colleges who were previously former NDP 
MLAs or MPs, etc., etc., maybe we should go back not too long ago in fact, to May 8, 1975. On the 
stationery of the Eston-Elrose School Unit No. 33, Roy H. Bailey, Superintendent, the office number, 
the residence number, then beside it C.N. McClelland and the Secretary-Treasurer, the office number, 
the residence number. It's got the picture of the administrative building and it's dated. It's addressed as 
an open letter to the Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights. It's addressed to the Executive 
Secretary of that Association. I won't belabor the Legislative Assembly today to read all that letter, 
because really it's just about as red neck a letter as I have ever seen in all the time I've been around. 
 
Mr. Larter: — On a Point of Order. There's a fire over on the other side of the House. 
 
Mr. Skoberg: — In this letter addressed to the Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights it spells out 
— and I must first say that all candidates in the last election received a questionnaire on the 
Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights. It was up to the individual candidate to answer that if he so 
desired and this is the answer, of course, that we have before us, the Hon. Member who introduced this 
Resolution. After reading this letter, reading the Resolution, then I can understand why it was 
introduced. He says, "Dear Sir." I won't go into the preamble there is quite a bit here: 
 

First and foremost you have owed the candidates an explanation as to the purpose of the 
organization and the source of funds on which it operates. Your questions are ambiguous and 
ridiculous and I have every reason to believe that your association deals under such a 
humanistic need, they have the right to conduct the survey, interpret the answers and issue 
Press statements which could be used as political blackmail. 

 
Now even in this paragraph it indicates that the Hon. Member who is in the House now and the one who 
has signed himself as the district superintendent of education, wasn't even aware of the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Association. Next paragraph: 
 

I want to assure you that the people of my constituency . . . 
 
Now he is a spokesman for his constituency and he hasn't been elected yet. 
 

 . . . are intelligent people . . . 
 
And I agree with him because I know many people in that constituency. 
 

 . . . and are not in need of outside organizations infiltrating through the media, exercising 
political biases 



 
January 9, 1976 

1948 
 

and prejudice. 
 
Another paragraph: 
 

I happen to be a candidate who is pro-police. I firmly believe that you should be concerned 
with police rights. 

 
I didn't know that they weren't concerned with police rights. 
 

Who are you to suggest that your association should interfere with a judiciary and with a 
normal operation of our already over criticized police forces? 

 
Another paragraph: 
 

You asked several questions about tenant's rights and I find no questions dealing with the 
rights to own property and the right of an individual to protect his property and a right to take a 
small return on his work and his investment. 

 
Another paragraph: 
 

Your questionnaire made me sick. The intent and analogies which you can draw from this 
questionnaire prolongs that feeling. 

 
Another one: 
 

I am sick of commentators and . . . canonizing anarchists, revolutionaries and criminal rapists, 
while condemning law enforcement. I am sick of educational idealists who would like to turn 
our schools into ugly nightmares. I am sick of potsmoking entertainers deluging me with 
condemnation of society's moral standards. I am sick of cynical attitudes toward patriotism. I 
am sick of politicians with no backbone. 

 
And brother, I can tell you if this Resolution goes, that individual Member has no backbone, Mr. 
Speaker, or I certainly don't understand what backbone is all about. And he continues: 
 

I am sick of the dirty, the foul-mouthed, the unwashed . . . 
 
And I would like to suggest that if we really use, and I mentioned this yesterday, one of the reports from 
the Hon. Member to his constituency, it is quite apparent that he isn't all that truthful in what he reports 
to his constituency. He continues: 
 

I am sick of the decline of personal honesty and personal integrity. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, he signs this as "Roy H. Bailey, District Superintendent of Education:, and 
even see his secretary, it has E.M. behind it, the initials are E.M. He even had the secretary, the 
taxpayers who had paid for that secretary, even type out the letter for him to send back to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights. Mr. Speaker, when I look at this letter and I look at the 
letterhead and I look at this Resolution we have before us, I think there can be only one position that we 
could possibly take at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Wiebe:— On a Point of Order, I am 



 
January 9, 1976 

1949 
 

just wondering if the Member for Moose Jaw North would permit a question at this time? Will you 
permit a question at the conclusion of your remarks? 
 
Mr. Skoberg: — No, not after I adjourn. We believe that every Member in this House, in looking upon 
this Resolution, realizes in the type of a letter that has been written back to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Human Rights, realizes in all probability, I don't know how many questionnaires were 
sent out by this Association of Human Rights, realizing that they do try to do a job, they do try to protect 
people in this province from this type of a situation we have before us. We consider, Mr. Speaker, that 
we probably should, or I would like to see, at least, time given to this Resolution so that we can possibly 
send this type of a Resolution to the Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights in order to get their 
decision as to whether or not the individual human rights of these people here whom he is referring to 
would be protected at least, in some sense. It appears that in this Legislature we notice that the Liberal 
Party also stood up en masse the other day wanting to have an answer to this question so they are tainted 
just as badly as the Conservatives are tainted insofar as this Resolution is concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that I am going to work on a resolution, I now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Motion to adjourn debate agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 30 
 

Blakeney Faris Rolfes 
Pepper Robbins Cowley 
Thibault MacMurchy Tchorzewski 
Bowerman Mostoway Matsalla 
Smishek Larson Skoberg 
Romanow Whelan Vickar 
Messer Kaeding Koskie 
Snyder McNeill Johnson 
Byers Feschuk Thompson 
Baker Shillington Banda 
 

NAYS — 13 
 

Lane Clifford Larter 
Wiebe Anderson Bailey 
Malone Merchant Ham 
MacDonald McMillan Katzman 
Cameron   
 

RETURN NO. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Larter that an Order of the 
Assembly do issue for Return No. 22 showing: 
 

The number of NDP candidates from June 11, 1975 Saskatchewan Provincial Election that 
now work for the Saskatchewan Government or a Saskatchewan Crown 



 
January 9, 1976 

1950 
 

Corporation: (a) their names and positions held; (b) the positions advertised; (c) the salary that 
accompanies each position. 

 
Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, before I get into speaking on this proposed motion 
by my colleague for Estevan (Mr. Larter), I should like to ask the House at this particular time to accept 
my apology for an earlier question which I directed to the Attorney General during the public Bills 
which were before the House. I did not intend to have the House become embroiled in a controversy 
again, I was simply seeking out a clarification and I apologize for the House getting into that particular 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don't wish to impede any apologies that are felt should be given but I was not 
in the Chair when that happened and I would suggest that this is not the proper place to offer an apology 
if one is required. I just mention that in passing. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — I am glad that the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) is asking the former 
Minister because in dealing with the question that has raised such a furor on that side of the House, and I 
would like to inform the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg), Mr. Speaker, that the innuendoes 
that he made in his presentation this afternoon . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Member for Moose Jaw North has not spoken on this Return which is 
before us. The Attorney General is the only person who has spoken. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, the relationship between the Return of my colleague for Estevan (Mr. 
Larter) as already pointed out by the Opposition are exactly the same thing, they have told me it is the 
same thing and this is why I was dealing with it in the same way. However, Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
point out in putting this question on the Order Paper that I have no regrets whatsoever for my reputation 
of working in this province in education. I can assure the Members opposite and I am not breaking my 
elbow to pat my own back, but in 27 years in education in this province, and if any Hon. Member 
opposite wants to take any area whatsoever in which I have served and go to the people and ask them 
about my reputation, I should be very pleased to have it brought before this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the former Minister of Education (Mr. MacMurchy) 
and I have worked under many Ministers of Education. I have a lot of confidence and I trust the Minister 
of Education a great deal. I know that the new Minister of Education who happens to be sitting right 
behind him has got some pretty big boots to fill, because the Hon. Member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood did in fact do a fine job in his office. He made a few mistakes and that's true and 



 
January 9, 1976 

1951 
 

I have no doubt the new Minister will make a few mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the most of my life I was raised in the old Weyburn constituency. This was the former 
CCF Premier's constituency and I had a great deal of respect for the then CCF Party. I had a great deal 
of respect for the honesty and integrity of that party. And when I placed this question on the Order 
Paper, Mr. Speaker, and when my colleague placed a question on the Order Paper, we did it for one 
thing and one thing only. It was not to embarrass any Minister, it was not necessarily to embarrass the 
Government. These are the questions which are being asked out in the communities and we placed the 
question there, my friend for Estevan placed this question there, and we think that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve an answer to these questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I happen to have taught when the larger school units or administrations were just 
coming in and nobody in this House, including my colleagues on this side or that side have perhaps the 
number of years to their credit in education. Mr. Speaker, I was appointed as Superintendent of Schools, 
there was no politics involved. Nobody in this province doubted that I was a strong Tory. I happened to 
get a position in what happened to be a really strong government constituency. It never entered into my 
employment. But, Mr. Speaker, what I am concerned about and I should like the new Minister of 
Education to listen very carefully to this. I am a strong supporter of local control in education. You can 
ask the former Minister of Education, he can probably tell his colleagues that the area that I served 
probably has the most input as my friend, Mr. Larter, in his question, the most input in local autonomy. 
Now when we ask these questions, Mr. Speaker, we are wondering why, why at this particular time that 
these appointments are made and in many cases appointments are made both in Mr. Larter's motion that 
is before us and yet, Mr. Speaker, we can't get any answer to the question. We got a lecture from the 
Attorney General and I am not saying that these questions are right, maybe we were wrong in doing so. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are finding out information daily about the MLAs opposite who were defeated, 
they won. They won! 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bailey: — And some of the MLAs who were elected, according to this article in the Leader-Post, 
they lost. They lost! Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps because we are new in the House and I make no 
apology for that, I have no particular axe to grind with any Member opposite. None whatsoever. None. 
Nobody can accuse me and nobody can accuse any person in the Conservative caucus that we are here to 
get somebody, that we are here to grind somebody up. We have not done it in the House up to this point 
and I can assure the Members opposite that we will not be doing it in the future. But in return for that, 
Mr. Speaker, I expect a little return in the way of a little bit of support and little bit of recognition 
because we, in this government over here, and what I heard this afternoon in return for my colleague's 
question, and my question and no doubt in return to his question, if any Member on that side of the 
House wants to play rough, I want to tell you right now that I am the boy that can play rough with you. 
And I want you to understand that. I have no intentions of doing so but just let another repetition of what 
happened this afternoon and you will have a rough Member of the 



 
January 9, 1976 

1952 
 

Opposition on your hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we placed these questions on the Order Paper, we know what has been happening, we see 
these appointments being made, people out in the boondocks are asking questions. What happened to 
this person and, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this province have a right to know this. They have a right 
to know in the case of my colleague's question on the Return No. 22. The number of candidates in the 
June, 1975 election who now work in the Saskatchewan Government. The Government need not be 
ashamed of that. This question, this type of question has been going on for years. They need not be 
ashamed of that, why not make it available to the public of Saskatchewan. It should be public 
information. 
 
Why should this information be denied to the public? Well, there may be good reasons, Mr. Speaker, in 
the heated potash debate that has been going on for days. There may be good reason and I suspect 
maybe there is, if the Government Members want to withhold information from the Opposition. There 
was a question this afternoon in the House to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Messer) to give reasons for 
the information not being brought to the House. Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why the Government 
that's followed after the pattern of the old CCF with their honesty and integrity, there is no reason for 
them not making this information available. It has nothing to do with a witch-hunt. We are not talking 
about hundreds of people, Mr. Speaker. Take a look at the Return of my Hon. Friend here for Estevan, it 
says, the number of NDP candidates. Surely, surely, Mr. Speaker, that with 38 people elected there 
would be no problem in making available to the people in this province the number of candidates who 
were favored with a position. I'm not even saying it is wrong, Mr. Speaker, I am not saying it's wrong if 
they do it in British Columbia. 
 
But what have they got to hide, Mr. Speaker. If I recall, Mr. Speaker, correctly and I have watched 
politics in this province for a long time, when the late Ross Thatcher's government I remember a very 
similar type of question, mind you it may not have been worded that way, but I remember a very similar 
question being asked by the then Opposition and the information, if I remember correctly, was given. So 
why all of a sudden now you want to label my friend for Estevan (Mr. Larter) or myself, for seeking to 
get information out to the people of Saskatchewan that they deserve, as if we were some kind of freaks 
or something? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have problems. Here is another quote from the Regina Leader-Post, I believe it is today 
where it says: "Keeping Job Necessary, MLAs Say". I can appreciate their position, Mr. Speaker. And it 
goes on in length to tell why these Members aren't in the House and as individuals I can feel for them. 
Nobody in the Conservative caucus started jabbing the Government because they weren't there. I am in 
exactly the same position, probably the worst position of any Member opposite, but I am here and I am 
here every day that I can possibly be here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this, we believe that the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know 
what happens in this province after an election. We are not talking about anything, as Mr. Larter has 
mentioned in his question, does not mention anything but the number of NDP candidates from June 11, 



 
January 9, 1976 

1953 
 

1975 provincial election that now work for the Saskatchewan Government or a Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation, the names and positions held; positions advertised; the salary that accompanies each 
position. 
 
Surely the people of the province have a right to know that. I can't see any organization in this province, 
I can't see any reason whatsoever, be it the Liberals sitting on that side of the House; be it Conservatives 
sitting on that side of the House, that this information is, in fact, not given out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, as you know, constitute or make up approximately in representation in this House of 
seven Members, about 30 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan. I want to say that we are not 
deserving, as we have mentioned earlier, and the innuendoes that have been passed from that side of the 
House in particular to myself and my colleague for Estevan. This was something that is only done by 
some low-down snake, something like this wouldn't ever be performed in the House; questions like this 
are strictly taboo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after watching the performance of this House since the short time that I have been here, I 
want to say this. If these two questions and particularly the question by my colleague for Estevan make a 
heck of a lot more sense being brought before this House than a good number of the questions and 
nobody over there ever criticized these other questions. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we were at a 
bit of a disadvantage in coming to the House; we came as seven new Members to this Legislature. Not 
one of us had ever sat in the House before and although there are a lot of new Members, in my friends to 
the right, at least they had some . . . politicians to show them the way. The new Members over there, 
some of them I hardly see; some of whom I have never heard; obviously they have a wealth, a wealth of 
seniority in that House to give them guidance. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, in response to these two 
questions being on and particularly to the Attorney General, maybe it is true that we should not have put 
these questions before the House. Maybe that is quite right, but I don't think for one moment, Mr. 
Speaker, that at this particular time that the Government of Saskatchewan, or the Government opposite 
should at this time, after numerous times, ask to stand these two particular items on the Order Paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. In the Province of Saskatchewan, and I was born here; I was raised here; 
I have spent all but one year of my educational career here and I have never seen in the time that I have 
been here, and I followed politics since I was in my teens, I have never seen so much in the way of 
hiding and covering and job-seeking that I have in the last two elections. I never have. 
 
Maybe it is right to do so, I don't know. All I am saying is that the people of Saskatchewan are 
thoroughly fed up with this continual patronage which is going on. It is costing them money; it is costing 
them thousands and thousands of dollars. We have put this question on the Order Paper, Mr. Speaker, to 
try to get some answers out to the people of Saskatchewan. I don't think the Government has anything to 
hide, not at all, and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, as it was in the case with the Member for Moose Jaw North 
(Mr. Skoberg), both questions are related. I am not ashamed of my record in this House, small and 
limited that it is. I am not ashamed of my record in 



 
January 9, 1976 

1954 
 

Saskatchewan. Despite what the Hon. Member wants to say. 
 
We think that these answers should go out to the people of Saskatchewan and if they want us to amend 
one part of these two, this one in particular, we will amend them. We will amend them from this side, 
we don't need your tampering over there. We will amend them. Just put the plain facts out to the people 
of Saskatchewan and let them know what is going on. Let them know what is going on in the back 
rooms of Regina. Let them see the number of people whom they are bringing in, bringing in, bringing in. 
There may be nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker, it is the taxpayers' money. The democratic process 
says that they, in fact, have a right to know and I think, in fact, they should know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to go back just for one moment to this proposed motion from my colleague 
for Estevan. I want to tell you that during the election my opposition, that is a Government Member 
opposite, one of the finest men that I ever met, beyond a doubt. He was a personal friend of mine and I 
couldn't conceive, and I have known many of you people over there for some time, including the Hon. 
Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper). I can't conceive, Mr. Speaker, meeting the former Member for 
Elrose or walking up to the Member for Weyburn, or any Member in the House whom I have talked to 
and I ask them for pertinent information as I have done in the few weeks that I have been here, and we 
sit at the back of that room and I have asked these questions, concerning Government policy; getting 
some information and I must say that I have been treated with the utmost respect and I got that 
information and you have been very, very good and I appreciate it. But, Mr. Speaker, I did not 
appreciate, and I will not appreciate any more lunatic tantrums like we heard this afternoon and in the 
past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, in closing, I don't think for one moment that my 
colleague for Estevan or myself were deserving recipients of the comments of this afternoon. I think 
despite the fact that certain things have been taken out of context I am going to ask the Members 
opposite, before I close off my speech this afternoon, to reconsider the comments made this afternoon — 
they can come to me in private if they wish. All I am asking the Government Member is to reconsider 
the statement which he made. This is not a bribe and it is not a threat, but reconsideration of the 
statement which was made, all I am going to say that some day, and it won't be too far, it will be in the 
near future, the statement that he has cast this afternoon will be regretted, not for this year but, indeed, 
for the next four years. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


