
























































Hansard: May 05, 1976


1490 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

38th Day 
 

Wednesday, May 5, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Inflation Approval Board 
 
Mr. S. J. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the depleted state of the benches 
opposite, I’m not sure to whom I ought to direct my question. In the absence of the Premier and the 
absence of the Deputy Premier and in the absence of the Minister of Finance, frankly I’m at a bit of a 
loss as to know to whom to direct the question. I want to ask about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . eeny, meeny, miny, mo . . . 
 
Mr. Cameron: — The fact of the matter is it isn’t all that funny. 
 
I want to ask someone and I leave it to you to decide who is going to answer it. The Saskatchewan 
Inflation Approval Board apparently approved the increases for employees of each of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, Saskatchewan Farmstart employees, SEDCO employees and one or two other 
groups of employees. I want to ask you the details of each of those settlements. What was the percentage 
that was agreed upon and secondly, I want to ask you whether or not the Board made a written report to 
the Minister responsible or whether or not you are prepared to table the report? 
 
Hon. J. R. Messer (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister 
of Finance (Mr. Smishek) who would be the Minister receiving any reports in regard to the decisions of 
the Board, I think I will have to take the question as notice and undertake to convey it to the Minister of 
Finance to see what information was conveyed to him and he in turn will have to give consideration to 
that as to whether or not he can provide that to the Member for Regina South. But I can’t at this 
particular point in time. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Supplementary. What settlement was approved for the employees of Sask Housing 
Corporation, Farmstart, SEDCO and the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission? 
 
Mr. Messer: — As I indicated to the Member earlier, I’m not the Minister responsible. I take his word 
for it that in fact the Board has approved those particular contracts. I think he’s right in that assumption. 
I’m not at this time informed as to what the exactness of that contract was and I think that only the 
Minister of Finance would be in a position to answer that question. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1491 
 

Mr. Cameron: — Further supplementary. It’s also reported that the Inflation Approval Board rolled 
back a settlement for the hospital workers, 6,100 of them, and ordered a four per cent rollback which 
leaves, I think, the options open to the Cabinet, for the Cabinet to endorse the rollback or alternatively to 
bring in legislation. In view of the fact that we’re going to be adjourning on Friday, is it the 
Government’s intention to bring in legislation to effect that rollback? 
 
Mr. Messer: — I think that that is a bit premature to give consideration to at this particular time. The 
only information I have is information that I have picked up through the news media in regard to what 
the hospital workers’ position may be in regard to the Board’s suggested rollback. I know that they have 
at least publicly stated that they have a contract and that they intend on abiding by the terms and 
conditions or settlements of that contract. There has been no official conveyance to the Government in 
any way as to whether or not they choose to give some consideration to the Board’s proposal or some 
other negotiations. The Board, I think, will be available to discuss with them the reasons for the 
rollback. The Board has not, on the other hand, conveyed, at least to my knowledge, any 
recommendations to the Government as to whether the Cabinet should be giving consideration in 
undertaking action to, in fact, endorse the settlement. 
 
So again, I think, it’s somewhat premature and hypothetical to ask the Government what it may have to 
do in that particular situation. The Board has made its decision. I think we have to wait for some more 
positive response from the nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Further supplementary. With respect, I wasn’t talking about a settlement with respect 
to the nurses. I was talking about a settlement with 6,100 hospital employees, non-nurses. Secondly, it 
isn’t a course for the Board to make a recommendation to Cabinet as to what to do. The Board, as I 
understand it, ordered a rollback of four per cent. That now leaves the Government to decide how it’s 
going to enforce the rollback, because the union is apparently in opposition to the rollback. Now it 
becomes urgent because we’re going to be adjourning in the next couple of days. What does the 
Government intend to do with respect to the rollback which isn’t yet being accepted by the union? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Well I think it’s premature to assume that the union is not going to accept the 
application or reject it, they have initially rejected. Surely there will be some continuing discussions 
with the Board. I know Mr. Boychuk has said that in such situations he will make himself and the Board 
available to discuss with the unions their reasons for their final decisions. To my knowledge that action 
or such meetings have not yet taken place, so that I think that it is presumptuous to assume that they will 
not abide by the proposal. Until we received, in some official capacity, information that they are not 
going to abide by the decisions of the Board, I don’t think that this Legislature or the Cabinet should be 
undertaking to give indication as to what its actions may be. 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1492 
 

Approved Reading List in High Schools 
 
Mr. R. H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of a number of the Ministers 
opposite, and certainly the Minister to whom I want to direct this question, perhaps the former Minister 
of Education would like to deal with it. Yesterday in committee I mentioned about a problem about the 
type of material coming into our provincial libraries. Last night I received a phone call and I understand 
that currently in Saskatchewan, at the present time, there is a petition being taken dealing with the type 
of material that is now being approved in the high schools, on the approved reading list. Who is 
responsible, and I would ask the former Minister, who is responsible for the approved list of reading 
material that accompanies the English program in the high schools? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think I should, to be safe, take 
notice of the question and ask the Minister of Education to respond to the Hon. Member. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I think that to say that the former Minister was 
aware, as a former Minister of Education, were you not aware that certain novels contained some 
objectionable language in the opinion of many Saskatchewan ratepayers and the parents of students 
at . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Next question. 
 

Government Pension Fund 
 
Mr. E. F. A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, in starting I can’t help but notice that the 
Government benches look like bomb craters have hit them, but by chance the Minister to whom I 
wanted to direct a question is in the House today, the Minister in charge of pensions. I wonder if the 
Minister of Health would indicate, in light of his comments that there is a potential shortfall of $500 
million in the Government pension fund, whether the Government doesn’t have a duty to alert 
government employees, indeed a duty to alert government employees of the city of Regina and the city 
of Saskatoon that there is a very real danger that their pension commitments can’t be kept and that they 
are being duped into believing that they will receive pensions which the Government may not be able to 
meet and the cities of Saskatoon and Regina may not be able to meet? 
 
Hon. W. A. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s common knowledge that all 
pension plans are in grave difficulties in relation to the inflationary trend. The figure of $500 million 
does not just relate to the Government pension plan, it includes the teachers’ pension plan which has 
some $280 million unfunded liability in it, plus Crown corporations, plus municipal employees’ pension 
funds, etc. Thee is no doubt that when you use unit benefit plans, you are going to have very large 
unfunded liabilities when wage levels are rising rapidly and inflation rates are high. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1493 
 

Now, whether or not the Government can meet those commitments is something that’s a hypothetical 
question because you are looking a long way into the future. Some of those unfunded liabilities 
disappear as people terminate and move out of the plan. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Why did the Government not move, either at the last 
session or at this Session to solve the problem which is clearly perceived by the Minister and others of 
this House? Why has the Government not moved to correct the situation which really is taking from one 
pocket to pay employees who haven’t earned that money and in the strict sense of the word, is not their 
money? I’m not saying that they shouldn’t receive a pension, but it’s not their money in the strict sense 
of the word. Why has the Government not moved in this Session or the last session? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I can’t give you a definitive answer on that, except that it’s something that certainly 
concerns the Government a great deal and a lot of consultation has been carried out with a lot of 
employee groups, in Crown corporations, in the public service and others as well. We have a study 
going on at the present time in relation to pensions. I would like us to have moved long ago, but the fact 
of the matter is, it takes time. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister not agree that where 
Saskatoon’s pension fund may be in some difficulty, the Regina Employees’ Pension Fund is in grave 
difficulty and that the Government, on behalf of the employees of the Regina Pension Fund, should step 
in or else one of two options are available. One, Regina or Saskatoon may not be able to meet their 
pension fund or the second possibility that Regina and Saskatoon will go in the direction that New York 
has gone and be drawn under as a result of their inability to meet the pension fund. 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, that, of course, is the danger in all pension funds including the Canada 
Pension Plan. I have had long discussions with the Hon. Marc Lalonde, the Minister in charge of the 
Canada Pension Plan who made a statement to me that if the present inflation rate continued until the 
year 2000 we would be paying 30 per cent of all our pay scales into the Canada Pension Plan in order to 
maintain it. 
 

Rural Areas Require Better Transportation Service 
 
Mr. L. W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — A question for the Minister responsible for transportation. As you 
would be aware there are a number of smaller areas in the Province of Saskatchewan that are not 
adequately served inasmuch as transportation needs are concerned. These smaller centres actually house 
elderly people and it is the elderly people that need transportation. Is STC going to be taking any steps to 
provide a service to these outlying smaller rural areas? 
 
Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1494 
 

STC they have started what they call a community transportation service program. There are now two 
routes operating in the Weyburn and Estevan area and in the Swift Current area and two about to start in 
the very near future in the sort of Ituna to Regina, Ituna to Yorkton area and in the Humboldt and 
Melfort areas. So there is some progress with respect to this particular kind of approach. I think that the 
plan for STC is to strengthen this particular aspect as their operation makes it possible. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder would there be any results back from your 
mini-bus studies that you have put into effect? Is there any result of those studies yet, or are you going to 
be employing any mini-bus services? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — I think this is a sort of a mini-bus idea that community transportation service is all 
about. If the Hon. Member is asking, do we have a sort of an analysis of our experience that I can 
provide for him, we do not. I think out of the experience that we have had with the two that I have 
mentioned, we have been able to establish a set of criteria upon which we can look at new proposals that 
I would be glad to forward to the Hon. Member. 
 
Mr. D. M. Ham (Swift Current): — A supplementary. With regard to old age pensioners and senior 
citizens’ bus services, Mr. Speaker, is it not a fact, or is it true now, that the old age pensioners of 
Saskatchewan receive a reduced pass to ride the STC buses? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Ham: — A second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Then is it not true also, Mr. Minister, that last year 
during the provincial election your Government promised free passes to these same senior citizens? 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — No, I don’t recall that promise. 
 

Regional Hospital Councils 
 
Mr. W. H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Health. The regional hospital 
councils claim that there will be no saving by their elimination and you, on the other hand, claim there 
will be a saving in the approximate of $663,000 that are budgeted for their operation. On the other hand 
you claim that you will supply additional funding to hospitals to absorb some of the functions that were 
formerly provided by the councils. My question, Mr. Minister, is then: what will be the actual saving if 
you are going to supply these additional funds? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, the Member will realize that of course these are estimates, but the budget 
for the regional hospital councils for the year just ended, to March 31st, was $785,000 in round figures, 
the proposed budget for the current year was $978,000 in round figures and we expect to be able to 
supply the necessary services through regional hospitals at a cost of $430,000. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1495 
 

Mr. Stodalka: — In other words, Mr. Minister, you are saying the saving will be approximately 
$500,000? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Approximately, yes. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: — A supplementary, Mr. Minister. The people that are operating the regional councils 
feel that this is a threat to hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. For instance, some of them that have been 
using particularly administrative services and the like that is supplied by the council will no longer have 
these. Is this, indeed, a case where the very existence of these hospitals in rural Saskatchewan may be 
threatened? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Obviously we don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: — A final supplementary. They also have requested that the Minister meet with them so 
they can present their case to the Minister. Is the Minister prepared to meet these people? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: — When, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I had 24 meetings in April. I’ll try to get as many in in May as I can. 
 
Mr. Ham: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health. I understood that in a letter 
which you sent out to the hospital councils and administrators early this week, that you had intentions in 
fact of allowing some of these hospital councils to remain in existence. Is this true? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — No, the approach was to take some of the selective services that were supplied by the 
council and have it available through a regional hospital in each of those areas. 
 

Approved Reading List in High Schools 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask one question of the Minister of Education, now that he is in 
his seat. Would the Minister consider at this particular time forming a committee to review the current 
materials that are listed in the curriculum, from all sections of society to give a general overview, rather 
than in order to prevent a mass of people in the public against the current reading list? 
 
Hon. E. L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, there are curriculum committees and 
committees that deal with the selection of school material as well as a great deal of flexibility at the local 
level and within the school on the selection of material used by the teacher in the school. I hope that the 
school boards would have some input into that as well. In reply to the question 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1496 
 

directly, would I be prepared to establish a committee, I am not prepared to say off the cuff at this time 
that I would be prepared to establish an overall committee until we have fully re-organized the 
department in which there is an intention to see that there is better co-ordination of each of the separate 
curriculum development functions that are going on so that they are plugging into an overall education 
program approach. I am hopeful that through that we can achieve a great deal of what the Member has in 
mind. 
 

Federal Bankruptcy Legislation 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask a question of the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
It deals with the bankruptcy legislation which will be coming before the Canadian Government and as 
Members may know, Mr. Speaker, the legislation will wipe out the right to the exemption which 
protects farmers from having their home quarter taken from them. I think that is bad legislation and I 
wonder if the Minister agrees with that position? Would the Minister, and perhaps be prepared in the 
strongest of terms, to say to the Federal Government that this is an improper way to deal with debtors 
who have fallen upon hard times, that the rook of taking from them their last quarter, or taking from 
them the home in which they reside, is an improper way to deal with them and is too harsh a form of 
dealings with debtors? 
 
Hon. N. Shillington (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — The Bankruptcy Act is not the responsibility of 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs, but rather the Attorney General’s Department in this province. 
However, I can tell you that we have been involved in a peripheral way and the issue raised by the 
Member is one of the matters that is of some concern to them. It doesn’t seem to be understood that a 
homestead is the farmer’s equivalent of the urban dweller’s home. I understand that they are reviewing it 
and the representations will be made to Ottawa. I can’t be more specific than that. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Supplementary. Would the Minister agree that if this kind of a change were made 
and there was a turnaround in the economy, perhaps along the lines of ’69, ’70 and certainly in a 
depression, that thousands of farmers would in fact have found themselves off the land and dispossessed 
of their home and the only place they had to live and reside? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know if the results would be that devastating. But, I do agree that this kind 
of change does have great implications for rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Pioneer Village Rates Increased 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Social Services, but I see that he is not here and I was going to direct a question to the Minister of 
Finance, and he is not here; and to the Minister in charge of Mineral Resources, and he is not here either. 
It is a question dealing with nursing homes and I am not quite sure whom to direct it to. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1497 
 

Perhaps the Minister of Municipal Affairs has some knowledge on nursing homes. 
 
The Government I am sure is aware by now that Pioneer Village has increased its rental rates rather 
drastically, very recently. In fact, Level I care has gone up by as much as $180 per month. Just bear with 
me Mr. Speaker for a second. Pioneer Village usually triggers increases in all nursing homes. They are 
sort of a leader in the field. That is, they put their increases in and others usually follow through. 
 
My question to the Government, if they can answer it is: have you any policy in connection with these 
drastic increases, do you intend on further subsidizing homes? Do you intend to assist people who are in 
those homes who are not already on social assistance? 
 
Hon. G. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who it is the Member is directing 
his question to. I believe it relates pretty generally to the rates being charged in Pioneer Village and the 
fact of some rather large increases that concern us too as a Provincial Government. It will also be 
known, Mr. Speaker, that there was a study set in motion only a short while ago which was purporting to 
look into operating as well as capital costs for nursing homes. I am assuming at this point in time that 
that committee has not yet reported because I haven’t heard that it has. Some of these matters will 
obviously be brought to light and the benefit of their thinking and their study will be brought to bear on 
any increased costs that will be, I am sure, part of the scene over the next while because there has been a 
rapid escalation, particularly in Level III and Level II care. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister agrees with what I said about these 
drastic increases, but by way of supplementary, he very specifically exempted nursing homes from the 
provisions of rent control which were passed only a few months ago. Can I ask the Minister: is the 
Government considering putting nursing homes and similar institutions under the rent control 
legislation? 
 
Mr. Snyder: — I think they were exempt for a very particular reason. The nursing home institutions, as 
you know, are already controlled in certain fashions. The commercial nursing homes are allowed to 
charge an average of the costs that is provided in the non-profit nursing homes throughout the province. 
I think in that way they are restricted to a degree. The other nursing homes, the public nursing homes, 
the non-profit ones are governed by the level of expenditures and they set their rates accordingly. I am 
not at all convinced that I think the Government is of the mind that perhaps efficiencies are not always 
observed to the degree that they might be and that is why the current study is in motion at the present 
time. 
 
Miss L. B. Clifford (Wilkie): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Minister in charge of Social 
Services is not here today, but he has commented on the inquiry that you have indeed mentioned. He has 
said however, 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1498 
 

that although he is concerned about the increases, he does not think that anything can be done at this 
stage despite your inquiry about the increases that have occurred. For months now I have been bringing 
up such increases that the Member for Lakeview has mentioned. I ask you, in the light of what your 
Minister has stated, would your Government, perhaps the Minister for the office of the rentalsman 
would like to comment, would you consider, despite what you said, consider putting nursing homes 
under the office of the rentalsman, or whether you consider securing additional funds so that they could 
relieve these old-age pensioners and give them a subsidy? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Perhaps I could respond. Indeed I have been burning to respond to this question. 
 
The rates charged by nursing homes comes under the Anti-inflation Board. Those rents that are not in 
nursing homes come under the rent control legislation. So one way or the other they are both covered. 
Now if I may just stray afield just for a moment, the press release which was issued by the Pioneer 
Village didn’t make it clear that that in fact was the case. What seemed to have happened was they 
seemed to have announced the increases in both the nursing homes and in the cottages without the 
qualification that they had to be approved. The truth is that the cottages come under the rent control, the 
nursing comes under the Anti-inflation program so both increases will be reviewed by the public board. 
 
Miss Clifford: — Final supplementary. Did I understand you to say that all these cases, and I am not 
naming them by district, but which I have been bringing up for a number of months, can now take their 
$190 increases that they have had, take them to the Anti-inflation Board, is this correct? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is correct. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — If I may go back to the Minister of Labour and croak out a supplementary to him. He 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, was in charge of the Department which negotiated the overall wage package which 
ended up in the drastically increased costs. Would the Cabinet now say that there won’t be the difference 
in rates charged depending upon who is fortunate enough to get into this particular or that particular 
nursing home? Would the Cabinet accept the policy of the British Columbia and Alberta Governments 
where everyone pays a uniform amount of money and the Government picks up the other end? In short, 
would your Government do, I believe Alberta’s is about $115 at Level III, the patient pays $115 and the 
Government pays all the rest in the same way that you pay all the different costs in the hospitals though 
some hospitals operate more cheaply than others. Thus the inequality and unfairness operating as a result 
will end in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Snyder: — I can’t speak for the Government in this connection but what I will say is this. That kind 
of an open-ended arrangement would make me very, very uneasy. In the event that the Government 
were to pick up everything over and above a certain amount, I think that just places any institution or 
any administration of a private institution in a position of not 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1499 
 

really paying very much attention to economies that can be effected. I think that is the worst of all 
worlds. I think we should really have a look at it — it is to some degree applied to hospitals — but there 
are other governing features there. But I think what you are suggesting there is probably the worst of all 
worlds. 
 

Saskatoon Sanitorium Converted to Level IV Facility 
 
Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Health. In light of the Saskatoon 
Sanitorium being the only sanitorium left in the Province of Saskatchewan and their request to move the 
TB patients into the University Hospital requiring only 12 beds and then freeing the rest of the 
sanitorium for Level IV, which the second floor is now full of and, therefore, removing these people 
from the hospitals. Is the Government considering that? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — It is a fact that the tuberculosis patients in the province are declining rather rapidly and 
that that facility is not required for that purpose. What the Government will do with respect to that 
facility in the future I am not sure yet. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Is there any truth in the story that it may be a penal institution? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Not to my knowledge. 
 

Second TV Service for Swift Current 
 
Mr. D. Ham (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. On what 
recommendation are you intervening or opposing the CBC intervention into the CKCK application for a 
second TV service for Swift Current? I don’t think he was listening. You were burning the last one, but 
not listening for this one. 
 
On whose recommendation are you opposing the CBC intervention to the CKCK application for TV 
service for Swift Current? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — On no one’s recommendation. On their own good judgment. 
 
Mr. Ham: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do you feel you have all the facts or have you spoken to 
those sides involved? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, we feel we have all the facts involved in the case. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Radiation Problem in Uranium City 
 
Hon. N. E. Byers (Minister of the Environment): — Yesterday the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. 
Merchant) made a number of rather wild and unfortunate statements 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1500 
 

regarding the radiation problem that has been identified at Uranium City. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Point of Order! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Malone: — The Point of Order is, Mr. Speaker, that this is a period of time for Ministerial 
Statements, not debates. And the Minister has already used inflammatory language in his statement with 
reference to the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant). I would ask you to bring the Member to 
order, please, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would ask all Members to not use inflammatory, or debatable, or provocative 
language when they are asking questions or making statements. I would ask the Minister to bring 
himself to order. 
 
Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I shall try not to upset the decorum of the House, but while the Hon. 
Member for Regina Wascana may feel that what he said yesterday is good politics, I want the House and 
the public generally to know what the situation is now, and what is planned. 
 
The Hon. Member made some comparisons with Port Hope. May I say that the two situations are very 
different. In Port Hope the problem originates from highly radio active waste materials, from uranium 
refining operations. At some point in the past, some of those waste materials did not get to the proper 
waste storage areas and were used as land fill. The problem there was compounded by run-off waters 
from a waste disposal area contaminating soil in housing areas near that site. In Port Hope very high 
levels of both gamma radiation and radon gas were discovered in many homes and buildings. The levels 
found make those discovered in Uranium City pale, almost insignificant. We have not discovered any 
levels of gamma radiation in Uranium City that exceed the maximum desirable levels that have been 
established by world health experts. We have found levels of radon gas that do exceed the maximum 
desirable levels. In the homes checked to date in Uranium City those that do exceed this maximum 
desirable level of .03 working levels, are not much above that level. 
 
I caution the Hon. Member not to be a party to misleading Saskatchewan people, and particularly those 
in Uranium City, by implying that we have a Port Hope kind of situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must caution the Minister that he must not use the opportunity for a 
Ministerial statement to in effect carry on a debate. The Member should be quite clear with regard to the 
terms and conditions under which Ministerial statements are given. They must be brief, factual and 
specific, and should not deal with some argument which is alleged to be going on at some other time in 
the Legislature. So I would ask the Minister to confine his remarks to a factual Ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to consider whether the 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1501 
 

Minister’s comments that I had in fact been misleading Saskatchewan people was not in fact . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I have already dealt with that. As I said, the Member . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — . . . is wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I said that the Minister is debating the issue and I have cautioned him not 
to debate the issue. 
 
Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this statement this morning is to clear up the implication that 
has been left by some sources in this province that we have a situation in Saskatchewan that is more 
serious than the Port Hope situation. 
 
I want to say that there is another fundamental difference in the two situations. 
 
In Saskatchewan we made all testing results public as soon as possible, after the Uranium City Council 
had been informed, and after the Council has had an opportunity to inform their citizens. This was not 
the case in Port Hope. Until recently, and indeed I have not seen any detailed public information on total 
survey findings in that city yet. 
 
While I stress that we are not dealing with the problem with anywhere near the public health 
significance of Port Hope, we do consider it a serious matter that we have radon gas levels exceeding 
desirable maximums. It is our firm intent, in co-operation with the Atomic Energy Control Board and 
other federal agencies to complete the general survey this month. We are working out the details of joint 
action programs which will follow that survey. It is Saskatchewan’s wish that that program will be 
directed at finding the cause of the problem and carrying out the necessary remedial measures. 
 
I want to stress that this will not be a simple task, because most of our high radon gas levels are so close 
to the safe limit. Some of our experts believe that the cause may be relatively small, and widely 
distributed pieces of low grade uranium-bearing rock used in land fill in parts of the city. Now these will 
be hard to isolate and difficult to retrieve. There are some things that can, however, be done to improve 
the situation in each house. Householders are advised to ensure that they dispose of any uranium ore 
samples from their homes. Good ventilation will reduce radon gas levels very substantially. The highest 
readings in that city were found in two of the three schools. Neither of the two schools had a functioning 
air exchange system. When these were installed readings fell to acceptable levels in a matter of days. 
 
A group of federal and provincial health experts reviewed the school situation and have advised me that 
the schools can operate safely at the present level. 
 
I am further advised that a research project was undertaken over the past two years in Uranium City by a 
group of public health experts from Alberta and the United States. And while this report is not complete 
and any findings are preliminary. 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1502 
 

there does not appear to be any abnormally high incidence of respiratory tract problems in Uranium 
City. 
 
In the Action Program to follow the current survey, Saskatchewan would like additional attention to be 
paid to this aspect. One of the problems in the current survey is the real shortage in Canada of the skilled 
professionals and technicians required. Because the Port Hope problem is so much more serious . . . 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Mr. Malone: — I don’t like to interrupt the Minister, Mr. Speaker, but surely there is some limit to 
which he must be confined. He is not giving a statement now as to the situation in Uranium City, he is 
giving a speech, and I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, he is not giving a short, to the point statement, as the 
rule insists upon in a Ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think the point is rather well taken with regard to the length of the Minister’s 
comments. I would not agree that it is not a statement. I would agree that it is a statement, but that it is 
too long. The terms and conditions under which Ministers make statements are that they be brief. I have 
referred to this a number of times with regard to statements and responses, especially statements, and I 
would ask the Minister to bring his statement to a close. 
 
Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was on the last paragraph when the Hon. Member rose. 
 
One of the problems in the current survey is the real shortage in Canada of skilled professionals and 
technicians required. I point out that because the Port Hope problem is so much more serious that most 
of the available Federal Government experts have been working there. We did get significant help from 
the Department of Health and Welfare. They did have to withdraw their survey team for the latter part of 
April, but they are back in Uranium City this week and I repeat that the general survey will be 
completed this month. 
 
Let me conclude by restating that we have a problem at Uranium City. We are determined to get to the 
bottom of the problem and correct it, and householders can assist in the interim by ventilating their 
homes. The problem does not pose any immediate serious health hazard. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, in starting let me say that since some latitude was given to the Minister, 
including a ten minute length, I hope that some latitude might be given to me. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has said that Port Hope is different in kind and quality from the 
Uranium City situation, and indeed it is, and the Uranium City situation is in some ways not more 
frightening but may require more complete remedial action. Port Hope is a situation where there is radio 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1503 
 

active waste, which they can recover. I am informed by Eldorado officials that the problem in Uranium 
City is that the whole town appears to be built on an area which is subject to high radiation levels. And it 
may well be that the Government may find that if they are prepared to take the expense that they may 
have to consider moving Uranium City. It’s that kind of a serious problem. 
 
The Minister suggested that there was some tendency to mislead, and Mr. Speaker, let me, though I 
know that there is some latitude available, just make a brief comment about that. 
 
Yesterday we asked the Minister for the levels in the homes and he couldn’t give us those statements . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I will ask the Member to be factual and deal with the Ministerial 
statement, and not be out of order as the Minister was. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — What figures, Mr. Speaker, do we have? We have the figures from Eldorado, and the 
figures from Eldorado regarding the schools are very frightening. They closed the schools in Port Hope 
at a picocurie level of 30, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, later in my ten minutes I should like to make some 
reference to factual statements about what levels are reasonable and safe. 
 
The levels that were found amongst others in the Port Hope schools, 62 picocuries per litre in the 
kitchen; 170 picocuries per litre in the girls’ change room. And indeed the Minister has never given us 
those figures out of the schools. 
 
Now the Minister tells us today that by opening a few windows and putting in a few fans they are 
solving the problem. And that may well be, but, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t change the situation that the 
levels were very high, higher than Port Hope and dangerous levels. 
 
The Minister says that the officials have been principally committed to Port Hope. Mr. Speaker, they 
have been principally committed to Port Hope because the Ontario Government had the guts and the 
strength to demand that they be committed to Port Hope, and this Government didn’t even discover the 
problem. The trade union movement, the local union, discovered the problem and then had to ask for the 
Government to come in and then the Government asked for the Federal Government to come in and 
assist them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the problems that radium daughter products can create, include leukemia, solid 
tumors, bone, breast, lung cancer. They cause genetic effects which appear in the children. They 
unfortunately have a greater effect on children than they have on adults. The levels that are considered 
safe by various experts, Mr. Speaker, including the American Environmental Protection Agency, are 30 
picocuries per litre for very short periods of time. The level that is considered to be safe in ordinary 
circumstances is 3 picocuries, and now reading from a report of a Doctor Victor Archer of Salt Lake 
City: 
 

Three picocuries of radon per litre of air, in some 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1504 
 

situations may be acceptable, but depending upon the working level of the daughters the level 
may be too high. 

 
The Minister, today, although he didn’t refer to it in those terms, wasn’t talking about the radon 
daughters and those levels implies that though there is a high percentage of radon gas that the working 
effect, the working level of the radon daughters may not be as high as Port Hope. And if that is the case, 
that’s good news. But this is the first time that that has been told to this House, and the first time that 
that suggestion has been made to the province. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the 
Government has first ignored the problem and secondly that the tendency of the Minister was to hush up 
the problem, both in his responses to questions and in his failure to make a proper report to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just finally say that there are two things that we think should be done. We believe 
that a sample of the children who have been exposed should be tested to determine their total body count 
of radiation. This is done, Mr. Speaker, in a relatively easy way. The individual enters a room and a 
counter measures and records the amount of radiation emitted by that person’s body. The test takes 
about 20 minutes. There are two whole body counters in Ontario, one is in the Toronto General Hospital, 
and indeed, these are suggestions from a doctor in the University of Toronto, and the other is in 
Pickering, Ontario. There may be other whole body counters available. That’s what they are going to be 
doing in Port Hope and that’s what this Government should be doing if they are really serious about 
ensuring that no damage has been done to the children. 
 
Now what good would it do to know whether they received a high amount of gamma radiation? 
Amongst other things, the child could then be removed from further exposure to radiation. It might well 
be that it would have to be suggested to some people that staying in Uranium City, or Rabbit Lake, in an 
area that is higher than one picocurie per litre, which is acceptable and probably is in this air, it’s 
everywhere, that moving from an area that is higher than one picocurie per litre would be necessary for 
those children. Second, the families could make sure that their children . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I would ask the Member to bring your comments to a conclusion. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I’m on the last paragraph, but mine won’t take 46 minutes to conclude. 
 
The parents should make sure that the child is exposed to a minimum of x-rays, including dental x-rays, 
and in serious situations there is action that can be taken to remove some of the effects from the bone 
marrow. Now, that’s what we think the Government should be doing, and I think the Government is 
ignoring their duty in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1505 
 

Mr. R. L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, my comments to the 
Ministerial statement will be very brief. 
 
First of all, I do not pretend to be an expert in the field of radiation. I don’t think really that anyone in 
this Assembly should pretend to be an expert in radiation, because it is a very scientific and involved 
field. 
 
Radiation levels, to the average citizen, are frightening enough in the light of some of the publicity that 
has been given to atomic energy throughout the last number of years and they frighten people 
considerably. I think that the Minister, up until this moment in time, at least as far as I am concerned, 
and as far as we are concerned, seems to have been doing everything humanly possible on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to obtain the best possible experts in the field, and to attempt to resolve 
the situation insofar as the people of Uranium City are concerned. And I believe that it is, quite frankly, 
irresponsible for anyone in this Legislature to use scare tactics, to yell ‘fire’ in crowded . . . 
 
Mr. Malone: — Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the Point of Order? 
 
Mr. Malone: — I would ask the Member for Nipawin not to make personal comments about the 
Member for Regina Wascana, which he is attempting to do by his remarks. He is very sensitive about 
personal comments. I would just like to draw that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I didn’t hear the Member for Nipawin make personal comments about 
any Member in this Legislature. Continue. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, if I might be allowed to continue, I believe, and all of us know the serious 
damage that can occur in a crowded theatre if someone yells fire, there could be serious problems 
developed as a result of that. In this particular case, if we frighten people by suggesting that we might 
even have to move the city, it’s that serious, we frighten them before the experts tell us that such a 
situation is in order. If the experts say this, then that’s a different story. But at the moment that is not 
happening. We are very concerned that we don’t want to see any Member of this Legislature or in fact 
any party or any organization provide that kind of information without the necessary backup to follow it 
up and to convince people that they might possibly be frightened out of their wits because of this 
radiation. 
 
For that reason we want to commend the Minister for his action. We think he’s done everything 
humanly possible. We can’t think of anything else that he could possibly have done in the circumstances 
and we wish to commend him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1506 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I’d like to 
say that it’s indeed a pleasure for me to introduce a delightful group of Grade Twelve students from 
Cutknife High School. They arrived here yesterday by Saskatchewan Transportation Company charter 
bus, their bus driver Lyle King, and they came in to see Hamlet performed in the Globe Theatre last 
night and are here today to view the legislative proceedings. Their teachers are Joanna MacLeod and Mr. 
Nigel Lacey and chaperone Mrs. Erickson. I’d like to extend from all of us, to the students from 
Cutknife, a sincere welcome and hope they have an educational tour and have a safe journey back home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Permission for Evening Sitting 
 
Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day I wonder if we could get a feeling from this 
Assembly at this time that this being Wednesday, that perhaps we could stop the clock at 5:30 and 
proceed into the evening with some review of the Estimates. I wonder if we could get a consent and 
move ahead? 
 
Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not a Point of Order, but I would like to respond to it. I’ve advised 
the acting Whip of the Conservative Party very clearly earlier today, that for various reasons we can’t 
agree to that and I take some exception to the Member rising now and asking us to do so when he knows 
full well that we’re not prepared to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think that’s not a Point of Order either. I think the arrangements that might be 
made in the Legislature should either be done by substantive motion formally or be arranged informally 
among the different groups in the Legislature. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, we think that this is an appalling piece of legislation and I don’t like to 
start with such a harsh word, but it abuses again the principles of standards and morality and it’s a part 
of the piece presented by this Government and in the name of the people they are prepared to do 
immoral and improper things. 
 
I will come back, Mr. Speaker, to dwell on those comments about the intent of the Act after I make a 
few comments about the Act and the way the Act fits into the pattern of legislation 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1507 
 

by this Government, concerning all mineral resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will tend to stray from this Act alone and talk about other legislation, indeed talk about 
one Act that is in another form before the Legislature. But that is because one act of a totalitarian nature 
cannot be seen unless it’s included as a part of the whole. 
 
Members cannot be asked to fully appreciate the tendency towards the making of absolute control unless 
some reference is made to other Acts. 
 
The Mineral Resources Act amendments which are now before us carry on a tendency towards absolute 
intrusion into the production of mineral resources, which began with The Coal Conservation Act. The 
Coal Conservation Act took the power to regulate the coal industry, not under the Legislature, but took 
that power to Cabinet. There are no parameters at all in The Coal Act and that tendency is now to be 
followed in The Mineral Resources Act. Now in this Act we are asked to give all power of control over 
mineral resources, not to the legislative body, but to Cabinet, which meets in private, meets in secret and 
about which questions may not even be asked in the Legislature. 
 
The Coal Conservation Act gave to the Cabinet the power to shut down any company. Now the 
Government asks for the same kind of carte blanche to shut down any mineral producing company. At 
the same time that we have The Mineral Resources Act before us, we have at another time in this same 
Session, The Transportation Act, which again gives to the Cabinet extremely broad powers in what they 
can do in regulating transportation. Again gives to Cabinet the right, as they demand it, to control 
transportation as they now demand a right to control all mineral resource companies. 
 
They will be able to go to the transportation companies as they have demanded they be able to go to all 
mineral resource companies and demand all of the information regarding the operation of those 
companies. That wouldn’t be so frightening, Mr. Speaker, if it weren’t for the fact that in transportation 
the Government is one of the competitors and in all of the mineral resource operations, the Government 
is one of the competitors with the companies from whom they may not demand that information. 
 
The Mineral Resource Act amendments are designed to wipe out two arguments presented successfully 
before the courts in two separate legal actions. The two actions are first, Canadian Industrial Gas and Oil 
Limited case, known as the CIGOL case. The second is the Central Canada Potash case. CIGOL case 
went in favor of the Government and is now under appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada. The Central 
Canada Potash case went against the Government and is now before the Court of Appeal and indeed at 
this time has been argued before the Court of Appeal and no decision has been given. 
 
The Mineral Resources Act will seek to effect and destroy the effect of those two cases. The Mineral 
Resources Act, first will redefine conservation and secondly they will redefine utilization to strike down 
the effect of CIGOL and strike down the effect of Central Canada Potash. 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1508 
 

The CIGOL judgment said that the province is limited to physical conservation and not economic 
conservation. The CIGOL judgment said that getting into economic conservation is really entering the 
field of trade and commerce, which is a matter, as Members well know, fully within the discretion of the 
Federal Government. The CIGOL case rightly said that the province could not legislate into the field of 
trade and commerce and on other matters went in favor of the Government. But the num and substance 
was that conservation had to really be conservation and couldn’t be a meddling with trade. 
 
In the Central Canada Potash case, Judge Disbury said that what the Government was purporting to do 
under conservation was really control the market and that to fly under conservation was just another way 
of moving into the federal field of trade and commerce. Mr. Justice Disbury said that you cannot do 
indirectly what you could not do directly and that’s always been the principle of constitutional law in 
dealing with whether matters are intra vires or ultra vires. 
 
How would any fair and honest and moral government, who have gone before two well qualified and 
well thought of judges in our courts, both Conservative appointments incidentally, Mr. Justice Hughes 
and Mr. Justice Disbury, how would a fair, honest, moral government have reacted to the clear statement 
by two separate courts that conservation was not a means by which they could intervene into 
inter-provincial trade? An honest and open government I suggest would simply have accepted that there 
is some limit on the Cabinet. 
 
But this Government, Mr. Speaker, is not an honest and an open government and they now choose to try 
to subvert the system of justice and do, in an immoral way, what they could not do in a legal way. They 
choose to redefine conservation and the argument will then be presented for the court that a judge can’t 
consider what conservation is, because the Legislature has defined it. 
 
It is as though Roy Romanow believes that somehow the Government can pull itself up by its own boot 
straps, jack themselves up by their own shoe laces. He seems to believe that they can get into the federal 
field by defining their way into the federal field. That they can somehow do in a side door, what the 
courts rightly wouldn’t permit them to do through the front door. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, present an extreme example. Supposing that Government, with their endless sea of 
backbench faces, decided that they were going to move into the federal area of criminal law. All 
Members accept and understand that criminal law is something that is within the preserve of the Federal 
Government. Could the Government say, pass, and I quote an Act called, ‘To Conserve Saskatchewan 
Humanity.” The purpose of “The Conserve Saskatchewan Humanity Act’ would be to see to it that 
people didn’t murder Saskatchewan people, and they’d say these are people who reside in 
Saskatchewan, so to conserve Saskatchewan humanity we’re passing an Act, we’ll define conservation, 
we know we have control over our own people and the penalty for not going along with the regulations 
of ‘The Conserve Saskatchewan Humanity Act’, namely if you kill someone, would be hanging. 
 
Now, could the Government, through a sleight of hand, move into a federal jurisdiction? I suggest 
clearly not, Mr. Speaker, 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1509 
 

and I’m sure that that’s the argument that will be presented in the courts. That indeed that was the 
argument that Mr. Justice Disbury dealt with in the Central Canada Potash case when he said you can’t, 
by sleight of hand, legislate your way into an area by the words you use, you have to look at the sum and 
substance of the direction of the legislation. 
 
The Government is virtually saying that they can legislate themselves out of a judgment. If they don’t 
like a judgment they can legislate their way out of it, because I suggest they well know that the Central 
Canada Potash case will be upheld, probably by the Court of Appeal and certainly by the Supreme Court 
of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are legal arguments. I’m not often sure that this is the forum to present legal 
arguments. But what of the morality of the Act? What should the people of the province think of a 
government that doesn’t care what the law says, doesn’t care what two judges, who have dealt with the 
question of conservation say, doesn’t care what is right and what is wrong, because they are so intent on 
their own way, they are so insistent, that they’ll do what they want to do, that they couldn’t care two 
hoots what two judges say, they couldn’t care two hoots what the pattern of law that’s been laid down by 
the BNA Act says. They, in their small personal way, will insist that their own will be done, though they 
know that the majority of the people of Saskatchewan don’t want them to do it and though they know 
that they are trying to do something which is illegal by everything that we understand within the balance 
of powers between the Federal and Provincial Governments. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Act doesn’t rest there. Section 3 provides that the Minister may prohibit 
the production of any mineral. The Act doesn’t just try to undo what the courts have done, it goes 
further, with a further meddling, with tentacles of government further meddling into our lives. 
 
The Legislature is asked to give a carte blanche, not just to Cabinet, which was done under The Coal 
Conservation Act, but to the Minister, to one man, to affect the lives of thousands and to affect the 
investments of millions and millions of dollars. Millions and millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, that were 
invested for this province and the result of which was good for all of us. As with The Coal Conservation 
Act, now the Government says the Legislature should in advance, give the power to Cabinet to do in any 
way that it likes, with any of the mineral resources companies and really give that power, not just to 
Cabinet, where there would be a collective decision, but give that power solely to the Minister. Take the 
power from the men and women of this House who represent the people of the province, and give the 
power to one man, the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). 
 
Section 4, subsection 3 says that now changes will be made in accordance with the terms as the Minister 
may determine. The Act used to say, in accordance with the Act. It’s a little change. A change that says 
that the Minister can now set his own rules, he doesn’t have to go by the objective rules that have been 
laid down by the Act and by this Legislature. He doesn’t have to expose the rules by which he will 
determine action of the Government. He doesn’t have to expose those rules to public debate and 
exposure and indeed gain the benefit of some Member’s thinking about the problem. He doesn’t have to 
do 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1510 
 

that now. He doesn’t have to deal in accordance with the Act. Just as the Minister may determine. 
 
Corrections under subsection 4 of 4 will be in the Minister’s discretion. A different way of saying the 
same thing in a different section. Corrections will not be in accordance with an objective test. There will 
be no review to a court to say we made the corrections and anybody can objectively see that we made 
the corrections. It would be like saying that you can obtain a divorce, not because you’ve been 
objectively cruel to your wife and daughter, or she can obtain a divorce because you’ve battered her 
around, but you can go into a court and she can go in and say that rotter used to butter his bread 
backwards and it bothered me, so I should have a divorce. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — I’d want a divorce from you too. But I’m talking about an objective test. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — 11 (a) of the Act will now say that the Minister can cancel the potash licence in 30 
days, rather than 60 days. The 60 days was skimpy enough. Mr. Speaker, those are rather small changes, 
but they have to be seen in relation to the expropriation legislation of the last House, they have to be 
seen in relation to the fact that the Government says they can take a vesting order without ever coming 
back to this House to review that they have taken over a company. They have to be seen in relation to 
the whole picture which is a government which is determined to take unto itself full power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these small but significant examples in the legislation will operate to increase Cabinet 
power, they are all a part of the piece, and all of the legislation is a part of a concerted attempt by this 
Government to subvert the judicial and legislative process, to take power, all power unto itself. 
 
There is a second area of development, Mr. Speaker, to which I wanted to refer. A second area in the 
Act where again there is a determination to attack the Central Canada Potash case. Mr. Justice Disbury 
for Central Canada said that the regulations are not within the authority of the Act. He said that the 
legislation hadn’t given the Government the power to pass the regulations which the Government then 
passed. That was the second reason that he struck down the prorationing tax. We all know that the 
potash companies haven’t been paying the tax, we all know that the Government for some amazing 
reason says they should go on paying the tax, even though the law says that the tax has been wiped out. 
We all know that if they pay that money, Mr. Speaker, they can’t get the money back, that the 
Government has been very clear in saying, you should be paying the money, and if you go on winning 
and win the Supreme Court of Canada, we’ll not give back the money. It is not as though we’ll accept 
the money in trust, or let it stay with some third party, or have it paid into court so that we know we can 
get the money back if the case goes against us, no, they don’t say that. They say that the case should just 
be ignored. The companies haven’t paid of course since the judgment. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1511 
 

Mr. Speaker, the second part of the Disbury judgment, and that’s the part that says that the regulations 
weren’t passed under the authority of the Act, is cured by the Government which now say that they can 
put the sum and substance of all of those regulations right into the Act. They put those regulations into 
the Act and then they say, the Act will apply back to the time when the regulations were passed. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, trying to pull themselves up by their own boot straps, again saying we don’t give two hoots 
what those two very well qualified Queen’s Bench judges have done, we’ll correct that. We are not 
going to be pushed around by any judges on behalf of the people of this province. It’s so simply, but it is 
corrupt and it is improper and it is dishonest, but it is very, very simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — You lose a judgment because the regulations weren’t valid, so you incorporate in an 
Act new terms. You say those new terms and provisions, which are exactly the same as the terms and 
provisions which were struck down, they applied from the date in the past to do anything, Mr. Speaker. 
But it has never been done and it is dishonest and corrupt and improper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — I ask the Member, Mr. Shillington, if that’s within the pattern of law that you believe 
in? If the Member for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie) were here I would ask him. Is that the pattern of law that 
you think is appropriate and proper? Is that the pattern this Government should lay down? I ask that of 
some of your back benchers, whether you can do anything, whether it is dishonest, whether it is 
immoral, whether it is corrupt? Can you do anything because you say it is for the good of the people? 
Do the means justify the end, just because you think that you are doing something for the good of the 
people? That’s what this Act does, it is a means that will justify the end and most of your legislation in 
this area says, no matter, the means. We can do anything though we know it would be immoral, we can 
do anything because we say we are acting for the good of the people. 
 
How is that legislation any different, and how is the argument that you present any different from the 
argument that would be presented by a dictator in South America? Or any different from the argument 
that would be presented by Franco’s Spain, or Hitler’s Germany? Those governments said they were 
acting for the good of the people, just as you do. Perhaps those governments were right! But within our 
rule of law, we say, and right-thinking people throughout this province say, that the means doesn’t 
justify the end, that you can’t write yourself a carte blanche to do whatever you like, simply because you 
say that what you’re doing is for the good of the people of this province. You may be right. It may be 
good for the people of this province. I don’t think so, but you may be 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1512 
 

right, 60 per cent of this province doesn’t think so. You may be right! But does that justify doing 
dishonest, immoral and corrupt things? Does that justify setting a precedent and a pattern where you say 
that we don’t have any rule of law in this province, where you say that the government is exempt from 
the rule of law? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that an honest Member could support these amendments which do in a 
dishonest and corrupt way what the Government has not been able to do legally before our courts. I 
won’t support these amendments. I hope, Mr. Speaker, though I know that the endless sea, including the 
Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen), who is fond of his little comments, I know that he’ll rise 
with the group of happy faces, to vote in favor. That’s the slow but sure road into the Cabinet and he 
hopes, Mr. Speaker, to get six or eight months in the Cabinet before the Government goes down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that an honest Member couldn’t support this kind of gross tampering with the 
system of law. I really say to the one lawyer of the four who sit over there, think about the precedent that 
you set as a government, when you decide that you will tamper in such a corrupt way from the way the 
court systems operate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. R. L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to the 
amendments to this particular piece of legislation, I believe the Member for Regina Wascana has rather 
succinctly pointed out the areas of problems as they relate to the law and quite frankly we concur in his 
comments as to the Government of Saskatchewan tinkering with the law and attempting to do 
legislatively what they could not do judicially. 
 
However, the concern that we have, we have expressed before, time and time again and that is, the 
tremendous centralization of power that is taking place in the Province of Saskatchewan in the hands of 
the Cabinet and the Premier. Our main concern, and I think should be the main concern of the Members 
opposite as well. Right now it happens that the NDP happen to be in power in Saskatchewan, but just 
suppose for a moment, for one moment, that two or three years from now the Progressive Conservatives 
become the Government of Saskatchewan. Suppose that anathema to your system, that anathema to you 
as individual Members, your group of citizens in the Province of Saskatchewan have that nemesis to 
them — the Member for Nipawin as the Premier — and suppose he has the kind of power over the lives 
of the people who support the NDP today — suppose he has the power that you are giving to the 
Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan under this kind of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the people who sit on the benches opposite and the arch supporters, those few 
NDP supporters that are going to be left after the next provincial election, are going to be very 
concerned about the amount of powers that are in the hands of the Premier and the Cabinet when the 
NDP do not sit in the benches opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . Liberals! 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1513 
 

Mr. Collver: — Well even if that nemesis occurred with the Members to my right, I think we would all 
be in a lot of trouble, if they had that kind of power. 
 
We are concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the power that is being attributed to Cabinet, the power that is 
being granted to the Premier and his Cabinet by this and other pieces of legislation. I have a great deal 
more to say on that. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Hon. W. A. Robbins (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting 
Emergency Medical Aid. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill 58 deals with emergency medical aid. The Bill contains provisions that 
have become commonly known throughout North America as the Good Samaritan law. The law is 
primarily intended to protect physicians from claims for damages where they may come upon a person 
or persons injured in a highway traffic or other similar accident, and who require assistance on an 
emergency basis. The physician, like the Good Samaritan, will provide whatever assistance he can, even 
though he does not have access to the equipment and apparatus available to him in his own office or 
hospital or the support staff necessary for carrying out complex procedures. 
 
The law provides that the physician will be protected from any claims for damages by the person or 
persons to whom he provided this medical assistance, unless gross negligence is established. 
 
Good Samaritan laws have been enacted in a number of the states in the United States of America. This 
law was also enacted in Alberta in 1969. The report of the Special Committee of this Legislative 
Assembly on Highway Traffic and Safety included in this report made in February 1975, the following 
recommendation: 
 

That legislation such as Alberta’s Emergency Medical Aid Act be enacted in this province to 
protect those people who provide emergency medical assistance, particularly to victims of traffic 
accidents and the possibility of civil suit. 

 
The College of Physicians and Surgeons of this province has also proposed on several occasions that this 
law be enacted in this province. It should be noted that the incidence of medical negligence and 
malpractice claims is much lower in this province than in most of the states of the United States of 
America where medical malpractice claims have become relatively common. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is therefore intended not so much to protect the physician from claims for 
damages but to give him a feeling of assurance that he has some degree of statutory protection when he 
provides emergency medical services at the scene of a roadside accident, without adequate equipment 
and supporting personnel. 
 
This law should remove any hesitancy on the part of a 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1514 
 

passing physician to provide emergency services under difficult conditions. This is only one small part 
of a series of actions that should be taken in regard to highway traffic accidents, but it is a measure that 
is of some importance to the medical profession and other groups of persons providing emergency 
assistance to victims of traffic and other accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say a few words. The 
Liberal caucus will be supporting this Bill. We welcome it, we think it is perhaps overdue, but that’s not 
being by way of criticism. We are glad the Minister has seen fit to bring the Bill in. We will be 
supporting the principle of it. 
 
Mr. L. W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words on the Bill before us. 
As much as I have been at the scene of accidents different times, I think a Bill of this nature which will 
provide for emergency medical help in the Province of Saskatchewan is one that I have been looking for 
to be brought in to prevent numbers of people from being sued in cases where they were only trying to 
help their fellowman. 
 
We will be supporting the Bill as well. 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak on this Bill. I appreciate this, this is 
part of the recommendations of the Highway Safety Committee. I hope that it doesn’t stop there. We 
have a serious situation in our society. Out of 317 students who have come to this Legislature this year, 
from my constituency, a question was put to them — How many of them had taken first aid? Out of the 
whole bunch, six had taken first aid. I asked them whether they felt they should take first aid in their 
education, and all the hands went up, that they believe they should take first aid. I hope the Minister of 
Education will take note of that. 
 
It is all right to expect people to help, but they must be equipped with the knowledge to do the right 
things. At the International Conference on Traffic Safety we were told that the first person on the scene 
of an accident was a very important person. Mr. Speaker, 20 per cent of the people who die in traffic 
accidents would have been saved if the first person there would have known what to do. There are many 
people in the morgues when the autopsies are taken where they say, this person may not have died. I say, 
good, it is a step forward, this Good Samaritan legislation. But let’s do something about the knowledge 
for people to do the right thing when they come upon the scene of an accident. 
 
I reiterate again, because some Ministers forget easily, that we want this type of education carried out in 
our schools. We had Allen Oliver, the Member for Shaunavon, who was on our committee, who said he 
brought a doctor into the school for one day. The doctor came in with a bottle of mercurochrome and he 
marked up the students, they spent the whole day carrying on first aid in school. He said that classroom 
never was the same again. Two weeks later they had a broken window in the school. 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1515 
 

A little kid comes to the teacher and says, teacher we have a broken window, we better fix it before 
somebody gets hurt. Ordinarily they would say, who the hell broke the window? There would be a fight 
over it. 
 
But we need attitude changing programs. I say that first aid in our schools would certainly be an 
improvement to attitudes towards safety. 
 
I will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
Mr. Robbins moved second reading of Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend the Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
 
He said: I might just take a minute or two to outline this Bill for the House and give a bit of background. 
 
There are five main government superannuation plans in effect, The Liquor Board Superannuation Act, 
The Public Service Superannuation Act, The Saskatchewan Power Superannuation Act, The Sask Tel 
Superannuation Act and The Worker’s Compensation Superannuation Act. These are formula type 
superannuation plans and they are standardized in the sense that payment out of those plans is on the 
basis of 2 per cent for each year of service with the average of the six highest years of salary when the 
person goes on pension. There are, of course, some differences in certain of the sections of the various 
Acts to take into account differences in the terms and conditions of employment. 
 
I want to point out that the provisions of The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act generally 
apply to those five Acts. 
 
The Bill setting up that Act came in in the year 1965. It was devised as a legislative means to provide 
uniform amendments to the five superannuation plans in the use of one Bill rather than five. 
 
The Bill presently before the Legislature will provide supplementary allowance for superannuates of $12 
for each year of service; and for widows $6 for each year of service of the employee in respect of whom 
the allowance is being paid; up to a maximum of 35 years of service in both cases. The allowance is 
computed on that maximum of 35 years service as previously mentioned. 
 
I want to point out that down through the years, the last 10 years or so, or maybe a little longer than that, 
I think 10 years out of the last 12 years there have been supplementary provisions provided. There are 
currently some 1,781 people on pension in the province out of the Public Service Superannuation Plan 
and obviously some additional ones out of the various other Acts, but smaller in numbers. 
 
The provisions of the Act have been changed down through the years on varying scales. In the initial 
stages — 1965, it paid $10 annual allowance plus $5 for widows. This was related to only those people 
who retired prior to April 4, 1951. In subsequent years they upgraded the Act, bringing the 1966 
provisions up to April 1, 1954, those persons who had retired up 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1516 
 

to that time were in receipt of this allowance as well. In 1967 it was increased up to 1958 for those 
persons who were put on pension prior to ’58 and in ’69 those prior to ’63. The total sums available up 
to the end of 1970 were $259,121 in terms of supplemental allowances to the people on pensions. 
 
Since that time, provision has been made in each of the subsequent years from 1972 through to the 
present. The total sums available in that period are $1,849,324 for a total of $2,108,445 in 
supplementary provisions in the last ten years. 
 
No one is going to argue that this is adequate. Particularly during the last three years the erosion of 
pensions has been very severe because of the high inflation rate. We have been urged many times by 
pensioners to have a look at an indexing system which would work well for people on pension. We have 
looked at this. In fact, we have a number of reports from actuaries which indicate that the results if we 
invoked indexing on the basis of the Regina-Saskatoon index, or if we use the Canadian Consumer 
Index, that the costs would be staggering. 
 
We conclude the greatest benefits should be provided to those persons who serve the province for most, 
if not all of their working years. It was, therefore, decided to provide a supplementary allowance on the 
basis as previously outlined. 
 
I want to make it clear, that I personally do not consider this any final answer at all in the field of 
pensions. It is simply a bandaid approach, that is patchwork to attempt to keep people’s economic heads 
above water, if you want to use that term. 
 
I want to make clear that we deliberately set the thing up in the way it is now set up in relation to a flat 
rate increase. This was done deliberately because the person who is on a pension of $3,000 and gets a 
$420 increase as a supplementary provision based on a fact that they have had 35 years of service and 
under one of those Acts will have a 14 per cent increase in their pension. However, if the pension is 
$6,000 a year they will also get a $420 increase, assuming again that they had 35 years service under 
one of those particular Acts. They will be getting a seven per cent increase. If they were on a $10,000 a 
year pension, they would again get a $420 increase on a flat rate basis, and this would be 4.2 per cent of 
the total. 
 
The average in ’75 worked out to about 8.8 per cent; the average for ’76 hasn’t been computed as yet. It 
will obviously be a little less than that because it will be computed on a higher figure taking into account 
the supplementaries that have already been paid. 
 
Our Government is engaged in a continuing study on pensions. Frankly, I am one who would personally 
like to see some quicker action on the field of pensions. It is a very difficult field because you cannot get 
unanimity amongst people and you carry on consultations for a very long period of time. 
 
Personally, and I would just like to make these remarks in conclusion, I don’t think I will have an 
opportunity in this Session of the Legislature to deal with it at all and I will do it very briefly. I came to 
the conclusion a long time ago that a pension should not be a reward for long service. That is irrational 
in our present day society. The pension should be 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1517 
 

a deferred wage and that a person should have that pension payable to them when they become 
pensionable so they have pensions for each period of employed period during their working lifetime. 
 
I just want to cite one example from my own experience, just in round figures, to illustrate why I hold 
that point of view. I know of the case of an individual who was 25 years of age who went to work for an 
employer, who accumulated roughly $4,000 of money in that pension plan and left that job at age 30. 
Because the vesting and lock in clause was applicable to that particular pension plan, that money 
belonged to that person but had to be retained for the purpose intended, pension. That $4,000 
accumulated over a period of years on ten-year cycles on a seven per cent compounding rate, will total 
over $32,000 by the time the individual reaches age 60 and will be in excess of $40,000 at age 65. Even 
at age 60, $258 a month would be available from that original $2,000 contribution of that individual, 
matched with a similar contribution from the employer. 
 
At age 65, because of the accumulative effect of the current interest return based on a 7 per cent 
compound rate, that individual would have a pension running very close to $350 per month, payable as 
long as that person lived and carrying a long term guarantee. 
 
What I am simply saying is that these provisions we are hopeful will be of some assistance, and 
obviously they will be of some assistance in alleviating some of the problems people have who are on 
pensions. But I must also point out that if we had used the flat percentage rate we would have, of course, 
given a great deal more help to the people on higher pensions, and much lesser rate to the people on 
lower pensions. That is why we used the flat rate approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the Minister on the 
manner in which he gave his remarks. I think he realizes perhaps more than anybody on that side of the 
House and perhaps even on this side of the House, the difficult situation that this whole country is 
getting itself in in connection with pensions. The Minister says perhaps the Act was inadequate for what 
it could do and I think that is right and, of course, will be supporting the Act. 
 
But really, the Act begs the question. All of the superannuation Acts we have here beg the question. 
Somewhere along the way some government is going to have to bite the bullet and come to grips with 
the problem. Whether it is your Government or the Government in Ottawa or somewhere else, is a 
problem that is descending on us like a big black cloud. One of these days we are going to be in the 
situation where funds aren’t going to be there to pay out the people that are entitled to them. 
 
I can’t let the opportunity go by, Mr. Speaker, without saying something about this Government’s record 
with senior citizens and old people. I condemn the Government for their record in this regard, 
notwithstanding their flaming speeches 



 
May 5, 1976 
 

1518 
 

about what they do for the nursing homes and so on. 
 
We advocated in the last election a basic minimum pension to senior citizens of $350, single and $500 a 
month if married, which was the recommendation, I believe of the Wartman Commission. The Senior 
Citizens’ Action group, under the guidance of a former Member of your Government at one time, was 
putting on a pressure on your Government to adopt these recommendations. For some reason he turned 
his attentions away from the NDP of Saskatchewan and has now gone on to Ottawa. 
 
I say that it is appropriate for this Government to be concerned and give senior citizens at least a decent 
standard of living, rather than putting their emphasis and their thrust of Government into things like 
potash and oil and so on. 
 
The first duty of any government is to make sure that the citizens over which they govern are adequately 
provided for. I submit that this Government has not done that. I am not going to go on with one of my 
long senior citizens speeches, you heard them before, and you will no doubt hear them again. But I do 
urge upon the Minister to hopefully get some of his opinions and some of his thoughts across to his 
Cabinet colleagues about pensions. I wonder if the Minister, when closing debate, could give us some 
indication as to the Government’s thoughts in this regard. Whether we can look forward to any 
legislation next year or the years ahead about pensions. I realize of course it is hard to legislate in a 
vacuum and this perhaps could be a federal problem rather than a provincial problem. But I should like 
to hear briefly from the Minister in this regard and as to what the Government’s intentions are with the 
whole problem of pensions. 
 
Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — When the Minister is replying to the Member for Regina Lakeview, 
would he also indicate if he was suggesting that all pensions will be covered like the 10-45 Law, or will 
it be like from day one. Is that what you are recommending with the example you used of the employee 
who had the $2,000 and the $2,000 matching? Are you suggesting that we should be looking at that 
now, where all pensions are locked in and you can’t withdraw? 
 
Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, my remarks will be very brief. 
 
I agree that we cannot solve this problem quickly unless we are willing to make a start on it. I have not 
found yet a unanimity of opinion with respect to making that start. Until we come to the conclusion that 
a pension is in fact a deferred wage and the pension in fact covers each individual for each of his or her 
employed periods we will not solve the pension problem. The real problem in terms of the inflationary 
trend that hits pensions today, shows up very clearly in terms of the fact that you cannot determine in 
advance what those costs are going to be. And I might say that the assumption is made on the basis of an 
actuarial study when the pension plan is established that most of the people participating in that pension 
plan will never be pensioned by it. That obviously never provides an answer for the vast majority of 
people. The sad fact is they all end up at government’s door, provincial or federal, eventually saying 
they have insufficient funds on which to live. Therefore, I say the sooner we get to this point in time, the 
better off we are. It is not something that has an immediate 



 
May 5, 1976 

 

1519 
 

instant solution because once you get on that road you really don’t see those results for a fairly 
prolonged period of time. But at least you have to make a start. I suggest that although I don’t question 
the need for some increases in relation to senior citizens, I do suggest to the Member for Lakeview that 
is something beyond the province’s ability to control. I still think that is something that has to be done at 
the national level. I must conclude that even the Wartman report very strongly pointed out that that was 
a federal responsibility. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:47 o’clock p.m. 
 


	QUESTIONS

