
























































Hansard: March 17, 1976


 
115 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

4th Day 
 

Wednesday, March 17, 1976 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I am very delighted to introduce through you 
to this Legislature, 38 Grade Seven and Eight students from MacNab Park School in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Mayfair. I should like to welcome them to this Assembly and also their teachers, Mr. Froese 
and Mr. Reckert and hope that they have an enjoyable and informational afternoon. I look forward to 
meeting with them this afternoon in the rotunda. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I, through you, might join the 
Member for Saskatoon Mayfair in welcoming the students from MacNab Park School. They are not in 
my constituency but I notice that a couple of my former colleagues are sitting there, Mr. Reckert and 
Mr. Froese. I am delighted to see you here and I hope you have a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. G. McNEILL (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce a group of 
gentlemen and I think they are the reeves and councillors who have the distinction of being the reeve 
and councillor of the newest municipality in Saskatchewan, the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake, 
which was formed and came into existence on the 1st of March. 
 
I should like to introduce the reeve, Mr. Roy Armstrong, who was born in Minnesota in 1910 and he has 
homesteaded . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — . . . in the Meadow Lake area in 1928 and has worked with the farm credit union 
and other community projects since. 
 
The Deputy Reeve, Mr. Ray Wolfing, born in Meadow Lake. He has worked for the Department of 
Education for five years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — One of the councillors, Walter Kovloski, born in Meadow Lake in 1933, farms in 
the area and also one of the members of the old LID councillors. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
116 

 

MR. McNEILL: — Lee Clarke born in Meadow Lake in 1932 and farms in the area and he is also one 
of the members of the council. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Glen Ronald born at Fiske in 1918 and moved to Meadow Lake in 1939 and farms 
and ranches in that area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Missing are two of the councillors who couldn’t be here. Also with them is their 
acting secretary Mr. Harry Stobbs. I should like you gentlemen to stand up. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McNEILL: — Mr. Speaker, I wish and hope that their work in the town and in the convention 
much success. I wish them a safe journey home and I will be meeting with them later on. 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce the council from the RM 
of Invergordon, of which I was reeve for seven years before I came to this House. I did such a bad job 
that they sent me down here and that is the only way in which they could get rid of me. 
 
They are sitting in the galleries to your right, Mr. Speaker, led by their Deputy Reeve, Mr. Jackson and 
the councillors, Mr. Stelmaschuk and Mr. Borsa. Would you please stand up. What a fine looking bunch 
of boys we have up there in Invergordon. Mr. Zabolski, Mr. Chitrinia and Mr. Toner. They are the finest 
group of people you could have here in this House. I also want to say welcome to Mr. Stobbs from 
Meadow Lake. He used to come from my constituency. He was also a reeve. I certainly appreciate 
having them here this afternoon and the next 25 minutes should be very enlightening. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Harold Livergant 
 
MR. D.G. STEUART (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 
the Premier. 
 
Is the Premier aware, does he have any knowledge that one Harold Livergant was ever convicted of an 
offence under the Criminal Code of Canada, of theft, or fraud, or conversion of money or any similar 
such offence? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — No. 
 
MR. STEUART: — The Premier says that he has no knowledge of this and I must take him at his word. 
I would then ask the Premier 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
117 

 

if this knowledge is brought to light, would he change his opinion about our contention that there is a 
conflict of interest in handling Mr. Livergant and his organization too great powers, to purchase, to buy 
and to control the nursing homes in the Province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot see what relevance a conviction would have — what 
influence it would have on whether or not there is a conflict of interest. If there is a conflict of interest 
then presumably there is, whether or not the person involved has or has not a criminal record. However, 
if there are facts of which we are not aware of which should be brought to the attention of the 
Government we would be happy to consider them. 
 
MR. STEUART: — A further supplementary. Would the Premier, since it is my information that this 
took place during his time in office or about that time in office, would the Premier undertake to look into 
it and report to this House? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I will not. If the Hon. Member has information he can lay it before the 
House or alternatively send it to me privately. I do not undertake to chase down every rumor that he may 
wish to raise in this House. 
 
MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly will lay it in front of the Premier. I am absolutely amazed 
that he claims that he has no knowledge of this at this time. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether that was a supplementary. The Hon. Member 
may be amazed. He is frequently amazed at the truth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Road Load Limits 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs, with respect to his comments yesterday to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and the load limits with respect to municipal roads that he indicated that he would be 
imposing. 
 
May I ask the Minister if these load limits were imposed would it not in fact prohibit the winter 
movement of grain from grain elevators to the Government terminals on lines that are blown in with 
snow? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — No. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary then. May I ask the Minister by what process would that grain 
movement be exempt if you had limits of 32,000 or 50,000 pounds on municipal roads? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We would use the 50,000 pound road limit. I want 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
118 

 

to make it clear to the Hon. Member that what I put forward to SARM Convention was the SARM 
policy, which they have requested us to implement over a fair period of time. We now see our way clear 
to implement their policy with respect to municipal roads. That being, 32,000 pounds for single axle, 
50,000 pounds for double axle. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary. Was it SARM’s request that all semi-trailer outfits that are 
used for hauling grain be taken off Saskatchewan roads? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — It was SARM’s request that the road limits on municipal roads be, as I 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, just a few minutes ago, 32,000 for single axle, 50,000 for double axle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Souris-Cannington. Is it a supplementary? 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — A supplementary, yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the Government act in light of the fact that this proposed change will eliminate larger trucks and 
semi-trailers from rural Saskatchewan, will he indicate whether or not he will allow F plates on tandem 
farm trucks? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We have no policy as yet to allow F plates on Tandem trucks. The matter is 
under consideration, but we have not announced any change in our present policy. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does this 50,000 load limit not conflict 
with the 500 pounds per square inch load limit on provincial highways? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think that it will be relative to the size of tire, I think that is granted. What I 
announced yesterday, Mr. Speaker, for the information of the Member for Souris-Cannington, it was our 
intention to implement a policy in response to the requests of SARM. I indicated to them that we could 
see a good deal of problems particularly administrative problems, with implementation of this particular 
policy. That we want to sit down with them to discuss the possibility of providing permits under certain 
circumstances. We want to do that and we will do that before we make any formal announcement, or 
any specific announcement, with respect to time of implementation and other conditions that may be 
involved in implementation. 
 

Scuttling of Hall Commission Report 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
119 

 

to direct a question to the Minister of Transportation. 
 
Is this not a direct attempt by the NDP to scuttle the Hall Commission before it even submits its report? 
Does the Minister not know that the Hall Commission now . . . 
 
MR. MESSER: — That is not a question. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, it is a question. Is the Minister not aware that the Hall Commission is 
studying at this present time the entire problem of transportation in grain handling in the Province of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada? And how does that not presuppose a denial and a scuttling of that 
report before it has even come up and may in all honesty tamper with any efforts to upgrade and 
improve the grain-handling situation in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am fully aware of the efforts of Justice Emmett Hall in this 
commission. I think they are doing an excellent job. I think that the people of Saskatchewan are doing an 
excellent job in making their position clear to that commission. 
 
It seemed to us that the people who build the municipal roads and maintain the municipal roads should 
know the kind of load limits they want on those municipal roads. They have indicated that by a 
Resolution of their contention . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think we have had two short speeches on this matter now, one in 
the guise of a question and the other in the guise of an answer. I would suggest that we get back to the 
Question Period. 
 
Does the Member for Nipawin have a supplementary? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I will concede to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Studies on Damage by Semi-Trailers to Road System 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a supplementary 
question of the Minister of Transport. 
 
The Minister, in his speech to the SARM has referred to the damage done by semi-trailers to the road 
systems in Saskatchewan. I should like to ask the Minister if he has evidence of such, the studies that 
have taken place on it; have any taken place and if so are you prepared to table such studies in the 
Legislature? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure that the Rural Municipalities Association have data 
which we can provide for all Members. If they have I will ask them if they are prepared to table such 
documentation. I think that there has been some evidence of damage done by semi-trailers, hauling the 
heavy loads of grain on our provincial highway system. I can get information from the Department of 
Highways and I will certainly provide that information to the Hon. Member. 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
120 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Since the Minister is perpetuating his thesis with no documentation, does he 
realize that under what he is proposing that every hopper bottom grain trailer will be taken off the road? 
That every cattle liner to every rancher will be taken off? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The Member is expressing opinions and I don’t think he is asking a 
question. If the Member wants to get to the substance of his question, would he proceed at once to it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Would the Minister dispute what I just said? Would you agree with what I said? 
Would you accept the fact that every semi-trailer in the category that I just mentioned will be taken off 
the road under what you are proposing? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — No, no, I think that many of the cattle trucks will come under the 50,000 
pounds. I think that if there is need for providing permits for hauls on the municipal system we are 
prepared to look at that. We are not out to completely change the municipal systems so far as hauling 
heavy loads or heavier loads, but we are certainly out to change, or prevent, total damage of that 
municipal system by continuous heavy loads. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I must caution Members to refrain from this manner of questioning 
because I think what we are doing here is not pursuing the topic which was opened up in the original 
question about the discretion of, or the imposition of, bans or load limits on highways but instead we are 
getting into a discussion about the construction of highways and about modes of transportation. And 
that’s not the question. The Member for Souris-Cannington. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Would the Minister agree that if this proposal is adopted that a farmer could 
leave his farm under the 50,000 pound load limit, only to be ticketed on the provincial highway for 
being overweight? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — One of the things we have to do is get into discussions about how this system 
as we are attempting to implement on behalf of the Rural Municipality Association can fit into the limits 
under the highway system and they will certainly be part of discussions as we develop and implement 
this policy. 
 

Municipal Road Load Limits 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is the Minister aware of the implications of his suggestions this morning on the 
hauling of pulp wood to the Government owned and controlled Carrot River pulp mill and is this 
suggestion being made because the Government of Saskatchewan does not want to add municipal 
roadways to its highway grid system to save money? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I lost the latter part of this 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
121 

 

question. Could you repeat the question again for me, please. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad the Minister mentioned that. I wonder if it would be 
possible, just off the record, to get this particular microphone upgraded a little bit so that when I give my 
questions I do not have to shout. I am not very good at shouting. 
 
Is the Minister aware of the implications of the policy which he announced today to the SARM, of the 
effect of that policy on the hauling of pulp wood over municipal roads to the Government owned Carrot 
River sawmill and is the Government of Saskatchewan attempting to introduce this now in order that it 
does not have to take into the provincial highway network the municipal roadways in order to alleviate 
some municipality problems in financing these badly beaten up municipal roads? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t respond specifically to the question of the wood haul into 
the sawmill in Carrot River. I don’t know whether they have to haul over the grid system or the 
municipal system in order to deliver loads to Carrot River. If they do then, as I have indicated earlier, 
this must be a matter for consideration. I want to point out to all Members what we have announced does 
not affect the provincial highway system which is 110,000 miles gross to the primary system and 74,000 
miles gross on the secondary system. This only applies to municipal roads. 
 
In response to the latter part of the question, I tried to make it clear to the convention yesterday that the 
days of transferring or wholesale transfer of municipal roads to the highway system in this Government 
is past, the municipal system is going to be the municipal system. It will be their responsibility and the 
highway system will maintain its present system as close to what it is as we can, with the exception of 
the expansion perhaps into the northern areas. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister, therefore, be interested in 
knowing that at the moment pulp trucks are using the municipal roadways because the load limits 
imposed on the provincial highways do not allow them to pass over the provincial highways and that 
these road limit restrictions will then limit the hauling of pulpwood totally. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Thank you for the information. I think it is time that we put road limits on the 
municipal system according to the kind of limits that that system can stand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Elrose. 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Would the Minister in charge of Transportation before this 
House say that there were no other motives than those mentioned in the House today for bringing in the 
road restrictions? No other motives except those mentioned today? 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
122 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, (1) I think we are responding to SARM, let’s make that clear. As 
the Member for Kelvington (Mr. Byers) points out, one of the first proposals they put forward to us was 
with respect to attempting to deal on a province-wide basis was road limits for this system. It is true 
also, as I indicated, it has implications for the inland terminals. We have stated that we are not as a 
government in favour of inland terminals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We want to protect the community, we want to protect the country elevator 
system if we possibly can. We are not stopping the hauls to the inland terminals as some people accuse 
us of when we limit the . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think the Minister’s answer tends to be too lengthy. I think the question 
was simple enough. I think a yes or no could have answered it. Do you have a question? Proceed. 
 

Registered Technologists — Union 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, may I address a question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of 
Labour. Is the Premier aware that the registered technologists in our province are planning dramatic 
action to protest their inability to form a union of their choice? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I am not aware of any action which I would have called dramatic action. I 
am aware of them writing letters to the press and writing letters to the Minister, but I am not aware of 
any other action which is contemplated. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier agree with the decisions of the 
Labour Relations Board forcing these groups of Saskatchewan citizens against their will to join unions 
which have very little whatever to do with their chosen line of work? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I question the urgency of that question and I will not allow it to proceed. Next 
question. 
 

Municipal Road Load Limits 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if could go back to the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy with a 
question. Is the Minister aware and I think if he isn’t he should be, that what he announced yesterday 
will in effect wipe out a number of operators who have vehicles that are semi-trailers designed 
specifically for carrying grain? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, this has been brought to my attention. The numbers involved I 
am not sure of. The kind of hauls they 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
123 

 

are involved in I am not sure of and that is why I indicated earlier that we are open to discussion with 
respect to the final implementation of the policy. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I must say I am pleased to hear what the Minister has just said. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Are you asking a supplementary? Proceed. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Would the Minister be prepared to indicate what format he envisages for those who 
are interested in this question to bring their views forward so that he and his colleagues are aware of 
them? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the format is to get in touch with my office. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Could I ask one supplementary on that? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. Supplementary. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Will there be public hearings on this question of weight haulage? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We will take it under consideration. I had not thought of that, but certainly we 
will make ourselves available to any representation which we always do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Registered Technologists — Union 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I should like to direct a question to the Premier with regard to my question. In 
order to alleviate the problem of the registered technologists in the province, is the Government of 
Saskatchewan contemplating for that reason or for any other reason . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have already expressed the opinion that I didn’t believe the matter was 
urgent. I was not impressed with the urgency when the question was first placed. The Member for 
Regina South. 
 

Municipal Road Load Limits 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask an additional question of the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs. Would he indicate to the House when the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities requested this particular policy and in what form did they request it? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — They made the request to us in a brief and I can’t 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
124 

 

remember the actual date, I think it was in November and it was part of their brief. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister be prepared to table correspondence or 
documents with respect to the request that he refers to from the SARM? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I will be prepared to table the brief. 
 

Beer Manufacturing Business 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, a question directed to the Minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board. Since the Provincial Government is a major Canadian shareholder in the 
Heninger Malting Company is it the Government’s intention to get into the beer manufacturing 
business? 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Minister in charge of Liquor Board): — Mr. Speaker, no. 
 

Municipal Road Load Limits 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 
responsible for Transportation or the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
You indicated earlier that the load limit proposals you made yesterday were at the request of the SARM 
and to prevent them from municipal roads, and yet in your speech you gave the reason as being what the 
load limit will prevent is the use of larger trucks and semi-trailers hauling to inland terminals, and that is 
specifically what you said at the convention yesterday. Would the Minister not also agree, or would the 
Minister not agree, that such a policy will stop many grain trucks and many farmers from using the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool high through-put elevators? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, what I said yesterday was that one of the implications of such a 
policy will be to restrict the kind of hauling envisaged to the inland terminal. The average farm truck is a 
three ton truck, which weighs about 10,000 pounds empty and fully loaded would weigh anywhere 
between 28,000 to 30,000 pounds. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary, would the Minister not agree first of all that 
that policy will effectively restrict grain load limits to 300 bushels in the Province of Saskatchewan and 
would the Minister be prepared to bring these proposals before this Assembly for approval prior to 
implementation? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Three hundred bushels weighs 18,000 pounds, another 10,000 pounds to the 
truck is 28,000 pounds. If it is a 350 bushel load, it comes within the 32,000 pound load limit. 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
125 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the same question. Is the Government not prepared 
to vest in the municipalities some discretion themselves on their own load limits in connection with this 
policy? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated that there is flexibility in terms of under the limits 
that they have asked. There are municipalities which presently now have a 28,000 pound load limit. I 
think we have to discuss that, as we have to discuss the problems of implementing spring load bans. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the Minister rule out any discretion in the 
municipalities above the load limits you have indicated? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — In our discussions with rural municipality associations, they have indicated 
that that is the limit, the maximum limit that they desire. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What allocations or allotments or whatever have 
been contemplated by the Government to the municipalities who have provincial problems similar to the 
Carrot River sawmill which is a province-wide sort of organization? What extra funds will be made 
available to the municipalities to upgrade their municipal roads to bring them up to standards so that this 
kind of load limit is not going to materially affect the industry, enclose the industry in their particular 
area and in the same way the municipalities in those areas of the inland terminals and so on? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We have not developed such a policy. If we develop such a policy, we will be 
pleased to announce it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Are there any further introduction of guests? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to introduce to this 
Assembly some members from Spiritwood RM. I believe they are Mr. Boechler, the reeve of the RM 
and two councillors, Louis Schalm and Jim Walter, along with the secretary-treasurer of the Spiritwood 
municipality, Gordon Thompson. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce three members 
from the RM of Enterprise, Mr. George Mastel, Mr. Allen Woelfle and Mr. Cliff Dunwald. I hope you 
enjoy your stay in Regina and hope you don’t get into any trouble. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
126 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to introduce the reeve of 
the Mayfield RM, Mr. Victor Prescesky of Ruddell. I want to wish him an enjoyable and interesting 
afternoon and wish him and his fellow councillors a good meeting and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

Changes in Text of Public Accounts 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, last year the report of the Select 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts recommended certain changes in the text of the public 
accounts. Specifically the committee made this recommendation, let me quote: 
 

Your committee considered the question of the amount of the details now appearing in the public 
accounts text. Your committee recommends that the levels for detail to be shown in the public 
accounts be as follows: 

 
$10,000 per employee for wages and salaries; $5,000 for payment to supplementaries and; $2,000 
per person for travel and; that where the aggregate of any person exceeds the limits throughout all 
departments, this aggregate amount is to be also shown. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the first recommendation was for a change, as you will notice in the level of detail to be 
shown. This recommendation was acted upon and the public accounts which were tabled at the last 
session reflect this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second recommendation was that where the aggregate of that person exceeds the limits 
throughout all departments, this aggregate is to also be shown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in compliance with the request of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts, this 
information has been assembled by the Department of Finance for the first time. It is my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to now table the supplementary information which was requested for and which we were able 
to compile and I hereby table that supplementary report for the consideration of the public accounts 
committee. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Question Period 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, there was a question asked in 
the oral question period yesterday by the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) and I was to 
bring an answer. I am trying to get a clarification of the rules. Do I provide the answer now or should I 
do it tomorrow in question period? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would suggest the Member 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
127 

 

do it in the question period at the earliest opportunity. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, if I might just bring this to the attention of the House that I don’t 
know whether this belongs in question period or not, but yesterday the Minister of Highways assured us 
that he would bring an answer to a question that I gave to him to this Assembly today. He has not yet 
done so. Does that belong in question period or does that belong now? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If that was the issue that was raised by the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter), the 
preamble of which was a Point of Privilege, then I suggested yesterday that the Minister would answer 
during the question period because it was a question. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well this was a specific question of a separate nature, Mr. Speaker, that I posed to 
the Minister of Highways. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am sure the Minister of Highways will take the opportunity to refresh himself as 
to what the question was and when he intends to answer, I expect he would bring it forward in the 
question period in due course. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. M. KWASNICA (Cutknife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I should 
like to introduce to the Members of the Assembly, members of the RM of Manitou Lake. 
 
I should like to introduce to you George Patterson who is the reeve, secretary-treasurer, Ron Doupe and 
Geoffrey Hall and Harry Graham. We bid them welcome here and we hope that they have a delightful 
afternoon and a good convention and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY SPEAKER 
 

Oral Question Period 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before proceeding any further to Orders of the Day, I should like to give a couple 
of statements which have been requested. The first being this: 
 
Before the Orders of the Day yesterday, the Hon. Member for Nipawin asked for the reasons as to why 
his Oral Question was out of order. I have checked the verbatim transcript with regard to his Oral 
Question which was as follows: 
 

Is the Minister attempting to use the Department of Highways to punish areas in Saskatchewan that 
voted Progressive Conservative in the last provincial election? 

 
I refer all Hon. Members to the Interim Report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, p. 9 
and Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, Chapter 5, 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
128 

 

p. 147 which is an outline of some of the basic guidelines which are to be followed. I rule that the 
question was vague in the nature of debate, contained an expression of opinion, was not of sufficient 
urgency and therefore out of order. It is possible that if the question had been specific and in a different 
form, the urgency of the matter would have been more apparent. 
 
The second statement is as follows: 
 
Before the Orders of the Day yesterday, the Hon. Member for Souris-Cannington rose on a Point of 
Order to seek clarification of the order that Mr. Speaker would recognize Opposition Members during 
the Oral Question period. I want to emphasize the point that the new Oral Question period, as 
recommended by the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, would be an experiment only. It will 
take a few days or weeks for myself and all Members to adjust to this new procedure and to have it 
operating smoothly. 
 
I referred all Hon. Members to the Order of Reference of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures which instructed the Committee to — "provide for an oral question period similar — to the 
oral question period in the House of Commons -." When this Committee visited the House of Commons, 
it was noted that the Speaker recognized Members from the Official Opposition before recognizing 
Members from the other opposition parties. 
 
Because of the Order of Reference mentioned above, I propose to follow the House of Commons 
practice. 
 
I would remind all Hon. Members that any Member may ask a supplementary to the question already 
asked. 
 
The new Oral Question period is still in the experimental stage and I encourage all Hon. Members to 
give the proposed new system a good try. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders 
of the Day, I should like to rise, I am sorry, on another Point of Order. Today, you ruled me out of order 
on a question because it was not of an urgent nature. I wonder if there wasn’t confusion between the 
question that I asked and the supplementary question that I asked. The question that I asked was: Is the 
Minister aware or the Premier aware the Registered Technologists in our province are planning dramatic 
action to protest their inability to form a union of their choice? That was the question, I wonder is Mr. 
Speaker ruling that question as not of an urgent nature in the province? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Member will have to — I can’t offer him a specific answer at this time; 
however, I will examine the record and determine at what point I said the matter of urgency was not 
apparent to me. I will bring something to the Member privately if he wishes later, possibly tomorrow. If 
the Member wishes I could make a statement in the House. I would expect the Member might be 
satisfied with a private explanation. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I would appreciate a statement in the House on this one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will do that. 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
129 

 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY 
 
HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Minister Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that you would 
want me to recognize this particular day because it pays tribute to a glorious group of people. I notice 
that there are some staunch admirers and some staunch representatives of the Irish in the House. The 
Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mrs. Edwards), the Assistant Clerk, the Hon. Member for Moose 
Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg), the Hon. Member for Rosemont (Mr. Allen), you can tell by their apparel that 
they are here on behalf of the Irish. And that they are very proud of that particular group. 
 
In our generosity, we Irish will admit that the Ukrainian is personable, emotional and adroit, and the 
Scot is thrifty and witty and industrious. The Scandinavian is hardy, patient and kind and the German is 
musical, hard-working, immaculate and business-like. Many other groups have fine qualities. 
 
We readily admit that. But I am sure that every Hon. Member will agree without reservation that the 
Irish have all of these qualities, all of them, and exhibit them modestly and without reservation, 
particularly on March 17th. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, to all of the Irish, ‘top o’ the morning and best of luck. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address-In-Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. D.G. Banda (Redberry) for 
an Address-in-Reply. 
 
MR. H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday before I adjourned debate 
on the Speech from the Throne, I made a few comments in regard to the Members opposite and I should 
like for their edification briefly to re-state those comments. 
 
I said that if one looked at the public policy issued by the Members opposite and the stances that they 
have taken publicly on such issues as natural resources, services to people, such as medicare, one could 
really see no difference between the Members opposite. And, therefore, one would, in order to save time 
and to make sure that we are clear, simply refer to them as the Opposition. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I had also spent some time on describing this Government’s policy in regard to 
natural resources and which is directly opposite to what the Members opposite would adhere to. We 
believe that most of the benefits should go to the owners of the natural resources, that is the people of 
Saskatchewan not to the big multinational corporations. 
 
I also had indicated, Mr. Speaker, that this Government recognizes the seriousness of inflation and that 
in general principles we agree with the Federal program, but that we would urge the Federal 
Government to make absolutely certain that not only wages and salaries are controlled, but also profits 
and 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
130 

 

prices. And up to this time I think some of us are having some doubt as to whether the Federal 
Government is really serious in making certain that profits and prices are also controlled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to spend some time in speaking about the Department of Social Services 
because I know that the House would be very interested by some detail on the Federal-Provincial 
conference that took place on social services on February 3 and 4. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a fact borne out by action taken by this Government that we do believe in fighting 
poverty and to support those people who are on fixed incomes and those who generally fall below the 
poverty line. In my Department, on January 1, we took issue with some of the hardships caused by 
inflation by increasing SAP rates. We increased the rates from $65 per person to $75 per person for food 
and clothing. We also increased household allowances from $30 to $50. And we said that we would pay 
$50 for utilities and also pay the actual rent and/or taxes. 
 
In terms of a family consisting of two parents and two children, this would mean an increase of about 20 
per cent across the board. For a single person this would mean an increase of approximately 15 per cent. 
 
The increases relate directly to the percentage increase in average wages and more particularly the 
increase in the consumer price index. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Social Services I am prepared to constantly review what the effects inflation 
is having on the poor, the working poor and those who are not able to work. I am prepared to constantly 
review this and if necessary recommend to the Government further increases. 
 
I stated, Mr. Speaker, in my first speech in this House after being appointed Minister that I was not 
prepared to fight inflation on the backs of the poor. I reiterate that statement today. 
 
It is also noteworthy that in this province we have the highest minimum wage anywhere in Canada. This 
Government since being elected has increased the minimum wage, I believe, over 100 per cent. We all 
recognize that even at $2.80 no married person with a family is expected, at least not on this side of the 
House, expected to live on that type of an income. Therefore, a few years ago, we implemented the 
Family Income Plan and I will say a few words about that plan right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members opposite have been very, very critical of the Family Income Plan. They have said 
that it is nothing but another way of handing out money to those worthless bums who are not prepared to 
work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I could quote the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) who is well known for where 
he stands on this issue. The Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher), who in the last session said that 
this Government makes nothing but leeches of people . . . oh, I know it hurts when you have to face the 
facts and the 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
131 

 

truth. But, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to support those people who are not able to work. But we 
expect those who are able to work to go out and work. But it is the responsibility of government to make 
work available. And in this regard, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan doesn’t have to take second place to any 
province except Alberta. 
 
At the Federal-Provincial Conference, I was very pleased and proud to be the Minister of Social 
Services of Saskatchewan because other Ministers were not so well off as we are here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I know this hurts with the Members opposite because when they were in power, 
what they were saying to people was, look, if you don’t like to live off crumbs go to another province, 
go to another province, but you are not going to get further assistance. That is their attitude to people 
who through no fault of their own are not capable of working, or through no fault of their own have a 
Federal Government who is more prepared to put restraints on the poor than provide employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, in Saskatchewan, the latest statistics and I will refer to these a little later, show 
that unemployment in Saskatchewan is well below most of the other provinces. Well below the other 
provinces. Mr. Speaker, it is not like it was in 1969 and 1970 when there was little unemployment in this 
province. There was no unemployment because most of the people were moving to other provinces to 
get away from that type of Government that the Member opposite is now advocating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Family Income Plan, although opposed by most Members opposite, and here I will 
exclude the Conservatives because I don’t think they have made any statement on the Family Income 
Plan. But I know where the Liberals stand on it. They are opposed to the plan. Let me say this, at the 
Federal-Provincial Conference at Ottawa most other Ministers and most other provinces are very 
supportive of our Family Income Plan. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — On a Point of Order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is your Point of Order? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — It would seem, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for the Government is speaking. I 
would like to hear it regardless of what he has to say, I am going to hear it. I just wonder if we might just 
have a little more quiet on this side. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the point is well taken. I was having a little trouble a couple of times 
hearing the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes) in his address. I would ask the Members to show 
the usual kind of respect when other Members are speaking. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make a comment to 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
132 

 

Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), you don’t hear with your mouth, you hear with your ears. It might 
help if you closed the one and opened the other two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying that most other Ministers were very supportive and very interested in our 
Family Income Plan. Now I will relate to that a little later in my talk because the new income support 
supplementation agreed in principle to by the other Ministers is basically following the principle of the 
Family Income Plan. 
 
The Family Income Plan, Mr. Speaker, . . .I really thought that the Tories were interested in programs 
for the poor, but I guess that they don’t to listen and also . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — I thought they wanted to hear you. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I did too. 
 
MR. PENNER: — They just heard about the Family Income Plan and they are going out to caucus. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, the Family Income Plan has had some problems in the initial stages. 
We all will admit that. And there were some loopholes which we had not anticipated. But it is not 
entirely that, I am glad that the Member for Eastview said that that is right, because we took as the basis 
for the Family Income Plan the Federal Income Tax system. And we thought that that would be a 
workable system. The Family Income Plan did have its problems but I think we have rectified and 
closed most of the loopholes. On January 1st, 1976 we made some changes. Income exemption has been 
increased from $4,500 plus Family Allowance to $5,500 plus Family Allowance. This relates directly to 
the consumer price index, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t change the benefits per child, they still remain at $40 
for the first three children and $30 thereafter, because when we initiated the program we took this into 
consideration. 
 
Although this benefit level was set in 1974 and 1975 it was designed so as to take into account 
subsequent cost price increases. It is your belief that the benefit level is adequate. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
have had some problems and therefore we have set a gross asset limit of $100,000. Furthermore, the 
Federal Income Tax Act allows depreciation and this has caused some problems and I recommended to 
the government and they accepted that no depreciation allowance would be allowed. 
 
Furthermore, we suggested and made it policy that grain cheques were to be counted for the year in 
which they are cashed. 
 
MR. LANE: — Very substantive changes. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, they were substantive changes. 
 
Results of the recent changes, Mr. Speaker, indicate that there are some people today not receiving 
benefits that were receiving benefits previously. However, we cannot, in this short time assess the total 
effects of these changes and again I am prepared to constantly keep under surveillance the program 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
133 

 

and if changes need to be made will certainly recommend these to the government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before January we had about 18,000 families on the Family Income Plan. In March of 
1976 we had 16,500. Whether this is the number that will remain for the year or whether they will 
increase or decrease is very difficult to determine at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to another topic and that is unemployment and job creation. 
Unemployment in Canada is a very serious problem. In some parts of Canada this past winter we have 
had unemployment rates up to 21 per cent. Here, in Saskatchewan, we are very fortunate that our 
unemployment rate is approximately four per cent. It is a little over four per cent. The latest statistics, 
and I will refer to these very shortly, are very encouraging. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are prepared to fight inflation and put in restraints, governments must be prepared 
also to either create employment or make programs available so that those people who are unemployed 
do not necessarily suffer from those restraint programs. 
 
The unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is one of the lowest in Canada and I think is a direct reflection 
of the vigorous state of our economy. It is also a confirmation of the sound planning and physical 
responsibility of this New Democratic Government, Mr. Speaker. Members opposite are saying that the 
unemployment rate is low because people are leaving this province. Again statistics don’t bear this out. 
The population is increasing and we are very hopeful and again I must say that the future looks very 
encouraging. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who are unemployed the province will continue its efforts to facilitate 
re-employment. By way of training programs, vocational counselling and follow-up and through job 
creation by way of the employment support program. 
 
Unlike some jurisdictions in Canada where we see cutbacks in these areas, the Saskatchewan 
Government will be maintaining its commitment to help those who are unemployed to find meaningful 
jobs. Today we find that people are unemployed primarily because of the failure of the free market 
system. I think it is intolerable to compel these same people to depend wholly upon that same system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in the very recent past the Federal Government issued the statistics of the seasonally 
unemployed people across Canada and it is certainly very encouraging here in Saskatchewan. We note 
that the national figure in January of 1976 was 6.6 per cent, Saskatchewan at the same time was 4.3 per 
cent. In February the federal went up to 7 per cent, but Saskatchewan went down to 4.2 per cent. Again, 
a very encouraging sign and we certainly expect that it will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said initially I wanted to spend some time on the Federal-Provincial Conference that 
was held on February 3rd and 4th. But before I get into that I want to make a few remarks about the 
Members opposite and some of the comments that they have made pertaining to my Department. Mr. 
Speaker, it is of considerable concern to me, the half-baked truths that 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
134 

 

emanate from the self-appointed experts across the way. We have all heard their general slams against 
the Department of Social Services in Saskatchewan and those people that it serves, the poor. These 
criticisms just won’t wash, Mr. Speaker, the number of people on public assistance is down. It is down 
substantially, the percentage of people on public assistance who are able to work is one of the lowest in 
the country. On January the 1st 1972 the last year you people were responsible for the Budget we had 
59,000 people on assistance. On January 1st of 1976 we had 36,000 people on assistance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — What about the Family Allowance, Family Income Plan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — What do you mean the Family Allowance? The Family Allowance was always there 
even when you were the Minister. The figures are a total and include northern Saskatchewan as it did 
when you were the Minister and it does now — 36,000 as compared to 59,000. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — What about the Family Income Plan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley said, what about the Family Income Plan. I 
intend, in the Budget Debate, in very detailed figures to give you exactly how many are on the Family 
Income Plan. You will be surprised that the number is relatively small. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier the Family Income Plan continues to be one of the most progressive pieces 
of legislation on the North American Continent. I was very pleased, as I had said before, that the other 
Ministers of the other provinces and the Hon. Marc Lalonde seemed to give some support and some 
eager support to the Family Income Plan. Very little criticism, the only criticism I heard from one 
Member was that the Family Income Plan in Saskatchewan was too rich and they could not afford to 
implement it on that basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to add to these accomplishments I should like to take a few moments to inform this House 
of the results of the recent Federal-Provincial meeting regarding Social Security Review. In February of 
this year the Federal and Provincial Ministers reached an agreement in principle on a number of 
critically important issues. Mr. Speaker, I want to say at this time that although the Ministers agreed in 
principle each Minister must go back to his respective Cabinet and seek their approval. What I am 
saying today is what I have given approval to and not the Government. One of these was an income 
security system which incorporated income support for those who cannot work and an income 
supplementation for those working at inadequate incomes. I am pleased to announce that the federal 
proposal is based essentially on the model of the Saskatchewan Family Income Plan. All of the 
Ministers at this conference, myself included, stressed the importance of an income provision for those 
who are living on inadequate incomes. 
 
At the same time we agreed that it was necessary to bear in 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
135 

 

mind the current economic circumstances of this country and to design a system which would not be too 
costly and one which would be in harmony with the efforts of governments to encourage increased 
productivity. In Saskatchewan we already have the Family Income Plan operating. Therefore the federal 
move should serve to ensure cost-sharing of this program and should in fact mean an substantial increase 
in cost-sharing dollars for this province. 
 
Another area which received approval in principle was changes to the Federal Social Services Act. 
Agreement was reached for the Federal Government to provide greater cost-sharing support for 
provincial social services programs. 
 
There will be in the new Social Services Act, Mr. Speaker, an expansion on the rehabilitation services 
for the handicapped. Removing the present concentration on employment preparation and broadening 
them into the fields of pre-vocational training in employment and social integration in community living 
support. 
 
The clients for rehabilitation will thus cover all age groups. A disabled housewife will have as much of a 
chance as a disabled mechanic at receiving the full range of rehabilitation services. The goals of 
community living and full participation in society become as important as employment. Also, for the 
first time sharing of capital of expenditures for certain rehabilitation facilities will become possible 
through a special fund. There will be a broadening of the services available to or on behalf of children 
and also there will be a new stress on the expansion of community development and community oriented 
services. These will include social action advocacy and self-help activities through the creation of a 
special sharing category. This will help the people work out the solution to their own problems and 
hopefully do so before the problems become acute. 
 
There will also be inclusion of a wider range of planning, research, evaluation, training and program 
information sharing activities to allow for a systematic development of future services in order to avoid 
the previous prevalent crisis reaction decision-making format. 
 
The conference of federal and provincial Ministers of Welfare reached agreement on all the principal 
features of the proposed new social services legislation which provides for the financing and 
development of social services in Canada. The legislative proposals recognize that social services are 
essential to ensure the opportunity for personal development for all Canadians and to present and 
alleviate the social and economic problems of individuals and communities. The future federal 
legislation is intended to assist the provinces in responding to the changing social and personal needs of 
Canadians in order to ensure that adequate services are available to all. It will replace the current Canada 
Assistance Plan which shares in the cost of services to persons in need or likely to become so. It will 
also broaden and replace the provisions of the Vocational Rehabilitation of Disabled Persons Act. In 
extending the scope of cost-sharing, beyond the poor and disabled, Ministers recognize that it is 
reasonable to expect persons with financial resources to pay a user charge for certain services. 
 
MR. LANE: — . . . charge. 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
136 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Call it what you will, it is a user charge. 
 
Provincial Ministers endorsed proposals of three main classification of services. 1. Services to 
individuals and families. 2. Preventative and development services for disadvantaged communities. 3. 
Residential service for adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note at this time that the Conservatives are not in the House. I wish they 
were because I really think that it is important. It is important that all Members be well informed on the 
new Social Services Agreements, new Social Services Act, the pension changes and the new Income 
Support Program which probably will become law within a year or two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shareable services to individuals and families will include crisis intervention, information 
and referral and family planning services. Preventative and protective services for children including 
residential services and rehabilitation services for the disabled may be provided without charge to 
persons who need them. And in regard to the rehabilitation services, the Saskatchewan group was able to 
convince the Federal Government and the other provinces that the rehabilitation costs of individuals who 
are handicapped but are integrated in the school system that these services would also be cost-shared, 
rather than cost-sharing them only if they are isolated from the community and housed in an institution. 
This was accepted in principle and I hope that we shall see this in the final draft of the new Social 
Services Act. 
 
Social integration services will also be provided to aid persons who are isolated from community life. 
To establish and maintain themselves and become involved in community life. Day care services for 
children and adults, homemakers and related services, meal services, a development service for children 
will be available but subject, again, to a user charge. 
 
Transportation services for the handicapped, subject to a user charge equivalent to the charge for regular 
public transportation in the community will also now be cost-shared. Community Services include 
community development programs and community oriented preventative services if provided to 
disadvantaged communities. Residential services for adults which are not insured services under the 
Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act will be shareable when provided to persons who require 
such services and will, again, be subject to a user charge. 
 
The major area in which the legislation is designed to provide improved federal financing are 
rehabilitation services for the handicapped and support services which will enable the aged and the 
handicapped to live in their homes and communities instead of being cared for in institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the communique that was issued it is interesting to note that all Ministers agreed that 
there must not be any advantage for a person to move into an institution rather than staying in the 
community. In other words, community services must be available at least at the cost or less than it 
would cost to have someone stay in an institution. I think most Ministers were aware of the dangerous 
trend of almost total institutionalization of our senior citizens and the disabled. 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
137 

 

The objectives of the proposed legislation are further expanded by providing for a rehabilitation fund, as 
I said earlier, for capital expenditures for rehabilitation facilities. This fund will operate for a five year 
period with specific amounts allocated to each province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one further area that the Ministers were concerned about and agreed to in principle were 
changes or amendments to the Canada and Quebec Pension Plan. We agreed to two specific 
amendments. 
 
1. That pension credits earned by both spouses during marriage would be divided equally between 
spouses upon the dissolution of the marriage. 
 
2. The contribution of male or female spouse who leave the labor force to raise children up to the age 
when they can begin to attend regular school could drop out those months or years of low or zero 
earnings from the calculation of their average lifetime earnings for benefit purposes. It is our belief that 
these amendments would result in making the Canada Pension Plan more equitable particularly for 
women in our society. 
 
A final commitment on the proposals entertained by the federal-provincial Ministers is yet to be 
forthcoming from both the Federal and the Provincial Governments. 
 
In Saskatchewan, as in other parts of Canada, we are facing a couple of major problems. 
 
1. The increasing demand on correctional facilities and correctional programs. 
 
2. The increasing cost of institutional living, in particular I am referring to the ever-increasing cost of 
special care facilities for the aged. 
 
On the basis of our provincial studies we are anticipating that we can come up with some concrete 
solutions to some of these problems. However, I think that we too readily forget that many of the social 
issues, which confront us, are not just a provincial responsibility. Although the Opposition parties would 
have us believe otherwise, a fair degree of social policy is a federal responsibility. 
 
Take the area of income security for the senior citizens. I think we have forgotten that this is and has 
been traditionally an area of federal responsibility. Since 1971 the New Democratic Government of 
Saskatchewan has fought for a higher basic benefit level and the lowering of the pension age to 60. 
Personally, I am pleased with the advent of the spouse’s allowance program. However, I think the 
Federal Government could have and should have gone much further. With regard to basic benefit levels 
for senior citizens I believe that the Federal Government is negating its responsibility. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, we hear nothing from the Members across the floor. It seems that they have 
difficulty in coming up with concrete programs when it comes to ordinary citizens on fixed incomes. 
 
Another example of federal irresponsibility is the restriction of family allowance. Poor families in 
Saskatchewan and across Canada will be losing about $30 per child because 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
138 

 

of the Federal Liberal refusal to increase the rate of the Family Allowance benefit in accordance with 
inflation. 
 
In the area of unemployment insurance benefits the Federal Government had made some recent changes. 
Some of these, I believe, are necessary and good but I caution this House that inevitably if 
unemployment rates increase the provinces will be under increased financial pressure to support the 
unemployed. Fortunately, in Saskatchewan, we continue to have one of the lowest levels of 
unemployment in Canada. I am critical of the federal actions for two reasons. 
 
1. First they are doing little or nothing to spur employment. 2. Ottawa is defaulting on its responsibility 
by curtailing or restricting programs and services, passing the buck to the provinces. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Nonsense! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The Member says nonsense. What it really means is because the Federal 
Government has not allowed the increases in the Family Allowance this must be picked up by the 
provinces or else you simply say to the poor families, tough luck, you simply suffer and the heck with 
inflation. That is exactly what the Federal Government said. And when it comes to unemployment 
insurance, what has the Federal Government done to create employment? You tell me what they have 
done. Tell me what they have done. You can’t give me one concrete suggestion, not one. Then you say, 
nonsense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously my criticisms must be tempered by reality. To be reasonable we must all reduce 
our expectations and I recognize that. There is no doubt that wasteful spending is bad, but I emphasize 
that any restraint in the areas of social and income security must be approached with some prudence and 
must be approached cautiously. We cannot consistently say, that we are going to restrain programs for 
those who are on fixed incomes and we are going to cut back or restrain the programs for the poor. 
Relate it, Mr. Speaker, to the area of price controls. I believe that it is high time that the Federal Liberal 
Government took some definite steps to control profits and prices. Our Government feels that something 
must be done to curb inflation. However, the control of prices and profits for those businesses operating 
interprovincially lies within the federal jurisdiction. In fact, constitutionally, there is little that the 
Province of Saskatchewan can do in terms of this area. 
 
I, for one, would like to see the Federal Government make some hard-nosed decisions in this area. 
Recently we heard a report that the profits of the chartered banks in Canada were up by over 30 per cent 
over the profits in 1975. I think that we should remember that 1975 profits were for the chartered banks 
up over 60 per cent above the 1974 profits. This is horrendous, it is totally, in my opinion, unacceptable. 
I believe, as does this Government, that we should pursue policies which equalize the burden of inflation 
for all Canadians. 
 
The Premier of this province had indicated another way to combat inflation. He has stated that one 
method to curb inflation would be to transfer the control of multinational corporations to Canadians. 
This is a concrete solution. It is 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
139 

 

interesting to note that the people of Saskatchewan seldom, if ever, hear what the opposition parties have 
to say with regard to excess profits. Some definite inequities exist which demand Federal Government 
attention. 
 
You know it is a rare occasion, but for once I agree with the Prime Minister. Recently he said that there 
is no rational way that the free market system can be made to work so as to really help common people. 
The Opposition Party should listen to what their leaders have to say. With a little thought I am confident 
that they would give up their barren arguments, begin to exercise some leadership and join with people 
of this province and with this Government in finding a new approach, one in which ordinary people have 
a greater voice in those decisions which affect the future of their resources and their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from what I have said you will certainly conclude that I will support the motion before us, 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, first of all congratulations to the Member for 
Redberry (Mr. Banda) for moving the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne and to the 
Member for Athabasca (Mr. Thompson) for seconding the Address. I thought that both of them in both 
areas of agriculture in northern Saskatchewan did a very, very commendable job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, there are just a couple of things that I want to mention today. 
 
First is what I consider to me a very, very serious state of affairs that is beginning to come about in 
Canada in regard to our medical care system. Members will recall in the June Budget of last year, the 
Turner Budget, an announcement that increases in costs for medicare would be limited by the Federal 
Government. They introduced a Bill, Bill C-68 in the House of Commons to bring that about. And 
originally they envisioned limiting increasing costs to 13 per cent in 1976-77, 10.5 in 1977-78; 8.5 in the 
following years. That since has been amended to 14.5 per cent for the next two years and the following 
year to be negotiated. Not only did they do this, Mr. Speaker, bring in these amendments to our medical 
care system, but they limited debate on those amendments. 
 
On Wednesday, March 9th, they gave notice that the debate on the Bill would be limited. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very, very serious situation for the Province of Saskatchewan, indeed, for all the provinces of 
Canada. Because when provinces entered into an agreement for medicare, with the Federal Government, 
they did so on the basis that 50 per cent of the costs of that system would be covered by the Federal 
Government. 
 
Last year those costs amounted to above $1.5 billion. Now any increases in the future, Mr. Speaker, over 
the allowed limit will have to be picked up by the province. Last year, alone, the increases were 16 per 
cent. This is above even next year’s 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
140 

 

proposed guidelines. What does this say for extension of medicare in Canada? 
 
As Members are aware Pharmicare and Denticare are not now covered by the federal medicare scheme. 
The province has been trying to get the Federal Government to share in these programs. They will not 
share these programs. And that is serious for us, but it is even more serious for poorer provinces of 
Canada which cannot afford to bring in these programs on their own. 
 
Since 1968 the Federal Government has not increased one single health program in Canada. Indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Government brought in the Hearing Aid Plan they took treaty Indians 
off their medicare program as far as hearing aids are concerned. The extra programs that are being 
brought out in the provinces, under medicare, now amount to about $1.2 billion. 
 
What is happening, Mr. Speaker, and I think that it is very serious and the unilateral action of the 
Federal Government is very serious. It means that in Canada as far as health services are concerned there 
will be health service for the rich and another health service for the poor. I don’t believe that we should 
let this continue. I think that representations from all sides of the House should be made to the Federal 
Government to not do this despicable act on the medicare system in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my speech this afternoon was and is a little bit disorganized, but I want to say a word or 
two about the events in the Legislature over the last number of days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall on Friday we opened the Session and we witnessed, on Friday in my view, 
the total and complete humiliation by the Premier of the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver). We saw, on 
Monday, Mr. Speaker, the total collapse in this House of the Leader of the Conservative Party. 
Yesterday, we witnessed a change in the Conservative Party. We observed that the effective Leader in 
the House for the Conservative Party was no longer the Member for Nipawin, but was the Member for 
Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — And we witnessed today the total collapse of the Conservative Party in its entirety. 
They have all left the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this action by the Conservatives is childish, but even more than that, where is the 
devotion to duty that they have lectured us on. Where is the devotion to duty to be sitting in here day 
after day, hour after hour, saying nothing, doing nothing, knowing nothing, now they are not even here. I 
suppose, Mr. Speaker, that we will read in the Leader-Post, Collver did such and such. We read in the 
Leader-Post, the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) asks embarrassing questions of the Government. 
Nothing will be mentioned of the dereliction of duty in the Leader-Post; nothing will be said of the total 
collapse in the Leader-Post of the Leader of the Conservative Party. Nothing will be said in the 
Leader-Post about the fact that when the crunch was on, when all the Members in the Legislature, and 
the Members of the Conservative Party were expecting the Leader of the Conservative Party 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
141 

 

to come out fighting, stand up for his side, that he totally collapsed. We won’t find that in the 
Leader-Post. 
 
Now it might sound, Mr. Speaker, that I am being a little harsh, a little bitter about the press. Not me! 
Because it doesn’t make any difference to me. If I waited for the Leader-Post to have "Allen says such 
and such in the Legislature," I would wait a very long time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Now I can go to Saskatoon and see the Star-Phoenix and see, "Allen says such and 
such." It does me a lot of good in Saskatoon-Sutherland when I am visiting my cousin. Let the 
Leader-Post in Regina, you know it would do me no good if they said something nice about me anyway, 
so I am not going to worry about what the Leader-Post says. 
 
But I should like to say something just on that subject, not in a personal way, because I am not 
particularly bitter about it. But I should like to say something about the impression that that gives the 
people of Saskatchewan, that kind of reporting. 
 
We have in the Province of Saskatchewan today, in the minds of at least some people, the idea that the 
Conservative Party are an alternative to government in Saskatchewan. Now where that idea came from 
is beyond my imagination. Because, I can only judge from what I see in the Legislature. I can only judge 
from the performance and the record in the Legislature of the Conservative Party, and I can say of the 
Liberals, where their record has been, in my view, unfair at times, wild at times, they are at least putting 
forward an argument, an alternative to government. But the Conservative Party, when they are called 
upon to speak, they do not speak; when they called to have a Throne Speech Debate, three of them got 
up to say a few words, offer no alternative to government, then sit down. And then I read in the 
Leader-Post that this man, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) is an alternative to the Premier of the 
province, I read that this band of the Conservatives, an alternative to the government of the province, 
and golly, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t see it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I want to say another thing. I want to say another thing about news reporting. I am not 
a reporter, but I should like to say this. If the press in this province and particularly the Leader-Post puts 
emphasis on things that are not there, interprets news coverage in its own way. I will give you an 
example. 
 
This disturbed me a little bit, maybe it shouldn’t have. But I have a Leader-Post here, third page, March 
16, talking about the little kafuffle when the Leader of the Conservatives collapsed under pressure in the 
Legislature the other day. I couldn’t find it in the article — "Collver explains delay to attest Legislature." 
If that was explanation, it is beyond me. Great headlines for Collver, "but Premier Blakeney and 
Attorney General Romanow appeared to laugh loudest." You will recall when he was saying why they 
needed written agreement. 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
142 

 

Premier Blakeney and the Attorney General laughed loudest. I tell you something, they didn’t laugh any 
louder than me. But it gives an emphasis that what was going on in the House on that particular day was 
that the Leader of the Conservative Party was being unmercifully bashed around by the Premier, by the 
Attorney General, when in fact he simply didn’t have the capacity, the intellectual or moral capacity to 
explain to this House his actions, and he had to sit down because he didn’t have the courage to continue. 
And I will never, ever, see that in the Leader-Post until the day I die, and I know I won’t. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, it may sound like I am being a little bit hard on the press, particularly 
the Leader-Post, but I thought that I should make those points. 
 
Getting back to the Throne Speech, I notice that the Members opposite said that they couldn’t support 
the Throne Speech. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Nothing in it, Bill! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Exactly, but I couldn’t figure out what you couldn’t support. I couldn’t find anything 
that you couldn’t support in the Throne Speech. Now that Throne Speech, I think, if the Liberal 
Members were serious about what is going on here, they could have brought in some kind of resolution 
on housing, on many of the other problems that we are having, that could be debated. And I think that 
they were a little derelict in their duty by not doing that. Be that as it may, I am not going to criticize 
them. As I said before, I didn’t want to speak long and I am certainly not going to speak long, other than 
to say one more thing about the Conservative Party. 
 
I remember sitting here and seeing the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition give it to the Member 
for Nipawin and I wasn’t sorry for the Member for Nipawin. Maybe I should have been. Maybe I don’t 
have enough compassion. But I was sorry for the Member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) and I was sorry for 
the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) because I knew it was these people that had entered the 
agreement. And what I thought had happened was that the Member for Nipawin, in his usual fashion, 
usual arrogant fashion, had decided ‘well these dummies,’ and you know he refers to them in that way. 
On a number of occasions I have heard him do that. ‘They have blown another one and I simply am not 
going along with it and that’s that.’ These guys are put into the position where they say, "Well either I 
get up and I am behind my Leader and cut my throat, or I sit quietly." And I thought, well they are 
sitting quietly, they are embarrassed, they feel terrible, they are honorable men and it is a very tough 
position for them. I find out when the Member for Estevan gets up to speak that this isn’t what happened 
at all. That they got together and decided to break their word. The Member for Estevan said to the 
Member for Rosetown, ‘well look, we are going to be the government next time and it doesn’t make a 
heck of a lot of difference if we keep our word or if we don’t keep our word, that’s the important thing. 
Our word doesn’t mean anything.’ I wonder what the people of Saskatchewan would think if it were 
ever reported in the Leader-Post accurately, if they saw that these guys had sat down, wrote out a little 
slip of paper and after meeting together had given their word and then got up and said that we decided to 
break our word. Never saw it in the Leader-Post, but I am getting carried away again on the Leader-Post. 
Now I was 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
143 

 

very, very shocked to hear that and I am sure that the Member for Estevan feels badly about it. The 
Member for Rosetown-Elrose skirted the issue, as well he might. He did a commendable job. In my 
view, he has taken over, in fact at least, in this House, the leadership of the Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have had a number of other things to say that I am kind of saving up for the 
Budget Debate, that will come after the 24th of March, but I should like to say that I take a good deal, a 
great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in supporting the Address-in-Reply from the Speech from the 
Throne and I will do so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I wish I could say it is a pleasure to stand 
and address this Assembly in this Throne Speech Debate. Unfortunately I can’t and won’t. I wish I could 
say that during the past few days that I am proud to be a Member of this Assembly. Again, I can’t and I 
won’t, because what has been going on here the last few days is an indictment of the democratic process. 
I should also like to say that I have no intention of voting against the Throne Speech which has been 
presented and I have no intention of voting for it because it isn’t even worthy of a vote. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen here is probably about as low a level any Assembly can get to 
in the past few days. We have had the Conservative Party and the NDP hassling back and forth about — 
you made an agreement; no I didn’t make one — back and forth like a couple of kindergarten children. 
We have had the spectacle of Government Members standing up trying to give the appearance 
something has been happening in this Legislature, as though we are actually doing something, as though 
we are actually accomplishing things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, frankly I don’t really care what the circumstances were of the agreement between the 
Conservative Party and the Government. I suppose I have my suspicions, and yet I really don’t know. 
We have heard the Government has a document and it will tell all and it will be tabled. It hasn’t been 
tabled and I really don’t care whether they do table it because I don’t think it is important. We have had 
the case where the Government has enjoyed taking their pound of flesh off the Member for Nipawin 
(Mr. Collver) and a Member of the Conservative Party. I think you have been successful. I think you 
have taken your pound of flesh and I don’t for one moment suggest that he didn’t have it coming. I think 
he laid himself wide open for this when he made his maiden speech in this Legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And I think the Premier laid it to him pretty well on Friday and I don’t think the 
Premier was at all unjustified in what he said. I agree with the previous Member who spoke when he 
said we probably witnessed complete destruction when the member for Nipawin spoke on his own 
behalf on Monday. I don’t think anything else need be said about that. But, nonetheless, this House is 
doing absolutely nothing. We are wasting taxpayers’ money, we are accomplishing nothing and this 
Throne Speech is nothing more than a fraud being perpetrated on the 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
144 

 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And I fully confess today as not being in a very particularly good humor 
because, frankly, I take exception to being down here, not only wasting taxpayers’ money by being here, 
but wasting my own time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why this Budget cannot be read tomorrow. This nonsense that we have 
to send out invitations, that we have to have people in the galleries, that we have to go through all the 
red tape and frills, etc., is nonsense. That Budget Speech is ready, stand up and read the damn thing and 
let’s quit this fooling around. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Those people who are interested can very simply read about it in the newspaper, 
or you can mail them a copy. I am quite sure they would be thrilled to find out exactly what the situation 
is, instead of dragging this thing out until Wednesday. The spectacle of going until 4:00 o’clock on 
Monday was a disgrace. The spectacle of going yesterday until about 5:20 is a disgrace. What have you 
got us down here for? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take exception because, in contrast to many of them across the way, I am an agricultural 
representative and I make my money out of agriculture. I make my living out of agriculture. And when 
somebody really wants to insult me they can term my occupation — a politician. Because frankly, the 
term politician as it is used in this Assembly right now, is degrading. When somebody wants to cut me 
to the bone marrow just call me a politician, because, frankly, I am not very proud to be one. I am not 
very proud about what is going on around here. It has simply been a farce this entire week. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — You are living proof! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well now, Member for Saskatoon, if you weren’t sitting on it you would trip 
over your IQ. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many of us are agricultural representatives and we make our living out of 
agriculture. There is Mr. Nelson, there is Mr. Wiebe, there is Mr. Anderson, here and I am sure that 
there must be one or two on that side of the House and there are also some in the Conservative Party. 
Agriculture sometimes does involve a little bit more than seeding. If you are in the cattle business you 
have cows calving at this time of the year. 
 
Granted, every single one of us is in this Legislature because he wanted to be here. Many of us had to 
fight for our nomination, many of us had to fight very hard to get elected. So we are here and we are 
obligated to be here when this Legislature is called no matter what the problems may be. I think most 
people make every effort to be here. But I don’t think we have to like it and I don’t think we are being 
unjust in suggesting that when you have us here, at what is a busy season of the year for us, that you can 
at least have something for us to 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
145 

 

do and something that is important and I certainly have seen no evidence of that to this point in time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, right now it is not all that difficult to be away from your agricultural operation. But 
the ten days that we wasted here, tack them on the end of April and the first part of May, then it does 
become serious. And I ask you on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and for the MLAs that work 
in agriculture, that make their living out of agriculture, for goodness sakes you have got us down here 
this time of year, let’s get to work and quit the fooling around. Now you can read that Budget tomorrow 
if you want to and any delay is nothing more than a farce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a word or two to our learned gentlemen who sit above you in the 
press gallery. I don’t make this to all of you, I just make it to those of you who have a media here in the 
Regina area, or one that I do get access to read. To read the reports of this Legislature for Monday and 
Tuesday, one would almost think that something happened here. One would almost think there was 
something important. You know I just wonder what the press gallery people in Ottawa would have to 
say if the Government in Ottawa attempted to carry on with a phony charade such as what we have here 
right now. They would chop them to pieces. Can you imagine what Tom Gould would do? Can you 
imagine what Mike Phillips would do? Can you imagine what (oh, I have forgotten his name from 
Southam News Service), they would chop that Government to pieces and rightly so. And what does this 
press gallery up there do, you report it as though something is going on, like we are accomplishing 
something. And I suggest that in your reporting you are the only means that the people have to find out 
what is going on here and I don’t think you have been reporting it accurately at all. I think you have 
been helping the Government to perpetrate the fraud that has been going on here. 
 
Now, once again before I sit down, I would ask the Government, stop this fooling around and bring 
down your Budget and let’s get to work. 
 
As I mentioned earlier I don’t think your Throne Speech is even worthy of casting a vote on it and I 
shall not vote. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, much probably to the dismay of the Hon. 
Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) it gives me a great deal of pleasure to take part in this 
Throne Speech. Fortunately I haven’t had to get disgusted because I wasn’t allowed to speak in the last 
session and run home and not appear again. I didn’t cry in my beard or whatever it may be and say, well 
I won’t come back again because I have other things to do. And also it utterly amazes me that an Hon. 
Member, of course, would suggest that there is nothing to do. I understand that he was taken off the 
Crown Corporation Committee this morning which is a perfectly legitimate reason if someone else 
wants to go on and he probably has a reason for being taken off, maybe to go home to help his cows 
calve. But I should like to suggest that there is business which can be done here, there is business to be 
done here in this Legislative Assembly. There are committees to attend, there are Crown Corporations, 
Public Account Committees to be structured, so that those things 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
146 

 

that can be done will be done. 
 
It not only amazes me, also, Mr. Speaker, that an Hon. Member would stand up and talk about being 
disgusted, the low level of the Assembly, don’t care about any agreement and still, we, in this Assembly 
are supposed to be elected here for a purpose of representing the constituency from which we come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Also it is more than amazing for someone to not be concerned about mutual 
agreements, that to say that he is not interested in the truth and is prepared then to say the Throne 
Speech meant nothing. I might also suggest that with the remarks that the Hon. Member made, he is then 
saying that because his Leader took part in the Address from the Throne that that doesn’t mean anything 
whatsoever to the people of this province. I suggest that every Member has some obligation to 
contribute whatever it may be, regardless of how little, how large, to a Throne Speech Debate insofar as 
this province is concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, really to be very fair, I think the Hon. Member probably was trying to cover up a little bit 
for lack of a participation in the Throne Speech. I think, really, we have to realize when we talk about 
being a farmer, a railroader or a rancher, we have to really see just how much activity is involved in 
those various enterprises. No doubt the individual himself will have to look to see whether or not his 
absence from that particular vocation of his at this time is that important in this time of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in taking part in the Throne Speech today, I am pleased that my honorable colleague did 
pay recognition to the day of the month. I am suggesting that there are many ‘skis’ and ‘os’ and ‘bergs’ 
and everybody else who would possibly like to be Irish people on a day like this. At least we can pay 
honor to the people from that country for what they have contributed to this province and in this nation 
as a whole. I am also certain that our society today is in a real crisis situation and it doesn’t help matters 
any when we badger each other across the way, but we do that, in the main, in a good natured sort of 
way. But it doesn’t help anything when we forget what our obligation is all about and the responsibilities 
that we do have as Legislative Assembly representatives of our constituencies. But I do say and I believe 
that anyone here would agree, that our compassion does go out to the people of that country that is being 
honored today and our compassion goes out in such a way that we do hope that we will be able to 
resolve their differences in their way and that their differences will then mean peace and security for the 
people living in that country. I am sure that each and every one of us would agree on that particular 
point. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech naturally was very, very short. But I think today, 
when we saw what was tabled in the House, there is a good indication of why the Throne Speech was 
comparatively short as compared to the past. There is much legislation to be done. In fact there was 
much legislation already done in this House and I can assure the Members opposite 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
147 

 

and I can assure the people of this province that down the road in history this Legislative Assembly in 
this last session will be proven beyond a doubt as creative history in this province and this country that 
probably will never be done again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — There is no question in my mind in Saskatchewan we have led the way and I will 
not go through all the many, many things that have been accomplished in the past, but now in this last 
session we have led the way to bring about some ownership of the resources which those opposite are 
not really that interested about. They talk about, we’ll let somebody else develop it. They talk about, 
well so what, who owns that resource it doesn’t really matter very much. But I am suggesting that the 
people of the province and our children in this province will forever and again be pleased to find out that 
some people are interested more so than what those opposite have indicated. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting what is needed now is very cool and reasonable 
negotiation with those people we are talking to and about. I am suggesting that the Premier of this 
province and the Cabinet of this Government can bring about that coolness and that reasonableness to 
bring about the negotiating that will have to be now entered into. And I am suggesting that those 
opposite naturally are in a position to criticize and they should be criticizing, rightly so, in such a way to 
make sure that the best agreement possible is brought about insofar as that the people of the province 
receive the greatest benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a short few months back, we did open another Speech from the Throne. At that time I 
mentioned about the growth in Moose Jaw. I can assure the Members in this House and also assure the 
Hon. Member for Thunder Creek who lives in Moose Jaw, that there is tremendous growth in Moose 
Jaw and much assistance from the Provincial Government has brought that growth about. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — I can also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there are many other things that we have to 
look at, regardless of the political affiliation of anybody in this House, any Members in this House, that 
we should work together to bring about these improvements that are needed in that particular area. I 
refer to the Qu’Appelle River Basin as a good example. We know that there are studies under way, we 
know there have been studies. We know that in every likelihood there could be a flood this year 
depending upon mother nature. We know that it needs long-time planning to bring about a control of the 
Moose Jaw River in order that those areas of Moose Jaw will not be flooded. We know that Spring 
Creek, we know that Thunder Creek have to be harnessed and used for the benefit of that particular area. 
I can assure the Members opposite and I can assure this House with the studies that are under way that 
type of consultation brought about by those studies will bring about a plan that will relieve the problems 
that Moose Jaw has been faced with. 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
148 

 

Turning to another area that I am sure all of us are concerned about, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
transportation situation in Saskatchewan and in Canada. It is very difficult to understand when we listen 
to and watch the Minister in charge of Transportation, the Federal Minister in charge of Transportation, 
talk about the user must pay. I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that is utter nonsense when you compare it 
to other areas of transportation in Saskatchewan and in Canada. I am suggesting that there are millions 
upon millions of dollars being used in the air, on the sea, on the road, in public financing of the 
transportation facilities and to say that only the rail transportation must pay is begging a point of what 
this whole transportation policy is about. I am suggesting that there does have to be and there will have 
to be more planning and a complete planning program brought about in order to co-ordinate all forms of 
transportation and that means the roads, the air, the seaway and the railroads. I am suggesting that it is 
high time that we looked at the electrification of our railway system and used the resources that we do 
have instead of using up this scarce resource of oil energy in the operation of the trains that is being used 
at this particular time. That can be done as proven in Europe and proven in other countries and all it 
takes now is some determination on the part of all governments and some united co-operation in such a 
way that that can be brought about and could benefit all concerned. There is no question about it, the 
resolutions that are on the Order Paper, a lot of this will be discussed and I will not go into that any 
further at this time. 
 
We do know that the public hearings now for the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific 
transcontinental trains have been advertised. We do know that there will be hearings held across Canada. 
We do know that there is every indication prior to the announcement from the Hon. Minister in charge 
of Transport, the Hon. Minister Otto Lang, that the very ultimate desire that they have is to do away with 
rail transportation if they possibly can. We do know that one of the suggestions that was brought about 
which he did not go through with because of the ultimate elimination of that seat of his where he is now 
residing, had to do with the one train to Sudbury, no train then all the way from Sudbury to Vancouver 
on the Canadian National north line, but rather than that, there would be one train to Sudbury, Canadian 
Pacific via Calgary to Vancouver. Somehow the Hon. Minister didn’t even realize that a suggestion had 
been made not many months back that there would be a transportation system which the railroad 
companies themselves suggested, Mr. Speaker, that there would be joint trackage used from Sudbury to 
Winnipeg, then break up in a north and south route, join again at Kamloops and into Vancouver. In my 
opinion that made sense, but under these circumstances when you eliminate part or our province, the 
north and the south route, then someone has to suffer and, of course, the user will suffer. For the 
Minister to say that the user must pay policy so far as rail transportation system is concerned is 
completely begging the point of what our transportation system is all about once again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking now and turning briefly to the Anti-inflation Board and the Saskatchewan Price 
and Compensation Board, I have made it abundantly clear that I am not in favour of that type of control 
which controls only wages and not prices, interest and other type of incomes. I have made it clear that it 
is strictly a camouflage on the part of the Federal Government, it is a counterfeit control which is only 
bent on 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
149 

 

destroying the collective bargaining of the various unions throughout this country and those people that 
band together for effective collective bargaining in a democratic society. There is no question in my 
mind whatsoever that it does eliminate collective bargaining. There is no question in my mind 
whatsoever that if you come to an agreement with your employer and then have to refer it to another 
board to make a final decision then that in itself is the destruction of collective bargaining as history has 
known it and as a democratic society has known it no matter which country we live in. I am suggesting 
that the bargaining that we must look at at this time is some voluntary type of recognition of the problem 
that we may be in. I am saying that the Federal Government could have gone about a voluntary type of 
restraint or a price freeze on everything in order that the people then would have been treated fairly, but 
this is not what happened. In other words the labor movement today is being treated as second class 
citizens and that, in my opinion, is a far cry from being the proper way. 
 
At the same time the wage controls under the terms of the federal Anti-inflation Board does nothing to 
recognize a fair share to all groups in our society. You can’t tell me that anybody who had a three-year 
contract and rightfully so, many of them did have three-year contracts, the Canadian Airline Employees 
Association is a good example and other airline employees associations had that type of a contract and 
now they are subjected to the type of anti-inflation guidelines set down by the Federal Government. But 
I might also say as I look at the Saskatchewan guidelines and as I look at the news release, "Steuart says 
Government Offers Union Payoff." I see there where he is talking about how terrible the situation is. He 
is talking about how the Government gets blackmailed by labor it will face more grave consequences at 
the next election. He made some remarks about this and that and all the rest of it. But I should like to 
refer the Hon. Members opposite to what the federal and provincial guidelines are all about, refer them 
to the fact that the provincial guidelines allow the board to make historical comparisons on a very wide 
basis when the board deals with the most appropriate valid relationship that exists on the inter-provincial 
basis. There is no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that those opposite are bent upon a plot to try and 
devalue the work of the labor people in this province. I can read another article, another little deal here 
where an Hon. Member said, "The NDP Government anti-inflation program is weak, toothless and 
wishy-washy." 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen in this House those opposite, particularly in the Liberal Party, we have seen 
these people trying to undermine the labor movement in this province. We have seen them use 
everything at their disposal to try and screw up that labor movement, to criticize what little there is to 
criticize and try then to come in here and say, even the provincial plan should be like the federal plan 
which is the most discriminatory plan you can possibly come out with. At least the provincial plan 
recognizes that there will be historical relationships and that I subscribe to. I say that the Saskatchewan 
guidelines realize some of the problems that are being faced in this province and I am sure that the Hon. 
Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) realizes that too but as a labor spokesman he is going to 
play a little bit of a game trying to get everybody up in the air. The only purpose, 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
150 

 

Mr. Speaker, is to activate dissension within the labor ranks and those opposite. The only purpose is to 
use the labor people in this province, the public servants and Crown corporation’s employees, to use 
them to devaluate the work of the Crown corporations. That has been very apparent when the House was 
not in session as we looked at the Members on the opposite side use one Crown corporation after 
another trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan how terrible Crown corporations are. It is very 
apparent when we look opposite and see those people attack Crown corporations and then question 
whether or not the employees working for those Crown corporations or the public or civil servants are 
doing a good job. We have heard that in Question Period over and over again. As far as I am concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, it is a straight sinister plot on their part to discredit the public and Crown corporation 
employees. There is no question about it, they have been doing it and continue to do it and then they’ll 
try and convince the people of Saskatchewan that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is not a good 
corporation to depend upon for the exploration of potash. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, surely in this Legislative Assembly we can recognize the worth of 
our fellow people in this province. Surely we do not need to make scapegoats out of our public servants 
or Crown employees working for the Crown corporations. And surely we do not want to drive our civil 
servants and Crown corporation employees out of the province in order to get better wages and that is 
exactly what the guidelines recognize. They recognize that there will be a relationship between the 
provinces, they recognize that the people here in this province are entitled to an equal return on their 
paycheques as those in other provinces and that will be recognized. I am pleased to say that I support 
that 100 per cent. 
 
It is very apparent in my mind that the Liberals opposite also try and say what a terrible department the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan is, they also attack those people in the North in order to try and 
do disservice to those people who are dedicated to that type of a visionary outlook in the northern part of 
our province. 
 
I am suggesting it is high time that those opposite in our Question Period, and I am glad to say that I 
believe it has livened up, I am completely in favor of an active Question Period, but I would like those 
people opposite to ask the Government whether or not in fact, either the federal anti-inflation board or 
the provincial one has looked into the increased prices of the cost of lawyers as an example? What about 
accountants? Not one decision has been brought down federally in rolling back the cost of services to 
the people of this country. Why wouldn’t the labor people want an increase in order to try and keep up 
with the increased cost of lawyers that they have got to go to now to fill in their tax forms, or the 
accountants and all the rest of it? I am suggesting that their accountability opposite insofar as in 
questioning those other than labor people, is really brought to life in this particular Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I would like to refer also, Mr. Speaker, to the fact when we look at interest rates we see what the Bank 
of Canada did here most recently and we notice what happened immediately 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
151 

 

afterwards, that the banks then raised their interest rates. It is rather remarkable that nobody opposite 
even suggests that there is any responsibility on the part of the banks to make sure that there are funds 
for housing in this province and other provinces that is consistent with the return to the labor person. It is 
rather remarkable that you can go across the line right now and for 2,000 square feet of housing, a 
bungalow, you can buy that house for $29,000. Anybody here tells me what you buy a 2,000 square foot 
bungalow for is from $50,000 to $75,000. I am wondering if anybody opposite . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How many people have a 2,000 square foot bungalow? 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Have you not seen a 2,000 square foot bungalow? I thought maybe out at 
Lumsden you had one there. But I am asking you opposite, are the carpenters in the United States 
getting less money that they are in Canada? Are the electrical workers getting less money than in 
Canada? Are the plumbers getting less money than in Canada? So really then, if you wanted to zero in 
on something why then not call for a commission to find out why this vast spread exists even in the cost 
of housing between the United States and Canada? Why not call for an investigation into the vast spread 
of the oil prices as it may be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer also, when we looked at the federal anti-inflation board which the 
Hon. Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) really supports, it is a wonderful board down there 
you know. John Luc Pepin must be a special friend because John Luc Pepin got on television here about 
a week ago and said, ‘expect price increases.’ He didn’t say they would investigate the price increases. I 
haven’t heard anybody mention in the Question Period today about increased prices of coffee and 
whether or not we on this side are going to investigate them or have John Luc try and investigate them, 
but the fact remains that John Luc Pepin is not interested in prices or interest or dividends or the cost of 
lawyers and accountants to the people of Canada, they are only interested in making sure that labor is 
kept in their place and making sure that their wages are kept exactly where he wanted them. 
 
I might also then mention as I move along into the agricultural economy — I wish the farmer from 
Thunder Creek was still here. It is rather remarkable that only a short while ago, that we had a Minister 
talk about the LIFT Program, the Lower Inventory for Tomorrow Program, and now we see once again 
where we are now not going to make any more sales, we have to wait and see what the market will do. 
We will now ask and try and find out whether or not there is going to be any foresight or insight into the 
future grains sales of this country. I am wondering whether or not those opposite are proud of their 
people at the federal level when they deliberately and methodically brought about a system of lower 
inventory and now we are in a position of not having the supplies that we should have. It makes me 
wonder when I see the Hon. Members opposite criticize the various areas and still not make anything 
concrete insofar as suggestions are concerned. 
 
Another point that I will refer to, Mr. Speaker, is the most recent criticism and I’ll spend a little bit of 
time on this. The most recent criticism that was brought about in the 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
152 

 

Question Period yesterday, by the liquor board which dropped South African products. It said here and I 
am quite ready to admit that those opposite, some of those opposite, will take this in a very light vein, 
very few will because it is a very serious situation. But it says: 
 

Dick Collver, Leader of the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative Party said that the Government 
decision is political. I would hope they would comment on the racism in Russia against Jewish 
people and Chinese people. 

 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party Leader, David Steuart, said I think the decision is rather silly. If the 
Saskatchewan Government decides to stop stocking products of everybody they don’t like, they 
could get into a lot of difficulty. 

 
I imagine I will hear, "hear, hear" from the opposite side. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Good, I am glad we heard that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is quite apparent that we are in a very small area of our society when we look at our 
provincial legislatures across the country. It is quite apparent that many of us think that only things such 
as this should be the concern of the Federal Government. But I would like to suggest that it is much 
deeper and much more serious than that. Actually in Africa today, the struggle for freedom and 
fundamental human rights is one of the world’s most crucial problems and I am suggesting in this House 
today, that we could do something about that, even though how small it may be, to bring to the attention 
of this country, the people of this province and the people of this world that we are prepared to move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — I should like to refer to a report called ‘Challenge in the Seventies." Some of you 
may know this lady who was over in Zambia, an area that I visited in 1971, Central East Africa, a Mrs. 
Essie Johnson. She is well known throughout the United Church with a warmth and enthusiasm with 
which she approaches life. A native of Yorkton, Saskatchewan, she was appointed to work in Zambia in 
1954 and again back in 1970 and I am given to understand by my hon. colleague from Yorkton, that she 
is home at the present time on leave from Zambia. 
 
But some of these various areas were dealt with by the United Church and the World Council of 
Churches. When I hear criticism opposite and hear the hilarious comments made on this particular point, 
then I wonder what type of a society we are really living in. These are her words: 
 

The people of the West who work in newly independent countries are impressed by the 
tremendous self-competence and exhilarating enthusiasm of the people. There is a will to surmount 
any and every difficulty that gives no quarter to despair, but this is not easy optimism. Freedom 
has been won and the same determination that prevailed in the freedom struggle will maintain 
national security, overcome the enemies of ignorance, disease and 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
153 

 

poverty and will find a solution to tribal jealousies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting those words should be taken to heart by all Members in this House. The Y, 
the international Y, put out what they call the black paper in response to the federal white paper that they 
put out on foreign affairs, ‘The Government Speaks.’ It is a publication of the Canadian Institute of 
International Affairs and the authors are Doctor Garth Legge, Associate Secretary, Board of World 
Missions, United Church of Canada, Professor Cranford Pratt of the University of Toronto, Mr. Richard 
Williams, a returned CUSO volunteer and active member of the International Education Project. 
 
But some of the questions that were asked and as I read those news items, when I look at this, it is better 
that I read this than to try and explain it because, of course, it wouldn’t be accepted from an Opposition 
Member. But it says: 
 

Let us look at these points more closely. 
 
And they are talking about trading with these countries that have racism and apartheid. 
 

The question. Should political or moral judgments influence Canada’s economic relationships with 
any other countries? If not in Cuba or the Soviet Union, why in Southern Africa? 

 
The answer that they gave: 
 

First of all South Africa is unique. Repression is based totally on differences of race, a situation 
found in no other cases of political repression. 

 
Secondly, Canada is already politically and morally involved. Canada has censored the Southern 
African regimes at the United Nations and in the Commonwealth, concurred with the 1963 Security 
Council resolution forbidding arms sales to South Africa, supported sanctions in Rhodesia, ceased 
supplying military goods and voted against apartheid. 

 
Finally, it is foolish to suggest that Canadian policy towards oppressive regimes must be the same 
in every case. Each situation must be judged separately. An assessment of Canada’s position leads 
to the conclusion that Canada should be following much stronger policies. 

 
The last question: 
 

Economic and political sanctions are useless if they merely make Canadians feel good while other 
western countries move in to fill the gap. 

 
Of course, because Manitoba and British Columbia have likewise banned the importation of South 
African liquors that should have some bearing on some of the thinking of those opposite. 
 

But the economic and political sanctions are useless if they merely make Canadians feel good. 
 
If they would please listen to the answer, and this is not my 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
154 

 

answer, this is somebody who has done the study and I am not sure how many opposite are interested. 
 

It is true that Canada is not very important economically in Southern Africa and that it cannot do 
anything that will significantly upset the governments of that area. But this is not an argument for 
doing nothing. It is important that at least some of the western nations publicly demonstrate that 
they are concerned with the denial of basic human rights. The Southern African issue is causing 
serious disagreements at the United Nations and within the Commonwealth. It is important that 
these organizations operate successfully and continue as international forums. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in my opinion that is a clear indication of the position of those world churches, those 
Canadian Ys, the international Ys and the Ys across this world, of the concern about racism apartheid 
which some people should be concerned about. 
 
I might also say in order that no one thinks that I am taking the side or that I completely condemn 
corporations that may be selling goods to refurbish the planes that we sold South Africa many years ago, 
but the same thing applies to the unions in South Africa. 
 
This is a letter that came from the leader of the South African labor movement. His criticism of what 
went on in South Africa. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Take it as read. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — I’d love to put it on the record. 
 

As at the end of April, 1968 (and this is an updated after this) the South African steel and 
engineering industry had under its employees the following figures: 177,522 Africans, 76,352 
whites, 15,746 coloreds, people of mixed blood, 3,385 Indians. All other workers from other race 
groups are recognized by law and have the right to bargain with their employers. But Africans who 
comprise the greatest majority have no rights whatsoever. 

 
The final paragraph that they refer to here, that I will refer to, it is not the final paragraph of the letter, he 
refers to the fact that the white trade union movement in Africa put out a letter in their journal stating: 
 

We are up against employers who are turning the many industries which are concerned into black 
industries to the detriment of the white workers. This will require all our strength as well as a full 
support of our membership to oppose improvement of African workers’ conditions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all I am saying is that no one person is right. But what has been done at least here, on a 
provincial basis on barring and banning the importation of South African liquor is at least one step that 
we can point to that something is being done. 
 
I might also, when I listen to some Members opposite and I 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
155 

 

notice as yet there is not one Conservative Member opposite and it is unfortunate. Of course, the 
Liberals will come to the defence of the Conservatives, I am certain of that. Then you asked the 
question, what other groups have really supported the position of banning the South African liquor? 
 

Church body gives $200,000 to anti-racists insofar as South Africa is concerned. 
 
That’s the church bodies themselves and that’s all inclusive. 
 

The YWCA of Canada in their publication said it’s a matter of conscience regarding Southern 
Africa. 

 
In that they refer to the fact that there should not be any exportation or importation of goods from South 
Africa. And just in case those people opposite believe that things aren’t all that bad in South Africa and 
many of you have been over there on holidays, I understand it is a pretty good place, but the 
Commonwealth Medical Association has expelled South Africa and Rhodesia for practising apartheid in 
medicine. A statement on the expulsion, the president said: 
 

The medical associations of the two countries refused to mix bloods from blacks and white. 
 
And in that regard they expelled those medical groups from the Commonwealth Medical Association. 
 
We now know what is going on in South Africa. These people who do the investigations, these people 
who are concerned will tell you exactly what goes on there in Rhodesia and surely somewhere along the 
line those opposite in the House and we on this side can work together for a principle of doing what we 
can insofar as apartheid and racism is concerned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, a challenge was thrown out yesterday and I’ll just say that I am only 
too pleased to take it up, by the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) to debate on human 
rights, apartheid and racism, and I can assure the Member who is not here and no one from his caucus to 
pass on the message, I would be only too pleased to debate with him or with any Member opposite, the 
position of apartheid racism and discriminatory action insofar as I am concerned and insofar as this 
Party is concerned. 
 
I should also like to suggest that it is quite positive that if anybody wants to know where the particular 
papers came out that he was referring to yesterday, they were published in the Rosetown Eagle and the 
Star-Phoenix. Many opposite did see those papers. As far as I am concerned I have nothing to take back 
insofar as my statement was concerned other than what I have said some months back, that maybe I 
should have given an opportunity to ask their question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing my remarks, I should like to say that I support the Throne Speech that has been 
given. I support the position of democratic government as we know it, even though it may be small at 
this time. I support the position that there is work to do, a lot of work to do in the Crown 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
156 

 

corporation, the Public Accounts Committee, when the chairman convenes that committee. There is a lot 
of work to do in many of the committees that we have before us, no doubt, and also there is a lot of 
participation going to be put in and could be put into this Legislative Assembly for the benefit of the 
people of this province. I know that we may get under each other’s hides once in a while, but I am 
suggesting that there is a purpose, a purpose of this Legislative Assembly to question those areas in 
legislation that should be changed. That is the purpose of the Question Period and that is why I believe 
that the Question Period will be much better than it has been in the past, because it will be better 
organized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne wholeheartedly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I intend to be very brief, indeed. That is my 
intention at least. I share the frustration of the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) in this 
particular debate. The one question that has come before us and I think deserves some attention and 
indeed the only one in connection with the whole of the debate, is as to the agreement or lack of 
agreement between the Government and the two Opposition parties with respect to facilitating the 
bringing down of the Budget and the waiving of the Throne Speech. 
 
It is my understanding when we prorogued on January 28, that as a result of a meeting that morning in 
the Attorney General’s office, at which meeting there were present the Government, our Whip and 
House Leader, the Member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. Malone), the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Steuart), together with the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) and the Member for Estevan (Mr. 
Larter). We had understood as a result of that meeting that there was agreement on two fronts. One is 
that we would waive debate on the Throne Speech when we came back in March. The second is that we 
agreed generally to facilitate the bringing down of the Budget on March 12th. That was our 
understanding clearly of the arrangements that had been made. 
 
Then we began to read in late February or early March about those agreements apparently having come 
apart, when the Leader of the Conservative Party indicated that as far as he was concerned there was no 
such agreement. Then he indicated not only was there no such agreement, he was going to insist on a 
Throne Speech and insist on a debate of the Throne Speech. 
 
I must say, just to pause and digress for a moment, that was a bit interesting to some of us because 
earlier when we were debating, at length, the potash takeover legislation, the Conservative Leader 
wouldn’t participate, calling it a debate that wasn’t worthwhile to be in. Then when there is an 
opportunity to debate he wouldn’t avail himself of the opportunity; when there was arrangement to 
waive a debate then he wanted one. Then when we are in the course of the debate they stomp out as they 
did this afternoon in a fit of something or other, I am not sure what it is, not understanding apparently 
that the Speaker has the power to preserve order in the House and at their request the Speaker will 
preserve order if he thinks 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
157 

 

we are getting out of hand. 
 
But what was raised as a result of the Leader of the Conservative Party having said what he did in late 
February and early March, led to the Premier, on Friday — to a display which most of us I must say 
were privately shocked at — indicating that the Leader of the Conservative Party had not been entirely 
candid with respect to the arrangements that were made or were not made. Indeed, it is putting it pretty 
kindly to say that the Premier said he wasn’t candid in that respect. 
 
Then we saw earlier in the week, the Leader of the Conservative Party attempting to explain his position 
to the House during the course of which, incidentally, there were documents referred to. Mr. Speaker 
will remember that when the Premier spoke to the amendment moved by the Leader of the Conservative 
Party, he referred to some documents that were available which he said he would table if he was 
requested to. I think having spoken to that amendment and that amendment having fallen and not having 
mentioned the documents in the course of any debate, I can’t call for their production. But if I had the 
opportunity to do so, I certainly would. I should like to see what kind of documents we are talking about. 
Which leads me to wonder why particularly in view of the comments of the Conservative House Leader, 
when he rose after his Leader and used phrases of the most base kind in connection with his charges, he 
said that they were being euchred by the House Leader for the Government; he said they were being told 
half-truths outside the Assembly and presumably behind the bars in connection with the arrangements. I 
can’t think of more devastating words if you want to attack the honor of someone than to accuse him of 
telling you half-truths, euchring you and misleading you. That is what those two gentlemen were saying 
about the Leader of the House of the Government side, the Attorney General. 
 
It is a serious question. We thought we had an understanding here. We are not privy to the conversations 
held between the Leader on the Government side and the Leader of the Conservative Party or their 
House Leader and, indeed, any of the conversations that go among them. We find it particularly 
astounding that that kind of personal charges were made about the personal honor of the Attorney 
General in the way in which he is conducting his duties as Leader of the House on behalf of the 
Government. Yet he has sat mute in connection with that debate. We still don’t know where the 
documents are or what kind of documents there are. We don’t know his version of the discussions that 
were held in which the Conservatives say there were half-truths spoken and in respect of which they say 
they were euchred and misled. 
 
I think the Attorney General as the Leader of the House on the Government side has a responsibility to 
all Members of the Assembly to lay before us the facts as he understood them. If he has documents in 
connection with the facts, to lay them before the House so we can have a look at them. As I say among 
all the nonsense that we have heard back and forth, including as I say the two devastating speeches from 
the Conservative benches, the Attorney General who was most directly implicated has said nothing in 
connection with it. That is why I said at the outset that I share the frustration of the Member for Thunder 
Creek since that is really in essence the sole substantive question before us and yet we are getting 
nothing from Members opposite in connection with it. As for the rest of it, 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
158 

 

I agree with him that what we have been doing by and large, with the exception, may I say, of the 
meeting this morning in Crown Corporations which was a good one and with the exception of the 
Question Period, is that by and large our time is not being spent very profitably and has not been. I hope 
as we go along in these next few days that that will not continue to be the case. 
 
As I say, I am in no position to request that the documents be tabled. If I were the Attorney General, I 
would want very much to table those documents in view of his own personal reputation having been 
called into question in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the reasons indicated I do not intend to support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few 
words, offer a few general comments. I thought I might report to the Members of the House how I see 
the rent control program operating. I thought this might be as good an opportunity to do it. 
 
The Hon. Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) mentioned the coverage that the press has given to 
the sittings in this House. I can sympathize with the members of the press. They would encounter no 
criticism if they would just allow everybody to write their own news story. It is certainly difficult to 
write news that satisfies everyone because you are going to offend some people. I have subscribed to the 
Leader-Post now for about 10 years, since I graduated from law school, (nine years I guess). I have read 
it in its ups and downs and I think it has been better, a whole lot better, than it is right now. I comment 
on what other newspapers in the province might be doing, but I think the newspaper of the capital has a 
special responsibility, because they are closest to the seat of government. I think they have a special 
responsibility to provide fair and accurate coverage of what goes on in the Legislature and in 
government. 
 
As I say I think the coverage has been better, it has been a whole lot better than it was the other day in 
the coverage that was given the incident on Monday. It has probably reached some sort of a new low. 
 
Mention was also made of the Wage and Price Controls. I want to say that I think the Federal 
Government is not making the job of those who support the program, or those who are trying to make it 
work any easier. My own personal position has been that inflation is a problem which is not only 
causing us economic problems, it is causing inequities. Canada is basically a trading nation. Because we 
are fairly good at it we enjoy a good standard of living, but if we don’t keep our scales sharp we are not 
going to survive long in the economic tussle. Inflation is something that is eating away at our ability to 
trade competitively. If we don’t deal with it, we are going to almost certainly suffer dire economic 
consequences. Indeed, the rest of Canada is already going through this process and 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
159 

 

perhaps that is why the objections to the wage and price controls in Saskatchewan have been more 
vehement than they have elsewhere. I think the rest of Canada may be somewhat more aware of the 
consequences that inflation is going to cause. 
 
In this province we have been lucky enough and I suppose skilled enough and good enough managers to 
avoid the worst consequences of the recession, in fact we have avoided them, I think, almost entirely. 
That doesn’t mean that inflation is allowed to go unchecked, it won’t affect us as well. 
 
I think there is a more important reason why we have to deal with it. As the Prime Minister said, 
inflation causes injustices. What you get out of the marketplace, your wages and your profits, aren’t in 
any sense determined by what you need or what you deserve or what you have earned. What you get 
now depends on how effectively you can bargain. I personally feel a form of inflation controls is 
necessary. I think there are probably only two ways of doing that, one is to induce a recession and stem 
the demand. That is unjust and unfair. The other is a form of wage and price controls. I think that the 
Provincial Government has to try and make the program work, that is what we are doing. I started out by 
saying that I don’t think the Federal Government is making our job of trying to make this program any 
easier. The increase in the bank interest rates was unnecessary. It added to the appearance of inequity, 
because we are controlling wages. The Saskatchewan program I may say is in its infancy. We are not at 
this point in time in a position to judge it. I am not aware of any wage settlements which have been 
referred to the Provincial Anti-inflation Board which have been determined. I think to suggest that at 
this point in time that it is operating in a way that is biased toward the labor and we are trying to appease 
our friends, is just absolute nonsense. I think if we had wanted to do that, what I think we would have 
done was stay out of the program altogether and gone the route that the trade unionists asked to. 
 
I think the Federal Government could do better in making the program appear fairer. I mentioned 
interest rates as one. Another thing I think the Federal Government ought to do is to publish the actions 
they took with regard to price controls. Where they say that a price is too high, that ought to be 
published. If you can publish wage rollbacks, why can’t you publish price rollbacks. It just adds to the 
appearance of an unfair program. If the program is going to work, it not only has to be fair, but it has to 
appear to be fair. That is one of the things that is wrong with the federal program, they make no 
particular appearance to be fair. 
 
Indeed, they got off on the wrong footing when they appointed John Luc Pepin as chairman of the board. 
I am not saying the man is not competent or not fair, but he has a long association with big business. 
What they should have done is do what the Provincial Government did, that is, appoint as a chairman, 
someone who is clearly impartial and has no association with either labor or business. They got the 
program off on the wrong footing and I think it has contributed to a lot of the mistrust and the criticism 
that has been levied on it since. 
 
The only other comment I want to make is about the Member for Thunder Creek. He says he is ashamed 
to be called a politician. I just want to say that I am proud of being a politician. 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
160 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I may not be a very good one, I am certainly not very experienced one. But I 
am proud to be a politician. I am not ashamed to experience frustration in politics, which you do, that is 
what the Hon. Member is experiencing. I am not ashamed to have people criticize me, publicly or 
privately. I am not afraid to make enemies, because I have done all of those things even in the time I 
have been a politician. The average public don’t appreciate what a very difficult role politicians have in 
giving leadership to meet the inarticulate, conflicting and confusing demands that are made. 
 
I can appreciate that one might be frustrated at the course this House has taken. All of us thought by the 
1st of March we would have a Budget Speech on March 12, but we didn’t. That is no reason for saying 
that one is ashamed of being a politician. 
 
With respect to the rent control program, I am sorry the Hon. Members on my right are not in the House. 
I think part of what I have to say might be of interest to them, since it was some of their criticisms in a 
sense I am going to respond to. 
 
I may say that by and large I am pleased with the way the program is going. I anticipate that that might 
produce some cynical comments from abroad, I mean across the House. By and large I am pleased at the 
way the program is going. I think I anticipate as clearly as anyone that there are going to be some 
transitional problems and there have been some transitional problems. In part we have been successful in 
dealing with them, sometimes perhaps we have been less successful. But considering the problems that 
the program started out under, I think the staff who are there have done a very good job of making it 
work. 
 
There were four official openings in the province, I attended them all, not because I expected to speak to 
a great crowd, because as those opposite who have been members of government will know, at official 
openings you manage to cajole all the staff to show up, a couple of reporters, the mayor will be there, 
that’s usually it for an official opening. The exception to that was Yorkton, there was a crowd at 
Yorkton. By and large when you have an official opening . . . 
 
MR. STEUART: — Close them, you get a crowd! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That’s right, in closing them you can depend on a good crowd. But for 
official openings it is a lot tougher. By and large I was speaking to the staff. What I said to the staff was 
that what we had done in the Legislature was get at the framework and that they would flesh it out. How 
competently and how fairly they dealt with the people who came before them would go a long way to 
determining whether the program was successful or not. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — That was a good line! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, it was a good line. I think the staff listened to it and I think they are 
going to try to be fair. Mr. Speaker, I think the staff I talked to were not quite as cynical as some 
Members opposite. I think they felt that it might be the truth 



 
March 17, 1976 

 

 
161 

 

and I think they have tried to live by that. I think the staff have done their utmost to try and be fair to the 
people who come before them. I think they have done a reasonably good job of it, although they have 
not made many decisions yet, which have been subject to appeal or attack. 
 
The workload is extremely heavy. The Regina office, in the third week in February was getting 600 
telephone calls a week. Now with the staff we have in Regina, that is, I suggest more telephone calls 
than you can really deal with in a fair and thorough manner. That is not including the applications you 
have to deal with, the letters, all the people who come in through the door, there is just a steady stream 
in and out the door. There is a very heavy workload. 
 
The telephone calls were recorded by the receptionist, I understand it would take no more time than is 
done in other areas, lots of departments record telephone calls. That is a reasonably common sort of 
practice. At least the numbers. One of the problems we anticipated which arose — it was temporary, but 
it was severe — was a lot of confusion around January 29th, as to exactly what the Act said. It was a 
problem for the landlords and tenants, because we passed the Act on January 29. On February 1st 
tenants had to know what to pay their landlords, the landlords had to know what to charge. I guess I got 
some of my just desserts because many people didn’t know where to find the office of the Rentalsman, 
you couldn’t contact it after hours. But it seemed that every landlord in Regina and every tenant knew 
how to find me. My telephone just rang off the wall for a couple of days. Fortunately or unfortunately I 
had already made previous commitments to be out of the city over the weekend. I stuck with the 
telephone calls as long as I was here and wished the telephone a fond farewell when I left. 
 
In order to cope with that problem we set up a public information program, there are television ads, there 
were ads in the newspapers, there are pamphlets . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — Who placed those ads? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think it was J.C. Struthers and Associates. We also sent out a pamphlet to 
every tenant that we could identify in the province. I think by and large the information program which 
we had was reasonably successful, at least my telephone quit ringing after awhile and that is sort of how 
I judged it. I received, from tenants and from landlords too, although to a lesser extent, compliments 
about the program. What we tried to do was to provide information and not tell them why the program 
was needed, what we tried to do was provide solid information of what the program did. As I say I think 
we were reasonably successful. I instructed my staff to send out a copy of the pamphlet to all Members 
of the House, I think you probably got it. If you need more, if you have inquiries on it, please feel free to 
contact me. 
 
The workload is heavy, we are going to have difficulty in dealing with all the applications that come. 
Suffice it to say we are going to do our best to deal with them as best we can in the time limit that is 
given. 
 
The political problem will be much harder to solve than the administrative problems. It is the 
administrative problems you 



 
March 17, 1976 
 

 
162 

 

spend all your time with, but it is the political problems that are really much more difficult to deal with. 
A good portion of Canadians share the same view about the anti-inflation program. "It is a good 
program as long as it doesn’t apply to me." That’s what I hear the trade unionists saying, although as I 
said earlier I think their argument is much more complex than that. That seems to me what some of them 
are saying, that’s what some businesses are saying, that is what landlords are saying. It is a good 
program, but I am an exception, here are all the reasons why I am an exception. 
 
Mr. Speaker interrupted proceedings and the Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


