



















































Hansard: December 01, 1976


 

 

464 
 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday, December 1, 1976. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in introducing through you 

to the Members of this House, a group of students from Viscount, Saskatchewan, in my constituency. 

They are a group of 26 students from Grades nine, ten, eleven and twelve. They arrived earlier this 

morning and have been to the RCMP Museum and I know they are going to the Western Development 

Museum later. I will be spending some time with them to answer any questions that they may have at 

about 3:30. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Miss Miazga and also Mrs. Eno and Mrs. Johnson, as well as 

their bus driver, Mr. Bird. 

 

I would ask the Members of this House to join with me in welcoming them and wishing them a safe trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon Nutana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through 

you to the House a group of 21 students from Bishop Murray School in Saskatoon Nutana constituency. 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Nieman and Mr. Buttinger. 

 

I understand they have visited the RCMP Barracks and also the Museum of Natural History. I hope they 

enjoy the proceedings of the Legislature this afternoon and I will endeavor to meet them shortly after 

three o’clock. I think we are going to have our pictures taken. I am not sure that that is good for them to 

have their picture taken with me but we are going to get Paul in it too I think, which will improve the 

situation. 

 

I am sure that everyone in the Legislature will wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P.P. Mostoway (Saskatoon Centre):: — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to welcome the Grade 

seven and eight students from Bishop Murray School and St. Charles school in Saskatoon and their 

teachers, Mr. Nieman and Mr. Buttinger and Mr. Nicholson whom I believe is the principal at St. 

Charles School. Many of the students at Bishop Murray live in my constituency. I live close to St. 

Charles School and I would like to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and Members of this House that I have 

a son sitting in the back row going to St. Charles. He tells me that it is the best school in Saskatoon 

along with Bishop Murray, and I agree with him wholeheartedly that they are two of the best schools. 

There are a number of others in my constituency that are on a par. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

465 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — I understand that they visited the RCMP Barracks this morning. They visited the 

Museum of Natural History and I am sure that they are going to be enjoying themselves in this House 

this afternoon. I, too, will be meeting with you later on. Hopefully, pictures will be taken. I want to 

express a desire that you enjoy yourselves today and usually one of the treats of a day like this is to stop 

in at MacDonalds. I don’t know whether you are going to do it or not, but at any rate have a safe and a 

pleasant journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Buena Vista):: — Mr. Speaker, may I join my two colleagues from 

Saskatoon in welcoming Bishop Murray school students. I do so, Mr. Speaker, because I had the 

privilege of being principal of that school for three years. I want to especially welcome my former 

colleagues, Mr. Buttinger, Mr. Nieman and Mr. Nicholson and a special welcome to the students from 

Bishop Murray. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. E B. Shillington (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you and to 

the Members of the Legislature Assembly 16 students from the Cornwall Street Tutoring Project. They 

are accompanied by their teacher, Tom Warner. 

 

It is with real pleasure that I introduce these students, Mr. Speaker. These are the first group of students 

whom I have ever had the honor of welcoming to the Legislature in spite of the fact that most of my 

constituents live within eyesight of the Legislative Building, so I am pleased to see them here today. I 

will be meeting with them in a short while and I look forward to it. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

GENERAL HOSPITAL BEDS CLOSED 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana):: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to the 

Minister of Health. Would the Minister indicate whether it is correct that he said in the House the other 

day that there were not 41 beds closed in the pediatric section of the General Hospital. Our 

understanding is that they were closed four and one-half months ago and I wonder if the Minister would 

amplify on that? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — The information I received, Mr. Speaker, was that six our of 41 beds were closed, not 

41 beds. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister might be good enough to check with the 

General Hospital and the officials 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

466 

there, as I have, and I think you will find that 41 beds were closed four and one-half months ago and 

perhaps you could report again to the House in this regard? 

 

STUDY ON MENTALLY RETARDED IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek):: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. Are 

you aware of a news release that was issued today about a study that was done on the mentally retarded 

in the Province of Saskatchewan which indicates that Saskatchewan’s mentally retarded are being 

treated as second class citizens and that Core Services has failed in its project of mainstreaming those 

retarded children into the mainstream of life? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of that study. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Minister of Social Services what his 

intentions are for Core Services, what are your long-range goals? Are you going to keep Core Services? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, at the present time we are holding consultations with the Saskatchewan 

Association of the Mentally Retarded and other groups who are concerned about the services provided 

by Core Services and we have made no decision at this particular time. But I think it must be understood 

that when Core Services was set up it was specifically set up to facilitate and co-ordinate the services for 

the mentally retarded as they pertained to the Departments of Health, Social Services and Education. 

And it was felt at that time that within five or six years if Core Services had performed its functions that 

we wanted it to perform that many of these services may well then be put back with the line department. 

That decision will not be made until we have full consultations and discussions with all groups 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The report also indicates that possibly the two 

institutions for the mentally retarded could be phased out in the Province of Saskatchewan. I wonder 

what the Minister’s opinion is about the phasing out of these two institutions? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what report he is referring to but certainly I don’t mind giving 

my own personal opinion of these two institutions. I think the two institutions certainly serve a function 

and there always, in my opinion, will be a function for them to operate. I think it is unrealistic to think 

that all individuals will be able to function in the community. But wherever possible we want to assure 

the people, that wherever possible we will make certain that all individuals who are capable of 

functioning in a community, services will be made available to them in their community. 

 

BACKLOG IN VARIOUS COURT DISTRICTS 
 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Attorney General. 

A situation has arisen in Regina and I 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

467 

understand that in various court districts in the Province of Saskatchewan that there is a four week delay 

in trying to obtain clearance certificates from the central registry; that high court judges are having an 

extremely difficult time getting stenographic help in order to get judgments typed and that there is a long 

delay in judgments being rendered because of a shortage of stenographic skills. At least in the city of 

Regina trial dates are being delayed anywhere up to four and five months. Now the Attorney General 

has given the assurance to this House in the past that he was on top of the problem and that he was 

taking adequate action to ensure that these long delays did not occur. Can the Attorney General tell us 

what he is doing to clean up the problems and the shortage of staff that exists in the various court houses 

in the districts in the province? 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, first of all with respect to the central 

registration office, it is true that there has been a delay for quite some time. In the last little while the 

delay, the last year or so was more pronounced because of the increase of commercial activity in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to the supposed or alleged shortage of stenographic help in Regina, I am pleased that the 

Member brings this to my attention because I cannot recall the judges specifically bringing it to my 

attention. But nevertheless I will look at this matter and see how serious the problem is now that the 

Member raises it. 

 

On the question of court delays my position has always been that it would be ideal to get all the court 

files on as quickly as possible in as limited a time as possible but the fact is that this is not possible to 

do. Saskatchewan’s record is as good if not better than most provinces in the Dominion of Canada and I 

think we have nothing there that warrants special action. 

 

Mr. Lane: — By way of supplementary, I am going to table a document from the Director of Court 

Services, Court House, Regina to all offices of the sheriff, the local registrar, the sheriff and the local 

registrar and court reporters in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That particular document under signature of Mr. C. A. Huggett, in fact gives instructions to the various 

registrars of the Province of Saskatchewan to cut back in services to backlog such work as surrogate 

court work. That each sheriff’s office should discontinue acting on chattel mortgages. That instructions 

are given to all registrars to allow the field work to backlog in all situations. That service work is to have 

a second priority. That all registrars are instructed to cut stenographic work to the level . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Can the Member get to the point of his question immediately. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, in fact, my question is, why has the Attorney General of Saskatchewan, 

through his officials given specific instructions to the officials of this province to cut back in staff and 

service to the public? I might add that the same document and I will have a further supplementary 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

468 

indicates that the various departments may have insufficient funds to continue. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, may I say first of all that I do not intend to rely on anything that 

the Member for Qu’Appelle interprets out of any document. I am going to take a look at the document 

and draw my own conclusions as to what it specifically says or doesn’t say. All that I can say to the 

Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle is that the budget of the Attorney General in this current year is something 

in the order of $28 million for all services provided and when you were the executive assistant to the 

Liberal Attorney General, it was something in the neighborhood of about $9 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! We are getting into a debate on this issue. If the Attorney General can 

terminate his remarks . . . 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary. The document I have and I would like to send a 

copy to the Attorney General, if I may, indicates from under what purports to be a signature of Mr. 

Huggett that in fact there are insufficient funds in the budget of the salary for Court Services to supply 

salaries for the next five months . . . I wonder if I can continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Lane: — That in fact there are insufficient funds perhaps to continue and that perhaps all travel will 

be cut off as of January 1, 1977. How can the Attorney General tell this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan that there are adequate funds when in fact it seems the court system is grinding to a halt 

under his department? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I guess that is ruled as a valid question and I will treat it as so. But it is 

very difficult to answer something like that. I must say quite candidly that I am somewhat confused as to 

exactly where the Conservatives stand, on the one hand in their questions and their speeches, they 

criticize this Government for too many people and too much of a burgeoning bureaucracy and too much 

expenditure. On the other hand the Member gets up and selectively decides to place an interpretation on 

a memorandum which I haven’t seen but I am going to peruse and says we are not getting enough 

money. I simply say this to the Member opposite, that he is the first member of the public, there may be 

a letter that has come into me that I haven’t checked out, that I may have forgotten about. But he’s the 

first member of the public who has raised this particular issue on this particular memorandum and 

brought it to my attention. I just don’t believe one bit what the Member says about the quality of court 

services in the Province of Saskatchewan. I think it is at an all time high and I am prepared to back my 

record against anything that the former administrations have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

469 

COMMITTEE SET UP TO CHANGE TAX STRUCTURE OF CROWN CORPORATION 

 

Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister in charge 

of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. At a meeting with the Hart Butte Municipality No. 11 and 

Government officials mention was made of a committee that was set up to change the tax structure of 

Crown corporations. Could I ask the Minister when the committee was set up, who the members are and 

when he expects a report back from that committee? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — The Member I think is referring to discussions 

that are being carried out internally within the Government in regard to the taxing or grants in lieu of 

taxes where the Crown corporations of the Government may be involved in expenditures or acquisitions 

of land, establishment of capital in rural municipalities. I am not able at this time as I conveyed to the 

members of the Hart Butte Rural Municipality to set a time when a final recommendation will be 

coming down from the Government. But we are certainly aware of concerns from the municipalities 

such as Hart Butte in regard to that matter and we are giving it due consideration. 

 

Mr. Nelson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe he answered all the question. When was the committee set 

up and who are the members? 

 

Mr. Messer: — I do not believe that the committee is structured in such a formal way that it has, in fact, 

a specific number of members who can be identified. There is a committee that is discussing the matter. 

It involves the Crown corporations, the Government finance office, and other departments of 

government who will also be related to input to such a decision of government, municipal affairs and the 

like of that. 

 

CHECK-OFF FUND — CATTLE 
 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. In the Minister’s 

budget address some two or three days ago, the Minister . . . pardon me, Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

thank you for the correction. The Minister made reference to consumers and their relation to the beef 

industry. Would the Minister tell this House today if his remarks pertaining to consumers was some 

indication that the Minister intends to remove consumer representation on the volunteer cattle 

check-off? 

 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Certainly not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister concede that the funds 

which are accumulated in this check-off fund come exclusively from cattle producers and exclusively 

the cattle industry. Would the Minister thereby tell us how do you justify having a consumer to 

administer funds which are totally raised by the cattlemen themselves? 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

470 

Mr. Kaeding: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that the practice of bringing consumers into some of these boards 

is a practice which we should look at oftener. I think that many times the things that we want to discuss 

in agricultural or other areas would get a lot of benefit from consumer input. And I think to have one 

member of a consumer group on that kind of a board, doesn’t hurt at all. It gives a greater dimension, it 

lets those people know in consumer groups that there are other problems in the agricultural field which 

they don’t recognize if they don’t have a chance to get into the board structure. When I was down in the 

United States a couple of months ago I talked to the people there and they were recommending that they 

put people on from consumers’ associations on these kinds of boards simply so that they would be able 

to find out really what the problems are in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Minister’s comments are well taken, but 

specifically, Mr. Minister, I would ask you, do you concede that the money in this fund, the dollars that 

are there are exclusively from cattlemen, from cattle producers, and thereby how do you justify having a 

representative from the consumers who incidentally, to my knowledge are not representatives of any 

officially designated consumers’ association, how do you justify them sitting on a board to administrate 

funds raised solely on a voluntary basis from the cattle industry? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that if there was any major unhappiness I would have been told 

about this long ago. I am sure that I would consider what my actions should be if I got a real serious 

complaint on that. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — A supplementary. Is it not a fact, Mr. Minister, that your department 

people are now not allowing the people who put the money into this check-off account to do as they 

please with it. 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Certainly not, Mr. Speaker, I get my recommendations from the check-off board. 

 

PEDIATRIC PATIENTS 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Wascana): — A question to the Minister of Health. I wonder if the Minister 

would comment on the growing practice in he pediatrics ward, necessitated by bed closures, of the 

transfer of medical patients to the surgical ward. Would the Minister agree that that is a very serious 

practice to have pediatric patients put on the pediatric surgical ward, the result being that children that 

come in for instance with tonsil problems, leave with pneumonia or chicken pox, as a possible result of 

these contacts. 

 

Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the Member gets his 

information, but I have been in consultation with the Administrator of the Regina General who informed 

me that they had no significant problems with respect to handling children in that hospital. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

471 

Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister agree that the mixing of children 

from the medical ward and children from the surgical is a very bad practice and would the Minister 

indicate whether it might be possible to ensure the House that this will not happen? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been informed by the authorities that it is happening and until 

I am I will not take any action. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Final supplementary. Would the Minister then be prepared to check, first on the 

number of bed closures to which I referred earlier, and secondly would the Minister check on whether in 

fact there has been necessitated a mixing of medical patients, medical problems and surgical problems at 

the General Hospital and report back to the House in that regard? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

BACK LOG IN VARIOUS COURT DISTRICTS 
 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a further question to the Attorney General. Should this 

copy of the memorandum which I have forwarded to you be accurate and there seems to be a reaction 

from the Attorney General which would indicate it certainly is, will the Attorney General advise this 

House if there will be an Appropriation Bill to ensure adequate funding so that the budget of the court 

services will not run out of funds for the next five months and that there will be adequate funds for the 

supply of court services in this province. Will you assure us that there is an Appropriation Bill before we 

adjourn on Wednesday or Thursday? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it amazes me that the Conservative Member for Qu’Appelle views the 

matter of provision of court services of such extreme urgency that he urges the Government to bring 

down a special Appropriation Bill. Not on what one thought yesterday during the course of his speech 

was the so-called then urgent crisis of hospital costing and the like, I am interested in seeing his 

priorities in this regard. 

 

The answer simply is that the question is hypothetical, I do not anticipate any special Appropriation Bill. 

I believe that the court services are functioning well, I have looked at this memorandum, very quickly. I 

think that the memorandum is a stringent call to live within the guidelines of the Budget as passed by the 

Legislature in March of 1976, no more, no less. Some of the wording can be open to mis-interpretation 

by yourself or others, but it is a call by Mr. Huggett, to say to all court people, look here we have a 

budget, we have to live within it like every other department does, let’s live within it as best as we can. I 

support that type of a memorandum. 

 

I don’t think the court services have been affected one bit, and I urge all department people to follow 

that type of an approach in a period of restraint. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Would the Attorney General not admit that a statement 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

472 

in the same memorandum that at the present rate of spending, 

 

. . . especially if no one is hoarding S4s, we are unable to have sufficient funds to continue, 

 

and a direct statement: 

 

be prepared to have your travel expense discontinued entirely or rationed after January 1, 1977. 

 

and direct instructions to cut back in service. 

 

Is this merely restraint or really a dismantling, for want of a better word of the court system, as governed 

under the Department of the Attorney General? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll let others than myself or the Member for Qu’Appelle be the judge as to whether 

or not the court service system is being in his words, dismantled. To repeat again, there is no doubt that 

in the last two or three years because of the unprecedented commercial and other activities in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, the court system has been strained. There are no doubts about it that it does 

have stops and starts and that there are some difficulties in this area. I am not going to stand here and say 

that’s not the case. 

 

But similarly, I will not adopt the judgments of the Member made for purely political purposes, purely 

political purposes, using the court services structure, to say that it is a matter of dismantling the entire 

court system. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think the Attorney General is entering into a debate, he is ascribing 

motives. I think that is not necessary in answering the question. 

 

SWIFT CURRENT COURT HOUSE 
 

Mr. D.M. Ham (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I am not allowed to draw any imputation, that is why 

that question is being asked. So I won’t. But I could if I was allowed to, and if I could I would make the 

imputation that perhaps there are some political reasons in that question as well. But I am not allowed to 

draw that, and I won’t. 

 

I simply say that I didn’t know, but I do know now because of the memorandum in which it is pointed 

out here. The memorandum also indicates the situation in Swift Current is righting itself. I think in the 

next little while indeed it will be fully righted. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

473 

EXTENSION OF LAND BANK 

 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — A question for the Minister of Agriculture. Would the Minister of 

Agriculture make a comment on his report in the Business Review by the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, in which he is suggesting an alternative to the present landownership to a system of public 

landownership, the question would be, would this alternative be an extension to the present Land Bank? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, the comments I made in that particular Review were simply laying out 

some possibilities which there might be in land tenure in the province. I didn’t advocate them as you 

will recognize if you looked at the article. I didn’t advocate them, I simply said that these are some of 

the possible solutions. I leave it at that. 

 

BACKLOG IN VARIOUS COURT DISTRICTS 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think what I would have to ask the Hon. Member to do is to give me 

some documentation that the backlog is there and is of sufficient crisis to warrant that type of action. All 

I can say is the only commonsense answer. No Government or Attorney General is going to stand by 

and say we want the entire backlog to go to such an extent that the beneficiaries of the estate are going 

to be affected. We are doing our best wherever a backlog appears to add more personnel or do whatever 

is necessary. And if that should be the situation with respect to surrogate court work and if you would 

like to provide me with some documentation, rather than general statements, I will be prepared to look at 

the specific cases and we will take the necessary action as it arises. 

 

Mr. Lane: — By way of supplementary, would the Attorney General not admit that the instructions, 

specific instructions from the director of court services to allow surrogate court work to backlog is not a 

matter of concern to the Attorney General? And why would the Attorney General of the province 

responsible for the administration of justice take such an unconcerned and political attitude as he has 

today when there is a severe cutback of expenditures and the problem is severe in the court services in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to again say that if one looks at this memorandum by any fair 

reading of it, one would say that this is a memorandum which says to all people in the court services 

area, try to live within your budget. I have not received representation from officials in my Department 

that say that the surrogate court work is backlogged to such a serious point that 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

474 

we need to take the drastic action that the Member for Qu’Appelle indicates. Nor do I draw to the 

Members’ attention, have you or the Member for Swift Current or anybody in this House had the 

courtesy of giving me any forewarning that there has been any such crisis in the past at all. I can only 

assume that any crisis, if it exists, exists only within your minds and the minds of the Conservative 

Party. 

 

SASKATCHEWAN’S STAND ON FEDERAL IMMIGRATION POLICY 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant: — I wonder if I might direct a question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. A few days 

ago the Hon. Mr. Cullen, the Minister of Immigration indicated henceforth the Federal Government 

would be prepared to consult with the provinces about immigration policy and I wonder if the Premier 

would indicate what our reaction as a province will be. We have a small population, will he be 

advocating a more open immigration policy and secondly, would this Government be prepared to 

recommend to the Federal Government that the point system which is interpreted as being 

discriminatory in some ways against some countries be abandoned and replaced with perhaps a fairer 

means of picking the immigrants to this country? 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, we have had ongoing but not very active consultations 

with the Federal Government with respect to the new Immigration Act and the various papers of various 

colors which preceded it. Our position has been that; one, we would like the immigration system to be as 

nondiscriminatory as possible, but we had no particular view on how the Federal Government ought to 

achieve that. Two, we wished that the proceedings of immigration, the procedures followed would be 

such as to direct people to Saskatchewan because we need more people and need particularly, more 

skilled people, and three, that we did not particularly favor legal requirements that people had to live six 

months in Saskatchewan or something of that nature, but we wished they could use suasion of one kind 

or another rather than the strict legal requirement. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

AGRIBITION AWARDS 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could beg the indulgence of the House and 

Members of this Assembly and yourself, to make a brief announcement and also to congratulate a 

Member of this Assembly in his achievement at Agribition yesterday. I am talking specifically about the 

Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Roy Nelson, who entered a number of steer calves in the 

Agribition and was awarded not only the first in the weight class but also the Reserve Grand Champion 

for the commercial section. Let me also add that each one of these animals bore the original color in 

which they were born with . . . Might I also add that this is, I believe, the third year in a row that a 

Member of our particular caucus had the privilege of presenting livestock at the Agribition coming away 

with not only the Reserve Grant Championship but also top honors at Agribition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, might I add a comment. I was at the show 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

475 

this afternoon where the Members’ cattle were being shown and sold. I must say they were good cattle. 

It is good to know that he can do one thing well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, in the last couple of days we have been saddened by 

the news of yet another former Member of this Assembly having passed away, a person whom a number 

of us served with. I should like to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to the family of the 

deceased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I accordingly move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. 

Steuart: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former Member of the Assembly, 

and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his community, his constituency 

and to his Province. 

 

James Ross Barrie, who dies on November 29, 1976 was a Member of this Legislature for the 

constituency of Pelly from 1956 to 1964 and again from 1967 to 1971 when he also served as Minister 

of Natural Resources. He was born at Morden, Manitoba in 1902 and received his elementary 

education there and his secondary schooling in Vancouver, British Columbia. For 28 years he operated 

a hardware and general store in Pelly and for ten years was also involved in a general insurance 

business. He served on the Pelly village council for 23 years and was village overseer for 19 years. 

From 1964 to 1967, he served on the board of directors of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Office and was also a member of the Masonic Lodge and the Pelly Chamber of Commerce. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved family. 

 

May I add, Mr. Speaker, a rather more personal note. I served in this House with Ross Barrie for eight 

years, from 1960 to 1964 and again from 1967 to 1971. There were others who knew him better since 

they worked with him in Cabinet. I came to know Ross reasonably well and came to have a very 

considerable admiration for him. He was a courtly gentleman of the old school who was always 

courteous and soft spoken in his dealings at least in public and I suspect in private since he seemed very 

much to be made that way. 

 

He served with distinction as Minister of Natural Resources and again maintained excellent relationships 

with people on the other side of the House, as I was. I felt that he served his constituents well. He 

obviously had a strong support, good deal of affection, in the constituency as is indicated by the fact that 

he was elected at least three times. 

 

I would like, therefore, to take this opportunity to extend my condolences to his sister and to other 

members of the bereaved family. 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

476 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with the Premier in 

paying a tribute to the late Ross Barrie. I worked with him for many years, both as a Member of our 

party, first as a Member of the Opposition, then in the Cabinet, and came to know him extremely well 

and had a great affection for him. 

 

Ross Barrie was the kind of individual who helped to make this a better province, a good province, the 

kind of people we find in all political parties and in all walks of life. He served his community in a great 

variety of ways, not only in local government, but as a merchant in the community he gave a great deal 

of advice. People came to Ross Barrie both when he was an MLA and when he was out of office for 

advice and for help. I was always amazed at the lengths to which Ross would go to help anyone in 

trouble. People would come into Regina when he lived in here, they would find themselves in some 

difficulty, and it didn’t matter whether it was the weekend or the middle of the night or what time of day 

it was or who they were, if they called on Ross he helped them, did his best to help them. 

 

As the Premier said, throughout all this he had an outstanding quality that maybe is too much missed 

these days in that he was really a gentleman. He was a kindly, friendly man who held strong views but 

expressed them in a very decent, a very friendly manner. 

 

I’d like not only to pay a tribute to him but also pass on my condolences to his sister with whom he 

lived, his sister and his brother-in-law, he lived with them for many years and the other members of his 

family, and to say in passing that the people of Saskatchewan have lost a fine man and a good friend and 

Saskatchewan is a better place for his having been here and his passing is a great loss to all of us. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party I, too, 

would like to join with other Members of this House in passing on condolences to the family. Indeed, 

this gentleman has given many years of his live to the province, both locally and at the provincial level, 

and it is our wish that our condolences be passed on with the other Members. 

 

Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Conservative Party in expressing condolences to the members of Ross Barrie’s 

family. 

 

I suppose I probably knew Ross Barrie as well as anyone in this House, as we grew up and lived as 

neighbors. I knew Ross from the time he started business in Pelly, I knew his association with people, I 

knew his attitudes towards his community, and I know of his attitudes towards a much broader 

perspective and spectrum than just his own community. 

 

He was kindly, didn’t hesitate to help anyone out if they were in financial difficulty. He assisted many 

with legal documents that they weren’t able to interpret, and he did this to a large extent of his own free 

will and gratis. 

 

I think one of the best ways to describe Ross was the time when there was an absconding of funds of the 

Arran Credit Union. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

477 

There was a run on what little that was left. Ross Barrie had money in their credit union. He said to 

people, ‘I am not going to withdraw or ask for the return of my money, I’m going to help to rebuild the 

Arran Credit Union’. Simply because of this attitude he was able to instil in people a confidence that all 

wasn’t lost, and today the Arran Credit Union is a thriving institution. This says more about Ross Barrie 

than many other things that could be said. 

 

He was my political adversary. We fought many bitter elections. They were bitter and hard-fought. Ross 

was a good politician, a hard worker. some he lost, some he won, but when the smoke had cleared away 

we found ourselves to be friends. I have spent time in this Assembly talking to him behind the rail when 

he was in government, as he has spent time talking to me behind the rail when I am in government. 

 

So I join with the Premier and others in expressing sincere condolences to his family and his relatives. 

He is going to be buried in Pelly. I hope to attend the funeral, and I certainly know that Pelly will feel 

they have lost a very good friend and a very valuable person. 

 

Hon. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to add a word or two to those who 

have already spoken. There isn’t much more could be said that hasn’t already been said of Ross Barrie, 

after the Premier and Dave Steuart and the Member for Pelly (Mr. Larson):. 

 

I think that anyone who knew Ross can stand and sincerely say he was a good man and a good citizen. I 

can’t say that I knew Ross so well, except across the floor and as a political opponent, but I have gained 

some insight into Ross Barrie as a person and as a character through the association with other people 

with whom he was associated while he was a Minister. Several members of the Department of Natural 

Resources who are still around and my present secretary, who strangely enough is probably one of the 

senior employees of the Government. She came to the Department of Natural Resources with the 

Resources when Canada turned natural Resources over in the early ’30s, and she was my secretary when 

I was Minister of Natural Resources, she was Mr. Cuelenaere’s secretary, and I think for a while she was 

secretary for Dave Steuart, and then for Ross Barrie, and I know that she had, this old Scottish girl, had a 

great respect for her Minister, and I think that says a lot more about the man than anyone could, and also 

the respect with which he was held by the employees and the staff and the Department over which he 

was Minister. 

 

I say that I am proud to add my words of condolence to the family and friends of Ross Barrie on this sad 

occasion. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

(Mr. Steuart):: 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of Mr. 

Barrie, be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

I may add, Mr. Speaker, that the funeral is tomorrow afternoon in Pelly at 3:00 o’clock and I think a 

number of 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

478 

Members will be attending the funeral. I, accordingly, will not be in the House tomorrow afternoon. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): moved second reading of Bill 23 — An Act to 

amend The Vehicles Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, one of the major announcements in the Speech from the Throne was that of 

‘Safety 77’, a year dedicated to curbing waste and carnage on our roads and streets through traffic 

accidents. 

 

On the part of the Government this would involve major legislative and policy changes in an attempt to 

create more safety on our roads. On the part of the public we hope that it will mean a good deal more 

attention to safe driving practices and actually doing those things that everyone knows but often do not 

bother about. 

 

Legislative amendments to The Vehicles Act related to Safety 77 will come in three packages. The bulk 

of these will come in the New Year, as will the policy announcements related to the safety year. One 

particular package of The Vehicles Act safety amendments must be introduced and debated now in order 

to allow the program to be in place in 1977. This particular package of amendments to The Vehicles Act 

contains changes to 25 sections of the present Act which will provide for a new system of registering 

motor vehicles and licensing drivers in Saskatchewan. In both cases the realities of the number and 

kinds of vehicles on the road has made our present system out of date and not able to meet the needs of 

our current situation. 

 

Let me deal with the driver licensing system first. At present there are three classes of drivers, operators, 

chauffeurs, learners. The operator’s class covers all older operated vehicles which constitutes the biggest 

percentage of drivers. The chauffeur’s class covers any commercial or public service driver. The 

learner’s class covers those who do not yet have authority to drive independently. 

 

The present system stresses a driver’s occupation, rather than his or her qualifications. From a road 

safety standpoint the emphasis should be on a driver’s qualification, not on his occupation. This is 

particularly true in view of the growing number of large sophisticated vehicles operated on our 

highways and in view of the more demanding traffic environment that we all find ourselves in. The 

proposed amendments would create eight classes of drivers. Drivers would be licensed according to the 

type of vehicle they are qualified to drive. For some classes, especially those related to the larger more 

complicated classes of commercial vehicles more stringent medical, age and ability standards will have 

to be met. 

 

Briefly, the new classes of drivers are as follows: 

 

Class 8 — Snowmobiles 

Class 7 — Learners 

Class 6 — Motorcycles 

Class 5 — Private passenger vehicles and two axle trucks 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

479 

Class 3 — Trucks of more than 2 axles 

Class 2 — More than 24 passenger busses 

Class 1 — Power unit semi-trailers 

 

The minimum age will remain at 16 for everything from private passenger vehicles down to 

snowmobiles, but it will be 18 years and a medical certificate will be required on everything from these 

up — that is busses, more than two axle trucks, semi-trailers and truck/trailer combinations. 

 

In short, what the system does is break out each type of vehicle into its own class and requires that a 

driver learn to drive and pass his driving test in that particular vehicle. The requirements set are those 

that more accurately reflect the skills required to drive a particular vehicle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the system makes a good deal of safety sense. It has been implemented in other provinces 

and the results have been promising. It must be emphasized that drivers who now hold either operator’s 

or chauffeur’s licences will automatically receive equivalent standing under the new system. 

Grandfather rights will be extended to all those who now hold licences. Those operators who wish to 

continue driving their cars, or their trucks as they have always done will not have to do anything. They 

will simply receive the equivalent licence under the new system. Chauffeurs will be required to fill out 

an application form to more clearly specify the type of vehicle they are now driving. Grandfather rights 

will be extended for this vehicle. But if they wish to upgrade their licence to a higher class they will 

have to meet the appropriate qualifications, of course. 

 

I repeat, Mr. Speaker, all those drivers who are now holding an operator’s licence and who wish to 

continue driving in the same way will not be affected. They need simply to renew their licence this year 

as usual. 

 

Of major significance to the driver will be that under this proposal he will be able to renew his licence 

and his plate in the month he chooses, rather than on the April 30th deadline that has always been the 

case. The April 30th deadline causes undue inconvenience to the public through line-ups and waiting 

times, as well as making the end pretty difficult to meet for some people at that particular time of the 

year. By choosing the month he or she wishes the driver will be able to choose that month which best 

suits his particular circumstances and will be able to renew on an annual basis in that month. 

 

The second major change — motor vehicle registration, will improve the system from an administrative 

and a financial point of view. As in the case of the driver’s licences, the realities have outstripped our 

present system, not so much from a safety point of view in this case, as from an administrative and a 

cost point of view. The increased number of vehicle registrations means that we have run out of 

numbers, the frequency of vehicle transfers means that we cannot keep up with the records, the demands 

for information by law enforcement agencies means that a new system must be found so that we can 

keep up with the records. 

 

These proposals provide for the replacement of the present practice of issuing a new plate each year with 

one five-year plate. The five-year plates will be a combination of letters and numbers in order to allow 

enough combinations to cover all vehicles. The plate will be kept for five years and be issued 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

480 

a new validation sticker each year. 

 

As with the driver’s licences themselves, you, the driver, will be able to choose which month you wish 

to renew in. When you go to pick up your licence this year you will be asked your month of preference 

and be issued a renewal plate and licence which will hold until your chosen month, after which you will 

renew on an annual basis. 

 

This package contains a few other amendments which are more of a housekeeping nature, dealing with 

practices which have become obsolete over the years and are no longer followed. 

 

The present Act contains a provision that the Highway Traffic Board may issue a chauffeur’s licence 

without fee to any person who drives a vehicle used in connection with relief of distress. Under the new 

classified driver’s licence system, this is repealed. 

 

In addition, there is presently a provision which requires all chauffeurs to either be licensed as a 

chauffeur or to wear a chauffeur’s badge. Again, under the new system to imply that there are any 

circumstances under which a chauffeur may not be licensed does not make sense, hence, removing the 

need for a badge in any circumstance as a substitute for a licence. 

 

The present Act contains a mandatory provision that any employer who dismisses a driver or a chauffeur 

must report the dismissal and the reasons for it to the Highway Traffic Board. This provision serves no 

useful purpose. The Board is only concerned with a person’s driving skills. These will be indicated on 

his driving record held by the Board. The Board is not and should not be interested in an 

employer-employee relationship. This section has not been enforced and is hereby repealed. 

 

Finally, the present Act requires that all taxi drivers and bus operators must be certified by the local 

police, which must be renewed each year. This certification is presently termed a ‘certificate of good 

character’. The concept is that those persons transporting passengers would be subject to some character 

scrutiny in addition to his driving skills. Many police chiefs hesitate to attest to the character of someone 

they do not know, and would prefer to either provide or refuse to provide a ‘certificate of approval’. This 

section is amended to read ‘certificate of approval’, and the yearly renewal is removed. Certification will 

remain in effect until cause is shown to rescind the certificate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the amendments to these 25 sections which provides for the new driver 

licensing system and the new registration system demonstrates the Government’s commitment to make 

our roads and streets safer as well as its commitment to a more sensible and efficient administrative 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with interest to the Minister’s 

comments and examined the bill. I don’t believe that 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

481 

the official Opposition can really protest very loudly about any of these provisions which are contained 

in this bill. 

 

It does appear that perhaps we are going into a little bit of extended paper work in an administrative 

sense. I would question whether we really have to go to a total of eight categories in driver’s licences. 

Granted, if it did have to be expanded I think we could question the advisability of going to eight. 

Nonetheless I believe the Minister did present a reasonably good case and in the interests of proceeding 

with this portion of the legislation, I believe I can say on behalf of the official Opposition we will agree 

to this bill in principle. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of brief comments in regard to this bill, let me first 

of all say that I approve of the Government’s direction in regard to the five-year licence plate and the 

five-year licensing of the operator’s licence. I mean many of us when we do purchase our licence plate 

on a 12 month basis by the time it is time to renew it we’ve just got to know what that licence number is 

and we have to start all over again. So I welcome this opportunity to be able to tell the service station 

attendant without thinking what my licence plate number is. 

 

One question which I would like to ask the Minister when we get into Committee of the Whole and 

possibly he can answer that for me when he closes debate on this particular bill, but I notice that trucks 

with more than two axles or those who operate a truck with more than two axles will have to have a 

separate testing structure for operator’s licences. Let me first off say that I don’t argue with this, the 

question though that I would like to ask is, will there be any difference in fee for that particular 

operator’s licence than what there would be for a class five. The reason why I say this is because many 

farmers in Saskatchewan today now find themselves the owners of farm trucks with more than one axle 

or more than two axles and I don’t object to that farmer having to be licensed differently, I would object 

if a higher licence were assessed to that farmer because he does have a larger truck than what another 

farmer would who would be driving a single axle truck. This is the only question that I have in regard to 

this particular bill and possibly the Minister can answer that concern for me when he closes debate on 

this particular bill. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the matter of the five-year licensing or 

long-term licensing has been under review for some considerable period of time and we have no quarrel 

whatsoever with the principle. 

 

I will have several questions of the Minister during Committee and that deals with the review of driver’s 

licences in the future. There seems to be some concern by the Safety Council with regard to, for example 

and I use clause (f): or clause (g):, people with mental or physical disabilities or people who are what is 

called habitual drunkards which I suppose is not a fair phrase, or addicted to the use of narcotic drugs. I 

would like to know how the department is coming to grips with the problem set out in those particular 

provisions. There is a reluctance, and I think a fair one, of citizens to report other drivers that they know 

are alcoholics or that they know are addicts or have a disability — their eyesight is going for 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

482 

example — there is a reluctance of people to report these and yet there are so many people on the road 

who have a physical disability that they really shouldn’t be driving. I think it would be unfair to ask the 

department to attempt to police it, I think it is an impossibility. But I would like the Minister to advise 

me during Committee as to what the department sees as its duty and how it comes to grips with what I 

think is a problem that all of us, as Members, are aware of and what particular action can be taken. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Just one comment when you are winding up, Mr. Minister could you 

explain, are you running into problems with people in the taxi field, as you suggested, those who are not 

constantly driving and so forth? Or you could handle it during Committee of the Whole if you could 

explain it better. 

 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — Just a note, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether I heard the 

Minister correctly. If I didn’t when he is going to close maybe he could answer what I am going to be 

referring to. 

 

I think I heard you say that everyone had to be 18 years of age or over before they could drive a truck 

with three axles or more. I was just wondering how this would affect farmers who had trucks with two 

axles or more and who had sons 16 or 17 years of age who were part of the farming operations. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the more specific questions can be answered when the 

officials are here with me, particularly the chairman of the Highway Traffic Board under whose 

jurisdiction the policing and that sort of thing takes place. 

 

I might suggest that when I laid out the various classes I laid them out in the narrowest way, the classes 

provide for broader application than I have indicated in my comments here. And I think we can deal 

with that there. I think that likely the farmer, for instance, if he has got a tandem truck will likely be able 

to drive his tandem truck as he is driving it now without having to get a special licence. That I think is 

the case, however, we shall be better directed when I have someone with me who can better answer the 

narrower regulations. 

 

With respect to the Hon. Member for Qu’Appelle, the same kind of thing would apply. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): moved second reading of Bill No. 33 — An Act to 

amend The Snowmobile Act, 1973 (No. 2):. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, amendments are required to two sections of The Snowmobile Act to enable us to 

introduce the new systems, driver systems for registering vehicles and licensing drivers. These 

amendments are similar to those proposed just a minute or two ago in The Vehicles Act to affect 

implementation of these systems. 

 

The Snowmobile Act authorizes the Highway Traffic Board to register snowmobiles and to license 

drivers of these vehicles. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

483 

Whereas The Vehicles Act provides the Board with similar authorization for all other types of vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker the new vehicle registration system provides for the issuance of a single five-year vehicle 

licence which is to be renewed each year through the use of validation stickers. The system also 

provides for staggering renewal dates which are to be chosen at the discretion of the vehicle operator. 

An amendment is required to this Act to implement this system as it pertains to snowmobile licensing. A 

further amendment is required, Mr. Speaker, to allow for implementation of the new classified driver 

licensing system as it pertains to the licensing of snowmobile operators. In addition to setting minimum 

qualifications for snowmobile operators within this system, provision is made for the staggered renewal 

of operator’s licences corresponding to their date of birth. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, two amendments are to be made to The Snowmobile Act to provide for 

implementation of the new vehicle registration and driver licensing programs as they pertain to 

snowmobile operations. By referring driver qualifications to the vehicles operated and simplification and 

streamlining of the vehicle registration system I think it demonstrates this Government’s commitment to 

road safety and to improve the efficiency of Government programs that are delivered to the public. 

 

I move that this bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Speaker, just even briefer comments than the Minister. We certainly agree with the 

intent of this particular legislation and we intend to support it. 

 

Mr. J.R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Privilege, what bill were we talking 

about 22 or 33? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Bill No. 33. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. E.C. Whelan (Minister of Consumer Affairs): moved second reading of Bill No. 35 — An Act to 

amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, for over 30 years The Automobile Accident Insurance Act has served the people 

of Saskatchewan well. The system ensures to a much higher degree than would otherwise be possible 

that each owner and driver of a motor vehicle is effectively insured. 

 

It achieves this objective by a simple procedure — by combining licence and registration processes 

under The Vehicles Act with Insurance Certificates. However, in more recent years the number of 

vehicles registered in the province has risen to 707,000 by the end of the licence year 1975-76 and the 

number of drivers was approximately 512,000. 

 

The sheer bulk of the transactions relating to the motor vehicle driver population has imposed a great 

strain upon the system which presently provides a common termination date for all certificates of 

insurance under the Act. This has resulted 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

484 

in processing delays with accompanying public inconvenience, particularly where there has been a 

change in vehicle ownership. The inconvenience is experienced most particularly by those who have an 

insurance claim before the transfer is processed and by those who may wish to take a trip out of the 

province and have to wait for a new certificate of insurance to be processed. 

 

The amendments in this bill are largely companion measures to The Vehicles Act amendments which 

are now before the House and which allow drivers’ licences and vehicle registrations to be issued on a 

staggered basis throughout the year. The system change will permit a more orderly flow of renewals 

throughout the year with minimum delay, it will speed up the handling of transfers and speed up the 

refund of premiums when vehicle registrations are cancelled. 

 

The majority of amendments in this bill are simply to accommodate the concept of staggered renewals. 

Under the staggered registration system, a car registration may be issued or renewed during any month 

of the year, generally for a 12-month period. The present concept of ‘licence year’, the period from May 

1st in any year to April 30 in the following year, becomes irrelevant. Under the new system, premium 

rate adjustments may be made at any time during the calendar year when such adjustments appear 

necessary or desirable. While it is not contemplated that changes will be made more than once a year, a 

review of insurance experience will probably be made every six months. 

 

The amendments provide that appropriate publication in the Gazette will be made of rates before they 

take effect. Clause 3 of the bill spells out in greater detail than currently the criteria by which motor 

vehicles and drivers are to be classified and rated. The principles expressed in this section follow current 

practice, but they provide guidelines by which the future developments of the rating structure should 

proceed. 

 

The particular significance of the amendments proposed in this bill are in subsection (b): of Section 2, 

defining the ‘violation record’ and in Section 3 which relates to the classification of motor vehicles and 

drivers for the purpose of fixing basic premiums. 

 

All other amendments contained in the Bill are housekeeping in nature, being companion to the 

concurrent amendments in The Vehicles Act, particularly, because the Act presently is before the House. 

 

For instance, subsection (a): of Section 2 of this bill substitutes the term ‘licence period’ for ‘licence 

year’ in order to accommodate the issuing of licences on a staggered basis. 

 

The amendments contained in Sections 4 and 6 relate as well only to that substitution of terms. 

Similarly, Section 5 simply substitutes ‘driver’s licence’ for ‘operator’s licence’ in order to conform 

with the terminology of the concurrent amendments to The Vehicles Act, whereas Section 7 only deletes 

the words ‘operator’s or chauffeur’s’, again, to conform with The Vehicles Act amendments which 

strike out all references to types of licences which are to be issued to drivers. 

 

And so, the important aspect of these amendments is to be found in Section 3 which deals with the 

method of fixing basic premium rates, and in subsection (B): of Section 2 defining the 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

485 

‘violation record’. 

 

While the essence of this amendment is the same as the provisions of the present section dealing with 

basic rates, the language employed in this amendment has been expanded in order to establish more 

flexible guidelines designed to aid in the development of new rating structures which will permit of 

better isolation of poor drivers and of hazardous types of vehicle design. It is expected that the rating of 

drivers to their individual driving records will be conducive to safer driving habits on the part of all 

drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence that these amendments together with the amendments under The 

Vehicles Act, will, at one and the same time, result in significant benefits to the people involved, to the 

owners and drivers of motor vehicles who are insured under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 

and in marked improvement in the administrative system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the honor to move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and the bill read a second time. 

 

ERROR IN PRESENTING SNOWMOBILE ACT 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just been brought to my attention that we have made a grievous 

mistake, we have passed the wrong Snowmobile Act Bill and I’d like to rectify that somehow. I don’t 

think it should be a problem. That what the Legislature can do, it can undo, I suppose. Or what it has 

undone it can do. 

 

We called Bill 33, it should have been Bill 22. 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — That’s what you said wasn’t it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I wish I had. So I don’t know what kind of a motion we need. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 

the House would give unanimous leave and consent to go to Bill 22. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the House will bear with me, I’ll defer the, if I detected a request of some kind for 

assistance on Bill 33, I’ll defer that until a little later and we can proceed with Bill 22. The one the 

Minister wishes to proceed with. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, I don’t seem to fully get the import of this because Bill 22, 

here’s the Minister now. He’s delivered all of his remarks to Bill 22. What happened was that Bill 33 

had been called by mistake. We were of the view that was The Snowmobile Act. There is Snowmobile 

(No. 1): and Snowmobile (No. 2):. Can’t we just simply agree to change the titles to Bill 22 and record 

that as obviously an error? Do we have to go through some complicated procedure? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Rather than giving the Minister an answer, let me give you a question. Suppose that a 

Member had been here and heard Bill 33 passed and then he stepped out of the Chamber and 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

486 

as soon as he stepped out of the Chamber you rescinded the bill or the passage of the bill on him? That 

puts the House in a difficult position and I want to seek guidance. I give you the question, I don’t have 

the answer at this point. But I am seeking some guidance. 

 

Mr. J. R. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I did bring it to your attention 

that it was the wrong bill and I had hoped that there would be something done about this because I had 

prepared to make statements on Bill 33. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member did raise the question of which bill we were dealing with and I responded 

with Bill 33, which I was under the impression we were dealing with and I believe we were dealing 

with. Order! Is the House Leader prepared to call a different item altogether at this time and we’ll try 

and come back to this a little later. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): moved second reading of Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The 

Election Act, 1971. 

 

He said: Well, Mr. Speaker, just before I start my remarks I should be absolutely sure that we’re talking 

about the right bill and I think we are. This is The Election Act amendment. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading to Bill 19, An Act to amend The Election Act, 1971. This is a 

relatively short bill which provides a couple of housekeeping amendments to The Election Act and also I 

believe, one substantive amendment to The Election Act. 

 

The amendments are intended to rectify a couple of problems which otherwise would arise if existing 

provisions of the Act were applied in the course of a by-election. The amendments do not represent any 

departure from the existing provisions of the Act. They are merely intended to rectify a couple of 

problems which have been identified. 

 

Before discussing this bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to outline to the House in very general terms and 

very quickly, some actions which have been undertaken with respect to the main body of this Election 

Act. 

 

A thorough review is currently being made on this Act. Shortly after the 1975 general election, I asked a 

committee of officials to undertake a review of this Election Act. The committee consists of the Chief 

Electoral Officer of Saskatchewan and the law officers of the Department of the Attorney General. 

 

The committees’ assignment is two-fold. The committee has been asked firstly, to review the long 

standing provisions of The Election Act, those which have been in existence for some time, apart from 

the reporting and contributions aspect of the Act, with a view to identifying those areas which may have 

either fallen behind the times or which may be simplified. The committee has also been asked to review 

provisions of the Act which set out controls upon election campaign receipts and expenditures of 

recognized political parties and candidates. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

487 

Mr. Speaker, I’m hopeful that I will receive the recommendations of this body in sufficient time for a 

brand new Election Act to be introduced at the spring session of this Legislative sitting. 

 

I want to hasten to add that no steps will be taken with respect to the major principles or concepts of this 

bill without prior advice and consultation and information to the representatives of all political parties 

with respect to the proposals of the committee and the proposed new features of this new Act. 

 

When the bill is introduced it will hopefully incorporate many of the suggestions of all sides or if not, at 

least will have identified those areas where we agree to disagree. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to discuss the bill which is before this House. I direct your attention to 

the amendment which is proposed in respect of Section 28 subsection (2): of the bill. 

 

At provincial elections held up to and including 1971, a qualified elector was entitled to vote in the 

constituency in which he or she ordinarily resided on the day on which the election writ was issued. This 

requirement is fundamental to all election statutes in Canada, as well as a number of other jurisdictions. 

 

When The Election Act was amended during the 1974-75 Session, however, Section 28, sub (2): was 

amended in an effort to bring about uniformity as much as possible with federal citizenship legislation. 

That attempt, unfortunately, in amending Section 28 (2): created a question of interpretation as to 

whether the test date for determining a voter’s ordinary residence was the date on which the election 

writ was issued or the date on which the actual election was held. 

 

The amendment which is proposed will make it unquestionably clear that the date on which an election 

writ is issued is the test date, the date to be regarded as the date for determining a voter’s ordinary 

residence in conformity with the standard election laws in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that Members of this House will agree that this is not a controversial amendment. 

Instead it will rectify any weaknesses in drafting or any oversights that have been brought to light 

subsequent to the election. 

 

The next amendment can also be fairly described as a housekeeping amendment. The amendment which 

is proposed to Section 202 (e): is fairly simple. As the Act now stands, each political party which 

embarks upon a provincial campaign is required to register with the Chief Electoral Officer in order to 

become a recognized political party. It’s the intent of the Act that the registration of a recognized 

political party shall be subsisting and shall not cease unless either the party itself wishes to terminate its 

registration or the party fails to endorse ten or more candidates at a general election. 

 

The amendment which is before the House, Mr. Speaker, will simply make it clear that at a general 

election and not at a by-election, a recognized political party is required to endorse ten or more 

candidates in order to maintain its status as a recognized political party. 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

488 

Mr. Speaker, the last amendment relates to perhaps the more fundamental aspect of the Bill. That is to 

say the application of election expense control laws during the course of a by-election. I repeat what I 

said a few moments ago, namely, that the whole subject of election expenses is being reviewed, not with 

a view to eliminating them or weakening them, but with a view to making them more straight forward, 

more understandable and if you will, more accepted by the political parties and the public. 

 

At the present time, Section 202 (k): of the Act places a limit of $175,000 upon the expenditures which a 

recognized political party might make prior to the issue of a writ of election for such things as 

transportation, election materials, rallies, advertising and the promotion of the general cause of the 

political party. 

 

I might say, in passing, Mr. Speaker, that that limit of $175,000 did not appear to be an unreasonably 

low sum, judging by the expenditures in the 1975 provincial election campaign when all three of the 

recognized political parties spent somewhat less, considerably less than the $175,000 in their respective 

campaigns. But, nevertheless, as the Act is drawn at the present time the expenditures made by the 

political party between general elections, count against this $175,000 limit. That’s the limit that is part 

of the review of this committee that I referred to earlier. 

 

Now, in order that the same concept of fair and uniform expenditure limits might apply to all recognized 

political parties during a by-election, as they apply during the course of a general election, it is proposed 

in the amendment which is before this House, the amendment to Section 202 (k):, that a ceiling be 

placed upon the expenditures of a recognized political party at a by-election in any constituency, other 

than Athabasca or Cumberland. In the event of a by-election in Athabasca or Cumberland, the limit in 

the printed bill before you would be raised or would be placed at $11,250. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there will be a House amendment which will be introduced with respect to this bill 

and that is to this very Section of 202 (k):. As a result of reconsidering the matter carefully and listening 

to representations, the House amendment will propose that a recognized political party at a by-election 

should spend the larger of either $10,000 or an amount determined by multiplying the number of names 

on the voters’ list by $1. In other words this would be virtually the identical formula which the 

individual candidate has during the course of an election campaign as set out 201 (v): of the Act. 

 

If I can use a specific illustration, say in Saskatoon Sutherland, if this House amendment which I 

propose would be passed, the expenditure ceilings would be, say in the case of a political party in the 

case of the candidate, $10,000 or $1 per number of voters, whichever is the higher. Speaking from my 

own knowledge of Saskatoon, I would think that Saskatoon Sutherland would probably have about 

14,000 voters. Therefore, the $1 per voter would be $14,000, the limit for the individual candidate, 

$14,000 or $15,000. 

 

Now, coming to the House amendment which modifies the $7,500 printed version, we would apply that 

same formula on the provincial party, so that the provincial party could spend $10,000 or $1 per the 

number of voters in Saskatoon Sutherland, 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

489 

whichever is the higher. Again I am using my figure that it is likely to be 14,000 voters, the provincial 

party would have $14,000 - $15,000 to spend. so that a candidate carrying the flag of the New 

Democratic Party would be, using Sutherland as an example, entitled to $28,000 to $30,000 or $32,000 

depending on how the eventual enumeration breaks down in terms of the voters’ list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this particular amendment and House amendment which I have explained is a 

fair and reasonable one. I personally believe that it is necessary in order to keep political parties in a 

by-election on an equally financial footing as they are on a general election, and thereby minimize the 

chances of the by-election being won by a political party with the most money to spend. 

 

I wish to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments will complement the general election 

expense controls and revelation sections of The Election Act which this House enacted in the sitting of 

1974. 

 

Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I know that some Members viewed with some concern as to how the 

election would operate. I am the first one to admit that there are certainly many deficiencies and 

problems which came to light. But in my judgment in the overall, namely as to the principal aspect of 

the bill, the limitation and revelation, I think the bill did achieve those objectives. We can argue about 

the ceiling limits and other aspects with respect to reporting and so forth, but if we believe as political 

parties in a democratic system, there should be this type of a mechanism, in our election law 1976 style, 

I think that the basic principles are a step forward in election reform. 

 

I welcome the suggestions of the parties with respect to this bill. At a later date the comprehensive bill 

when it is brought forward to the House. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, let me first say that I am pleased that The 

Election Act is being reviewed. It is complicated and it is clumsy and it is difficult and it badly needs 

streamlining. I hope this takes place. I think that when the Attorney General says that the limit of 

$175,000 obviously is high enough because none of the three parties spent up to the full $175,000. I 

should like to point out to him that certainly in the case of the Liberal Party, we didn’t approach that 

figure too closely for the simple reason that we were afraid to because of the difficulty we would find 

ourselves in if we exceeded that amount. As anyone who has been involved in an election knows, that it 

is extremely difficult to control expenditures to within even a few thousand dollars in a provincial party. 

Once the writ is issued and the election is on, and people are letting ads phoning and saying run that ad 

three more times, change it or take it off, or put it in a better time slot, it becomes very difficult to 

control with any accuracy the amount you spend. I am sure all parties did the same we did and left 

ourselves a pretty healthy cushion so that we would not find ourselves running afoul of the law. 

 

I would not want it to go on record to say that I think the $175,000 is adequate, I don’t think it is. I 

always view 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

490 

with suspicion, a great deal of suspicion whenever the Government, any government, most especially 

the NDP Government start to tinker with The Election Act. I think it must be recognized and is 

recognized that as we approach an election, whether it is a by-election or a general election, the 

government of the day has a fantastic edge, they have the levers of power, they have the normal, 

abnormal advertising that takes place with government programs, and about Crown corporations. Where 

the line is drawn between what is good solid advertising on behalf of the Crown corporation, or proper 

dissemination of information on behalf of the government and political propaganda, that line has never 

been established and I don’t have to remind the people of Saskatchewan that the Members opposite are 

past masters along with their Montreal advertising agency, Dunsky’s at turning what is taxpayers’ 

money, what should be just normal advertising to acquaint people with programs and to talk about 

Crown corporations into political propaganda, they are past masters. 

 

I will use an example right now of an apparent step up in the advertising about potash, potash ads seem 

to be stepped up a good deal lately. SEDCO, in I think a hopeless effort to reclaim, beef up its tattered 

reputation is doing what appears to be even more advertising than has been the case in the past. Now 

whether this is leading up to a by-election in Sutherland, I don’t know. But the suspicion is always there. 

 

I think that the ceiling placed on this Act is too low in this bill before us. The reason I say it is too low is 

again the Government has the edge to begin with and they use that edge. The Government’s edge gets 

bigger all the time, their advantage gets bigger all the time as they hire more people and they launch 

more programs and give more money to Crown corporations and to the various departments to advertise 

in every form, pamphlets, letters, mailouts, television ads, newspaper ads and so on, that their edge 

grows all the time. 

 

In a general election if you use television, it covers many provincial constituencies and the cost could be 

spread over many provincial constituencies. This is not true in the case of a by-election, there will be a 

by-election in Sutherland, we all use the television and the radio, and the cost is just as high as if it was a 

general election. Yet the effects are spread over probably 15 or 20 provincial constituencies, but the 

whole cost of the by-election must be charged, as at the passing of this bill, and I am sure it will pass, to 

that constituency. I sincerely feel that the ceiling is too low. A suggested amendment outlined by the 

Attorney General helps, it is better than it was. I still hope that when he comes to look at the bill that he 

will even allow a larger amount than $1 per constituent, $1 per voter or $10,000 whichever is the higher. 

 

I think we ought to remember this that if you trace the history of by-elections or elections in 

Saskatchewan, there was no limit on the spending by any political party. I am not aware of any case, 

however the election went, whether it went for the government of the day or against the government of 

the day or for the Opposition or however it went, that the success in an election or a by-election ever 

could be traced to the party, the success of that by-election or election could be traced to that party that 

spent the most money. In other words, I have never been convinced that the spending of money has 

thwarted the normal will of the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

491 

I am extremely suspicious when a government in a very sanctimonious way as this Government does, 

we are going to put limits, but the limits are on whom? They are on the Opposition, because there is 

literally no limit on the number of civil servants who will be prowling around Sutherland from now until 

the by-election is called, until that election is held. There is no limit as to the mailouts the Ministers will 

find it incumbent on themselves to suddenly mail out, and Sutherland will be the target for a great many 

of those mailouts. There is no limit on that, they have the public purse. This leads me to a point that I am 

going to ask the Attorney General to consider. 

 

If the Attorney General considered bringing in a further amendment, then I think in spite of our 

suspicions and a feeling that this particular bill is not necessary, in spite of that, we will support this bill. 

If the Attorney General will bring in a further amendment limiting government and Crown corporation 

advertising after a writ is issued in a by-election, in the same manner that it is now limited when a 

general election is called. When a general election is called and we brought this point up when the 

present Election Act was brought in, the Government acceded to it, which I appreciated. When the writ 

is issued, all government advertising must cease, and Crown corporation advertising must cease, except 

what is considered normal for the hiring of people or for announcements by the Telephone or the Power 

Corporation. I can’t say that in the last election any Crown corporation or government department did do 

anything that I could have any complaint with or any fairminded person could have any complaint with. 

They followed not only the letter of the law, they followed the spirit of the law. That was a help, it 

meant that one of the edges, one of the advantages the Government had was at least taken away from 

them from the time the writ was issued to the election. 

 

I would ask the Attorney General to consider bringing in a House amendment to do the same thing in 

regard to a by-election. I think this is fair and reasonable. If he will do this, I say again we view what 

they are doing with suspicion, we think the ceiling is too low. His suggested amendment is going to 

make it better, and more practical. I hope that he will consider going even further than he has, he said he 

will today. But if he would bring in that further amendment, limiting government advertising and Crown 

corporation advertising, after the writ is issued in the by-election, then I can say that we in the official 

Opposition will support this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B. Allen (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this bill. In doing so my remarks will 

be brief. I feel, and I feel this in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that there have been a number of issues raised 

in my mind about the principles of this bill. There was an article in the Star-Phoenix yesterday, it dealt 

with campaign contributions, it was under a headline that read, “Cowley requests A.G. Ratio Donation.” 

Perhaps other Members have seen the article. I’ll just quote a small section from the article, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Former Saskatoon Star-Phoenix reporter Norma Greenaway said Monday, a Liberal candidate in 

Saskatoon during the last provincial election showed her a cheque for $100 campaign contribution 

from the Star-Phoenix. The candidate showed her the cheque 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

492 

after she had interviewed him for the paper saying, ‘Even your company supports me,’ Greenaway 

said. 

 

Jim Struthers, executive vice-president of Armadale Publishers Limited which owns the Star-Phoenix 

said Monday, any contributions made by the newspaper would be disclosed if required under the 

election laws. I frankly don’t think that any contributions that are made that are not subject to the 

requirements for disclosure are anybody’s business, he said. Struthers declined to say whether the 

Star-Phoenix had made campaign donations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the second revelation in a couple of days that the media are making political 

contributions to selected political parties. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it sincerely that these revelations raise a fundamental question in 

the public’s mind. The question that it raises in the public’s mind is this: can the media who are trustees, 

in effect, of the public’s right to receive information maintain their integrity to report the news fairly, if 

they are giving contributions to selected political parties. If they select one candidate, or one party, as 

apparently they did in Saskatoon, and I heard it was Saskatoon-Riversdale and perhaps somebody could 

(Struthers or somebody): clarify that. If they did that in an attempt to defeat the Attorney General, how 

does this affect the public’s attitude toward the media? Mr. Struthers says he did not have to say whether 

the Star-Phoenix campaigned against the Attorney General or not, by our present law he is right. He is 

absolutely right. He doesn’t have to report this contribution. But if Mr. Struthers was an ordinary 

businessman, an ordinary citizen in Saskatoon, and made a contribution under $100, I wouldn’t have any 

real quarrel with that. I think that is quite right and quite proper. But I am not convinced that Mr. 

Struthers and company aren’t in a different class if I can put it that way. He speaks for major daily 

newspapers in this province. I believe that we should at least have a closer look at that kind of donation. 

 

I call, Mr. Speaker, on the Star-Phoenix and the other media to come clean, call on them to let the public 

know what the facts are, whom they contributed to. I don’t know perhaps they contributed to some of 

our candidates as well . . . 

 

Miss Clifford: — You better check if they . . . 

 

Mr. Allen: — . . . Well I don’t know if they have, and I don’t think anybody knows if they have. But 

revelations I think that have been substantiated have been made that they are making these kinds of 

contributions. I think that they should come clean. I believe that they should let the people know exactly 

what has taken place. I believe that this is the only way, the only avenue, that the media has open to 

them now to restore the public’s confidence in them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps we as legislators as well should be looking at a new approach to how election Acts 

affect the media contributions. Given the trustee role that the media plays in a free society, I believe that 

we do need a new approach and that we should be having a closer look at it. I call once again on the 

media to come clean, to give us the facts, to tell 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

493 

us how much and what parties, what candidates they contributed to in the last election. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What about The Commonwealth, you think they should come clean? 

 

Mr. Allen: — Yes. Fine, absolutely, all the media should do that. Further, Mr. Speaker, I call on the 

Attorney General and the Government to sit down with the media in this province and come up with 

guidelines that will restore some confidence that the media are reporting the news fairly, and I am not 

saying that they aren’t Mr. Speaker, I am not saying that they aren’t doing that. But I am saying that 

with recent revelations there are many people in the province who would begin to question a newspaper 

which attacks the Attorney General in editorials and is also contributing to his opponent in Saskatoon 

Riversdale, some people might begin to question whether or not that newspaper’s prime purpose was to 

defeat our illustrious Attorney General. 

 

With those few brief remarks, I will say I will go along with the bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I can only say that if it was not the objective of 

the newspaper in Saskatoon to do whatever it could to defeat the Attorney General in the last election, it 

sure as hell should have been. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, frankly I am getting a little tired of this witch hunt on the media that has 

been going on the last couple of days. Frankly, I don’t know why anybody in our party should have any 

great love for the media because, I think any of you — at least those of you in southern Saskatchewan, I 

don’t get a chance to read the northern papers that often. But anybody who has read the Leader-Post for 

the past year, I defy you to find one issue of the Leader-Post that somewhere, somehow on the first three 

to four pages doesn’t shift the knife right into the Liberal Party and give it a twist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Nonetheless . . . Mr. Speaker, this heckling is bothering me could I have some quiet. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I sympathize with the Member that his comments should be heard, he should be given 

an opportunity to make them. And I would take this opportunity to remind the Member that it is Bill 19, 

The Election Act, and not contributions. I know that the Member is trying to stay within the principle of 

the bill. This is what I want to caution the Member on. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I shall certainly stay in exactly the same parameters as the speakers 

previous stayed within. Frankly, 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

494 

Mr. Speaker, I was not particularly impressed with the procedures used in the last election for financial 

contributions and I don’t intend to go into names or documents. But I did take a look at the financial 

statements submitted by some candidates, some MLAs. And it was a very common procedure to see a 

very sizeable donation if I may use for example without being specific, say the NDP Women’s League 

or the Conservative Ladies Association or the Liberal such and such. These were taken and accepted as 

authentic campaign donations and yet where did these organizations, obviously subsidiaries of the major 

political parties, where did they acquire these funds? I see no evidence that they ever were investigated 

and I see no reason why they should have been. 

 

Frankly, I really wonder if each paper that was submitted by each candidate, I have to say was it worth 

the paper it was written on. I can say that mine was. I don’t know how many others were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may go back to the comments that the previous speaker made. If the Attorney General 

should ever sit down and set any guidelines on the media, I certainly hope that the media would do 

something that it certainly hasn’t done since my time in this Legislature, stand up on its heels and fight 

this Government. Because this Government has had better than a fair break from the media. Of course 

the ones that have had the real honeymoon, an unbelievable honeymoon for doing nothing are my 

friends to the left. I would think they would have the most to lose. But this witchhunt that is going on 

about who gave what from the press, its relevance totally escapes me. If we are going to get down to this 

stage of the game where we are going to have limits proposed on the media, how about limits proposed 

on what unions can contribute to the NDP. Whether it be in cash or whether it be in very highly paid, 

highly skilled organizers. Let’s do the whole thing if we are going to go that far. Because when we don’t 

have a media that is free to do whatever they want, as I say they have sure been doing it to the Liberal 

Party this past year and one-half. But I would be the first to defend their right to do so because if you 

don’t have the press watching government, then you have got fascism or you have got communism or 

call it whatever you want. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, I would hope that the comments that have just come from the back bench will be 

ignored. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Attorney General knows that we do have 

some qualms about parts of The Election Act. I would go a step further than the Leader of the 

Opposition when he mentions the Government certainly does have a conceded advantage over the 

Opposition parties and that is they are using the Crown corporations in advertising continually every 

day. I would go a step further because once the writ is dropped and even with an amendment to restrain 

the government from advertising they still have the advantage of using materials which have been 

brought together, and they can purchase it the same as we can at cost through the Legislative Buildings. 

The only thing is that most of this advertising is slanted towards the Government and the party could use 

this and therefore they do gain an advantage there too. 

 

The Member for Nipawin has something to say on this tomorrow, I would therefore beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

495 

 

ERROR IN PRESENTING SNOWMOBILE ACT — BILL 22 AND BILL 33 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Earlier today, there was some question raised as to the passage of Bill 33, An Act to 

amend The Snowmobile Act, 1973 (2):, as being a bill which had been passed in error. However, it is 

my judgment that the Bill has passed second reading and has been sent to Committee. The question 

before the House is, facing the House Leader is, how shall Bill 22 be brought forward. 

 

I believe there are two options open to the House here. The first option is to leave Bill 33 as is, agreed to 

in principle in second reading and ready for consideration in Committee of the whole, then call Bill 22 

for consideration in the normal manner. 

 

The second option which is open to the House, is to have someone move a motion by leave rescinding 

all the proceedings today regarding Bill 33. Bill 33 will then return to the category of bills ready for 

second reading, and then the House Leader could call Bill 22 and deal with it in a routine manner. It 

should be noted at this time that the Votes and Proceedings will show Bill 33 as having been passed and 

later than an order rescinding the proceedings of second reading and sending it to Committee. 

 

The option is before the House and the House must decide which to do. I will end it with a brief 

quotation from Erskine May, where it says on page 376: 

 

Proceedings null and void — An order declaring proceedings to be null and void is employed where 

there has been an inadvertence or some form of irregularity in procedure. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, as much as I know all Members of the House will support Bill 33, and 

the one that we passed in error, I don’t think that is the way we should go, because I am sure that there 

will be some Members who will want to express their opinions on it. Therefore, I am choosing the 

second option that you have outlined. 

 

I would move, seconded by my colleague, the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Transport policy, Mr. 

MacMurchy, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That all of the proceedings on Bill 33 — An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act, 1973 (2): taken this 

day Wednesday, December 1, 1976 be declared null and void. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 
 

NIGHT SITTINGS 
 

Mr. Romanow: — I should like to introduce a motion which gives us night sittings for tonight. I would 

like to move, seconded by my colleague, Mr. MacMurchy, by leave of the Assembly: 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

496 

 

That on Wednesday, December 1, 1976, Rule 3(3): be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly 

may be continued from 7:00 o’clock p.m. until 9:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

WITHDRAWAL OF UNPARLIAMENTARY REMARKS 
 

Mr. Pepper (Chairman of Committee of the Whole): — Mr. Speaker, during the consideration of Bill 

23, the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher): used certain unparliamentary remarks disrespectful 

to the Chair, which the Member refused to withdraw. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Based on the Chairman of the Committee’s report I would ask the Member for 

Thunder Creek to withdraw the unparliamentary remarks that he made in the Committee. 

 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, again as I indicated to the Chairman, I would like to indicate to 

you, I am a freshman MLA and I do not pretend that I have had instant grasp of all the rules of 

parliamentary procedure. Very roughly paraphrased, I attempted to make a motion which the Chairman 

indicated was out of order. The Chairman indicated and I stand to be corrected that the amendment, the 

motion must be made under a specific clause or subsection of the bill. Then in ignorance or whatever 

you care to term it, I asked the Chairman to tell me specifically where this option, or amendment would 

fit in. After making this ruling the Chairman would not tell me. As I say, Mr. Speaker, I do not pretend 

to, just because I happened to win in a local election, that instantaneously I have grasped all the rules of 

parliamentary procedure. I mean no disrespect to the institutions of this Legislature, yet at the same time 

I think the point was valid. If you tell me that I am incorrect, that the Chairman should have told me 

specifically what clause or subsection that this motion would be appropriate. Therefore this led to the 

exchange. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member’s explanation did not constitute a withdrawal. I am unaware of what 

happened in the Committee and I am not particularly concerned how the Committee conducts itself 

because that is the job of the Committee and the Chairman. If it is reported to me that an 

unparliamentary expression was expressed in Committee, the obvious next higher level to go to is to call 

in the Speaker and have the matter dealt with. Regardless of the Member’s admission of not knowing 

where the amendment should go that doesn’t constitute a withdrawal and I ask the Member to withdraw 

the unparliamentary comment. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In that case, Mr. Speaker, while I refused to do it for the Chairman, in deference to 

the Speaker and to the higher authority, I shall therefore withdraw. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then this Assembly is in the position to accept your withdrawal. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

497 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 

(Attorney General): that Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Election Act, 1971 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks to 

address to this particular bill. I have no objection at all to bringing by-elections under The Election Act 

and to limiting the expenditures by political parties and by candidates in by-elections just as we have 

done in the past for elections. This is a commendable effort and it is commendable that the Government 

has brought this in the light and prior to a by-election which has been necessitated recently. However, a 

by-election is a different animal than an election. In a political party, whether it is on the Government 

side of the House or the Opposition side of the House has unique problems during the course of a 

by-election. The problems that I want to relate this evening and relate specifically to this Bill is one of 

the tremendous cost of production. This is not the cost of advertising but the cost of production for 

television, for radio, for newspapers and so on that every party experiences. That the NDP experienced 

in the last election, that the Liberals experienced in the last election and the Conservatives experienced 

in the last election. 

 

Production costs during the course of an election can be spread over 61 constituencies. Because 

production costs apply to 61 constituencies they don’t apply constituency by constituency. Production 

costs, putting together the film necessary for a television shot, or radio time, or a newspaper ad, can be 

applied province wide during the course of an election. But during the course of a by-election which 

happens significantly after an election usually in which the production costs that were spent during the 

election are now no longer usable, are significant indeed and are going to cost each party a great deal of 

money. 

 

Now I suggest that at by-election time the government of the province has in the production cost area a 

very significant benefit or gain in addition to the normal benefits derived from being in government. 

Normal benefits being the statements that can be issued by Cabinet Ministers, announcements which can 

be made, the natural press reaction to events that occur during the course of a writ. These are natural 

events that occur that give the government an advantage over the Opposition parties and these 

advantages I don’t think can be dealt with. Certainly I understand as part of this latest Act that 

government advertising will be prevented during the course of a writ and that’s a good thing. But these 

are natural advantages. What you might call an unnatural advantage occurs in the fact that film crews 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan, photographers employed by the Government of 

Saskatchewan are taking pictures of the Leader of the Government Party, of the Cabinet Ministers of the 

Government Party, and it is our understanding that these production facilities, a radio room downstairs, 

for example, and the production from that are made available to anyone, to the Members of the 

Legislature, to the Opposition or to the Government on the basis of the cost of film. In other words, no 

production time is included whatsoever. No production costs 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

498 

are included whatsoever. These are available, with preference if you want, towards Government 

Members because it is natural and normal that these employees of Government should be taking 

photographs of Government Cabinet Ministers and Government situations doing their job on behalf of 

the people and that’s normal. 

 

Now we suggested prior to the introduction of this bill a solution which this Assembly should definitely 

consider. The solution is not to raise the spending one dime, not to raise the amount of spending on a 

by-election or a general election one dime from that proposed in this amendment and that proposed in 

The Election Act. The solution that we suggest here is that parties should be able to make their 

determination as to whether they spend the total allotment considered under the amendment and under 

the Act and should be able to make their decision as to whether they spend their money at by-election 

time or at election time. By-elections are important to all of us. By-elections are important, however, 

even more so to the Opposition than they are to the Government. Because the next by-election for 

example in the Province of Saskatchewan will not change the Government of the Province of 

Saskatchewan but it could indicate to the people of this province, all the people in the province, it could 

indicate a dissatisfaction with the Government’s policies. It could, and it’s an opportunity for the 

Opposition parties to present its case to the people of that constituency in such a way as to attempt, if 

you want, to get them to react to the Government’s policies that they have introduced since the last 

general election. And it is a very important event for the Opposition, perhaps even more so than the 

Government. 

 

We don’t have the opportunity to get the production costs provided for us by Government staff and I 

know it has been suggested that the Government has never used these production facilities, they are 

nevertheless there, they are nevertheless available to the Government for their use during the course of a 

by-election. By-election expenditures haven’t been limited. And there may be the temptation on behalf 

of the Government to use that film, to use those production facilities. There may be a temptation. The 

Minister for Industry shakes his head when I say there may be that temptation there. Maybe. 

 

What we are suggesting is this, supposing there are two by-elections and you’ve allocated $11,500 to 

each party for expenditures for each by-election. That’s $23,000, so that means the total election 

expense by the party if there are only two by-elections between elections is going to be $175,000 in the 

Act, plus the $23,000 for the by-election. What we have suggested is, okay, that’s $198,000. Let each 

party determine how much it will spend on the by-election and how much it will spend on the general. 

And if it wants to spend $20,000 on production costs during the course of a by-election, then it only has 

$150,000 left to spend on a general election. It is limiting the expense but it’s allowing each party the 

flexibility that is needed to bring into account the tremendous costs of production that may have to be 

spent during the course of a by-election and are spent during the course of a general election. 

 

Now if it is the purpose of this bill to limit that in this particular Act to the cost of producing these ads, 

we have no objection to that either. If you want to limit the 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

499 

expenditure on actual ads based on TV by the way you have done in this amendment, we don’t object to 

that. To limit the amount of money spent on advertising in the newspaper, a specific ad or a specific 

number of ads in the newspaper, the actual money spent on advertising, that’s fine. But what we are 

asking for, and I think rationally, is a flexibility in the production of advertising for by-elections that we 

have during a general election that we will not have during a by-election if this Act is passed. I suggest 

that each of the Members on the Government side of the House at this point try to remember what it was 

like and what it is going to be like when you are sitting on the Opposition side of the bench. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I’ll be too old to. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well, try to remember, Mr. Minister of Social Services, try to remember. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief in rebuttal. First of all the 

Leader of the Opposition from the Liberal Party (Mr. Steuart): wanted us to consider an additional 

House amendment with respect to the publicity that a government may engage in during a by-election 

period. Now I think that this is a worthwhile suggestion we will be incorporating in the House 

amendments the question of the amount of expenditure that a government can make during a by-election 

period. 

 

There is a difficulty here, there are a number of difficulties here. For example, in a particular by-election 

in a particular area, we think that government advertising shouldn’t be stopped through the entire 

province. The key to this whole thing is to make sure that nothing that government does by way of 

publicity is used to jeopardize the actual political campaign that is going on in a by-election and 

accordingly the House amendment that I have asked the department people to draft will try to achieve 

the goals of the Leader of the Opposition and I am sure the Leader of the Conservative Party as well, 

limiting publicity of government in the by-election but still allowing a government to carry on in its 

day-to-day normal activities with respect to places outside of the constituency affected. In any event I 

invite the Opposition parties to take a look at the proposed amendment and we can work from there. 

 

I think the second point raised by the Leader of the Conservative Party which in a nutshell I think has to 

be interpreted as an argument for funds or for a higher type of ceiling for funds with respect to 

by-election campaigns. Whether you tag it on to the $175,000 or whatever I think that that’s the way the 

Leader of the Conservative Party’s argument boils down. He argues that the proposed amendment of 

$10,000 or $1 per voter is really not sufficient. He argues as a corollary that it ties the hands of the 

individual party in setting its own priorities as to what it wants to spend the money on. 

 

I guess these are really very difficult decisions to make because they depend in some ways on a 

subjective decision taken by each individual or each individual party. If you take the $175,000 general 

ceiling which a party has in a general election and divide that by 61 ridings, roughly calculating it you 

are looking at about $2900 per riding that a provincial party can spend in a general election, certainly as 

according to the 1975 election. You add to that, $10,000 that the 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

500 

candidate can spend and you are looking at about $13,000 or $15,000 if there is a higher voter 

registration in the constituency. On our proposed House amendment formula applying it to Saskatoon 

Sutherland, there would be anywhere from $14,000 to $16,000 allowed for the candidate and $14,000 to 

$16,000 for the provincial party on the estimates that one has of the voter stance in Saskatoon 

Sutherland, or a swing of about $28,000 to $32,000. And that is substantially higher in a by-election 

than one would get for a general election for an individual constituency. I agree it breaks down a bit 

because in some ridings the amount isn’t equal to 29, it’s higher or lower in some ridings. But basically 

the figure is a fairly reasonable one. 

 

I would simply say that while I have some sympathy for the Conservative leader’s argument that I can’t 

accept it because I believe that his argument virtually amounts to an argument for no ceiling for 

by-elections. It is true that in theory there is a ceiling, a ceiling of $175,000 and there is in theory a 

practical ceiling that a provincial party will be motivated to self-impose on it, knowing at the other end 

of the general election it may be handicapped somewhat. But, basically it is still a prescription for no 

ceiling and the whole policy of the Act is to have a ceiling and have ground rules for the parties so that 

all three or four parties whatever happens have a roof and a known roof by which they can make these 

expenditures. I guess I won’t convince the Leader of the Conservative Party that we are giving all parties 

sufficient funds but I believe that on a $28,000 to $32,000 ceiling, using Sutherland as an example, that 

a good by-election should be run by the candidate and the political party in the individual riding. So I 

think at this stage of the game I am not free to accept the suggestion made by the Conservative Leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few words of rebuttal, I move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister 

of Finance): that Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few very brief remarks to make about this particular Act. I can 

accept the intent of the Act which is to bring the taxation regulations more in line with Ottawa as I 

understand. What I cannot accept in this Act is providing to the Cabinet absolute discretionary taxation 

powers that this particular Act provides. As I understand this particular bill it is as basic and as 

fundamental a principle as that which has been fought out a hundred years ago and a hundred and fifty 

years ago in Britain and that is taxation without representation. 

 

This bill, the way it is written enables the Cabinet to set the rules of taxation in Saskatchewan, without 

further reference to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

This bill is a dramatic change, a dramatic change in the way our taxation rules are established. 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

501 

Now I’m not going to go through this evening, because obviously we’re not going to change the minds 

of the Members opposite to their continued policies of adding more and greater powers into the Cabinet, 

providing less and less powers to the Legislative Assembly, less and less powers to municipalities, less 

and less powers to everyone else, to individuals. This taxation without representation is as old an 

argument as exists in democratic countries. When we take the power to set taxation rules away from the 

Legislature and put it in the hands of the Cabinet we are usurping one of the very basic and fundamental 

rules of this Legislature and that is that it is incumbent upon the representatives to decide taxation levels, 

policies for the people that we represent. 

 

This bill enables the Government, or the Cabinet to do exactly the reverse. Pass regulations and rules as 

they relate to taxation in Saskatchewan without further reference to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to support this bill. If there was any way I thought we could convince the 

Members opposite to make a change in it, I would try to do so tonight, but it is in keeping with their 

continued policy to strengthen the support, the strength of the Cabinet to the detriment of this 

Legislature. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The Hon. Member got so excited he’s trying to light a fire. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I apologize to the Speaker and the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, if I may say the Hon. Member has completely missed the point of this 

bill, which is not the first time he’s missed the intent and purpose. This bill does not give the 

Government any power to tax. Not at all. What this bill does, is provide by regulation to make royalties 

that are paid by industry to be deductible from income tax. What the Hon. Member has said is just 

totally incorrect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may recall that last year we amended this bill to be consistent with the federal income 

tax of what is allowable and to ensure that the interpretations and the definitions of our Act are identical 

to that of the Government of Canada but no sooner we pass the bill, the Federal Parliament amended the 

legislation and therefore, our legislation which incorporated their intent and their interpretations became 

obsolete at the present time. 

 

Now deductions are there in rebates for income tax purposes are to be paid to industry and we can’t do it 

because the Federal Government changed the interpretation and definition. It’s not money coming to the 

Government, the Government is not gaining anything from this. What it is, is to rebate and to allow the 

royalties for industry and individuals. 

 

Now how the Hon. Member can come up with a conclusion that this gives the Government power to tax, 

it’s beyond me, but this is not the first time the Hon. Member has not read the legislation properly and 

confused himself and tried to confuse the House. The intent is very clear. Under Section 5, to make 



 
December 1, 1976 
 

502 

regulations not inconsistent with the provisions and intent of the section. Now if the regulations are 

made that are contrary or in any way inconsistent, then that regulation becomes itself subject to 

challenge by the law, because the law says so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member should read the bill. He now has a lawyer in his caucus, 

perhaps the two of them might consult. 

 

Miss Clifford: — They don’t talk to each other. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Perhaps they don’t. We are not trying to gain anything from this and the only thing is, 

so long as the Government of Canada, and I’m not quarrelling with them because the interpretations and 

definitions sometimes aren’t able to be changed and all we’re trying to do is to conform and the only 

way you can do it is when they change, every time we have to bring in an amendment, as we did last 

year. No sooner we brought in the amendment, two weeks after the House rose, it was obsolete. Now out 

of that situation the Member reaching the conclusion that this is somehow giving us the power to tax 

people without power, taxation without representation, all these allegations are just sheer nonsense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and the bill read a second time on the following Recorded Division: 

 

YEAS — 34 
 

Pepper Larson Vickar 

Thibault Whelan Johnson 

Smishek Kaeding Thompson 

Romanow Kwasnica Banda 

Messer McNeill Stodalka 

Byers Feschuk Clifford 

Kramer Faris Wiebe 

Kowalchuk Rolfes Cameron 

Matsalla Cowley Anderson 

Robbins Tchorzewski McMillan 

MacMurchy Shillington Thatcher 

Mostoway   

 

NAYS — 6 
 

Collver Lane Ham 

Larter Birkbeck Katzman 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. E.L. Cowley (Provincial Secretary): moved second reading of Bill No. 37 — An Act to amend 

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill has a very brief amendment to The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968. 

The board of the 



 
December 1, 1976 

 

503 

Municipal Hail Insurance Association fixes each year the basic amount of indemnity payable for losses 

from hail. The amount may not be more than $10 an acre and the basic amount is the amount of 

indemnity provided to all persons who participate in the plan. The basic amount fixed by the board has 

never exceeded $6 per acre. Participants of the plan however, may apply for an indemnity in addition to 

the basic amount. The additional indemnity which must also be fixed by the board is presently limited 

by legislation to $14 per acre. 

 

The amendment proposed increases the maximum amount of additional indemnity to $25 per acre as 

requested by the municipal hail people. They argue that this is more reasonable in the light of present 

value of crops. 

 

I am pleased to report that the Municipal Hail Insurance Association remains in a strong financial 

position. Its surplus and reserves as at January 31, 1976 exceeded $16 million. Their reserves provided 

the Association with investment income of over $1 million last year. Income from reserves tends to 

stabilize premium rates while the reserve itself provides an important measure of safety or protection in 

the event of severe losses. 

 

In view of the strong financial position the Association in my opinion has the capacity to provide the 

additional insurance coverage proposed in this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I brought this forward at this time because the Municipal Hail Association asked that if it 

was possible they would like this brief amendment passed at this Session so that they could make the 

necessary arrangements for the next crop year. It’s not really that they are expecting hail between now 

and February or March, but, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 37, An Act to 

amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a few brief words in regard to this bill. I think it’s a very timely 

and well deserved bill in terms of municipal hail. There’s no doubt that many farmers throughout the 

province who have as a matter of habit been purchasing hail insurance through the municipal people, 

now realize that the amount that they’ve been limited to, does not adequately meet the needs which they 

now feel that they have. So in effect this bill allows them to compete and to provide the type of coverage 

that farmers throughout the province desire and I’m very pleased to see this small amendment being 

made. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, our party too in checking out this Act that was brought in 

tonight, we find that this is in very good order. I use this insurance myself and according to the 

municipalities it’s very timely and we too support it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:30 o’clock p.m. 


