
























































Hansard: April 15, 1976


1123 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

25th Day 
 

Thursday, April 15, 1976. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. B. Allen (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce this afternoon to you and 
through you to the Members of the Assembly, a group of 66 Grade Eight students from Wascana School 
in my constituency. I am particularly delighted to introduce this group to the House because, Mr. 
Speaker, we have many fine groups of students who come to visit us from day to day in this Assembly 
and I assure you that none are finer than the group from Wascana School. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Jim Adair, and John Harvey. I think, Mr. Speaker, that most of 
us would agree that it is encouraging for people in public life to see the interest that our young people 
are taking in the parliamentary and democratic system under which we operate. I would like to welcome 
you this afternoon to the House and I look forward to meeting with you a little later. The students are in 
the Speaker’s Gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. A. Blakeney (Regina Elphinstone): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might join with the Member for 
Rosemont in extending a greeting to the students from Wascana School. It is in his constituency, by a 
full hundred feet would be my estimate. It is the school which serves much of the constituency of 
Elphinstone. Two of my children go to that school and I share everything he said about what a good 
school it is. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses’ Strike 
 
Mr. D. G. Steuart (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to direct a question to the 
Minister of Health, but again he isn’t here. I’d like to direct it then to the Premier. There is a great deal 
of talk about the possibility of a nurses’ strike in all or part of the province, it could be most serious. I 
wonder if the Premier is aware of what action the Government is taking (a) to head off the strike and, (b) 
in the case of the strike to protect the patients in our hospitals? 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1124 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member refers to negotiations between the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses and representatives of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association. My understanding is 
similar to that of the Hon. Member, that the negotiations are at a difficult stage and that the strike vote 
has been taken. As I understand it, the union has been authorized to call a strike at their discretion. It is 
my understanding also that the strike is not or may not be imminent. It is my further understanding that 
representatives of the Department of Public Health are attempting to head off any such strike by 
discussions with both parties. I am also advised that a conciliation officer has been appointed. I am not 
fully aware of emergency plans which may have been made in the event of a strike. But it is also my 
understanding that the Department of Public Health is turning its attention to that matter. 
 
Mr. Steuart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Premier in the light of the settlement 
made with the teachers which ranged something around 20 per cent and a high of $3,300, would the 
Premier assure the House that he will have agreed with the Minister of Health and the Department of 
Health they could make available to the hospitals the kind of money necessary so that they could offer a 
similar, I don’t say exactly the same, but a similar generous settlement to the nurses who feel as strongly 
as the teachers do that they have fallen behind. Would he be prepared to take a new look at the budget 
for the hospitals, the SHSP, so that the hospital boards would be in a position to make as generous an 
offer to the nurses as has been given to the teachers of the province to avert this strike? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is yes, not that we will review the budget, but, yes, 
the funds can be provided to provide an offer as generous as that made to the teachers. It is my 
understanding, according to press reports (and I am not aware of this for sure) that the offer that has 
already been made by the employer would approximate that for which it is hoped they are prepared to 
settle, as the teachers were. 
 

Grid Road Weight Limits 
 
Mr. J. G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier in the 
absence of the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Last night the Minister of Municipal Affairs met with the 
executive of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. As a result of that meeting: is the 
Government now prepared to back off its previously stated policy on weight limits and load limits? 
Would the Government further be prepared to continue the grid road system for this year for the rural 
municipalities that have not yet completed their system? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member asks me questions specifically in his terms, as a result 
of the meeting between the Minister of Municipal Affairs and some others. I was not at the meeting. I 
will take the questions as notice. 
 
Mr. Lane: — A supplementary. I am advised at the meeting last night that the Association of Rural 
Municipalities denied 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1125 
 

supporting the weight limit and load limit policies as proposed by the Minister of Municipal Affairs and 
the Premier and the Cabinet. The Minister was so advised last night. In light of the contrary position 
taken and the indication from the Association of Rural Municipalities that they disagree with what the 
Minister said in the House, is the Government now prepared to withdraw that proposed load limit policy 
and if so, would you make that announcement today? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member knows that he is not entitled in the question to give 
information and then ask questions about it. He proceeded to do that. It is an improper question and I 
don’t propose to answer it. 
 

Saskatchewan Potash Corporation — 1976-1977 Estimates 
 
Mr. E. A. Berntson (Souris Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. In 
view of the fact that the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation has been formed, is there any reason to 
allocate funds in the 1976-77 Estimates under the Department of Finance for the advertising of 
Saskatchewan potash? 
 
Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t really quite get the question. You 
will have every opportunity to deal with the question during the consideration of the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The reason for this question is that we have been 
trying to get an answer during Estimates for the record. The question was, Mr. Speaker, is there any 
reason for the allocation of funds in the 1976-1977 Estimates under the Department of Finance for the 
advertising of Saskatchewan potash? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Next question. 
 

Increased Capital Borrowing — Reducing Credit Rating 
 
Mr. C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the Premier. 
On April 1, the Saskatchewan Government floated a bond issue of $75 million at 10¼ per cent on behalf 
of Sask Power. At approximately the same time, Manitoba Hydro floated a bond issue of about $40 
million at 8¾ per cent. Does this indicate to the Premier, that this province’s greatly increased capital 
borrowing is reducing the province’s credit rating? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is, shortly, No. I think the issues were very different. Ours 
were in Canadian funds, I believe theirs were in Euro-dollars. It was certainly not in Canadian funds, not 
in the Canadian money market, and is accordingly in my judgment not comparable. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Has the 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1126 
 

Mr. Thatcher: 
 
Government any intention of entering into the European money market, either for money to purchase a 
potash mine or for Sask Tel or Sask Power or any other Crown corporation? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — The answer is: we certainly do not exclude that possible source of funds. We believe 
that in general we should stay in that Canadian market where the exchange risks are less, but if it 
appears advantageous to assume that exchange risk in exchange for a lower interest rate, we are 
prepared to do it. We have no current plans for so doing. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier confirm or deny that top 
level Government officials have been in London and held either discussions or negotiations with various 
financial institutions and in particular with a firm that represents almost exclusively the Kingdom of 
Kuwait? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I have no knowledge of the alleged event which the Hon. Member refers to. I am not 
able to confirm it or deny it but I tentatively deny it on the basis of my knowledge. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier assure this House today 
that Arab funds will not be used either directly or indirectly in any potash purchase or for use in any 
other Crown corporation? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — I assuredly will not assure the Hon. Member of that. If Arab funds are cheaper we 
will borrow where it appears to be cheapest and most prudent. We will not select our lenders and I know 
they won’t select their borrowers. 
 

Legislation on Land Bank Commission 
 
Mr. R. H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Last 
fall with the opening of the session on November 12 the Throne Speech indicated that there would be 
legislation brought in this Session dealing with the Land Bank Commission. The question to the 
Minister of Agriculture is: can we expect that legislation this Session? 
 
Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think you will have to wait a few more 
days before the decision on that is made. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture. Will that 
legislation control the individual farmer who has sold land to the Land Bank and they are now leasing 
the same land back? Is that the nature . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Next question. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Wait until the legislation 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1127 
 

is brought down. 
 

Allow Potash Industry a Normal Profit 
 
Mr. E. C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I should like to address to the 
Minister in charge of the Department of Mineral Resources (Mr. Whelan) but I see he is not here so 
perhaps I could address it to the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation. 
 
According to the former Minister’s announcement yesterday on uranium royalty the Government is now 
taking into consideration the fact that private companies and private operators like to make a profit. It’s 
apparent in the uranium royalty structure that the profit incentive is taken into consideration. My 
question to the Minister is: you now realize this as far as the uranium industry is concerned, are you 
prepared to reassess your position as far as the potash industry is concerned and allow them a normal 
operating profit? 
 
Hon. E. L. Cowley (Minister of Potash Corporation): — Mr. Speaker, I must answer the Member that I 
think circumstances and situations, both with respect to the type of industry and with respect to the type 
of negotiations that the industry was prepared to carry on in uranium vis-à-vis potash, are different. With 
respect to the potash industry, we indicated at the time the reserve tax was brought down that we were 
prepared to consider variations and changes in the potash reserve tax, provided we were provided with 
the financial statements, which we were not. At the same time the uranium scale as the Member will 
know, is graduated, a sliding scale, and that in principle was said by the people in the potash industry to 
be unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Again, the Minister of Mineral Resources indicated 
yesterday, not here but on TV, that one of the reasons this agreement was made with the uranium 
industry, the major reason for it was that the uranium industry was prepared to divulge their financial 
statements. Now if the potash companies should change their position and divulge their financial 
statements to the Government or to you or to the Minister of Mineral Resources, are you prepared to 
change the reserve tax structure? 
 
Mr. Cowley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we certainly will take that under consideration in the unlikely event 
that we receive the financial statements. And if we do we will have to take into account the 
circumstances both prior to and after those statements being received. 
 
Mr. Malone: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister not agree with me, and is it 
not true that the reason that you handled the uranium industry in the manner that you did, was that 
exploration has not been completed to the same extent as the potash industry’s exploration and that the 
potash industries are here and are a captive group of the Government while the uranium . . . 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1128 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Next question. 
 

Spreading of Leafy Spurge 
 
Mr. L. W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Highways. Is not the 
Department of Highways responsible for the spreading of noxious weeds, leafy spurge in this case, from 
an infested Government gravel pit? 
 
Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Highways): — All I can say to that is: I don’t know what particular 
location he is referring to. If there is any property that is under the jurisdiction of the Department of 
Highways I would hope they would endeavor to keep the weeds under control as well as would any 
other citizen. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary. Then the Minister would agree that it is the responsibility of the 
Department of Highways to eradicate the noxious weed prior to removal of gravel? 
 
Mr. Kramer: — If the Member would be specific and tell me just where the location is; if he would 
give me the location I could give him an answer much easier than replying to something hypothetical as 
to just exactly when and where this may have occurred. I say again, the Department of Highways is 
subject to the same regulations as far as The Noxious Weeds Act is concerned as any other body. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Last supplementary. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Next question. 
 

Cable Communication 
 
Mr. E. F. A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to one 
of the few Ministers who decided to show up today. The Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Snippy. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Yes, it is a little snippy, isn’t it. You should attend the House from time to time. It is 
an interesting place. 
 
I wonder if the Minister would indicate the success or failure of his meeting recently with the Federal 
Minister of Communications and whether the Minister was successful in persuading Madame Sauvé that 
Saskatchewan should have a paramount right in cable communications within our own border in this 
province? 
 
Hon. E. B. Shillington (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — To answer your question in a strict sense, 
that was never an issue. The Government of Saskatchewan has not taken 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1129 
 

the view that the Province of Saskatchewan should exercise all jurisdiction with respect to cable TV. In 
general terms we do not quarrel with the view of the Federal Government as to what the constitutional 
jurisdiction is. Our main thrust has been the manner in which that jurisdiction is exercised. And to 
respond to your question it is difficult to gauge the success of our meetings because there were no 
conclusions drawn. We met, discussed the cable TV in Saskatchewan. It was a cordial meeting. The 
Federal Government appeared to be conciliatory and prepared to listen to the provincial point of view, 
but there were no conclusions drawn. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I understand this meeting was about ten days ago. 
Are further meetings planned with Madame Sauvé and were you the only provincial representative who 
met with the Minister at that time, or were there other Minister’s advancing similar policies at the same 
time? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There are no follow-up meetings planned by myself with Madame Sauvé. I was the 
only Minister present at that time but I can tell you that she plans to meet, or I understand she plans to 
seek similar meetings with the other provincial ministers. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The enunciated policy, as I understand it, has been 
that the Province of Saskatchewan might deny the use of the streets and lanes for cable if the cable 
application of the province by Sask Tel is refused. Is that still the policy of the Government, or would 
you make it possible if a private cable operator were given licence, would you make it possible for cable 
to come to Saskatchewan say by the end of ’77? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That is still the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Is it still the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan to deny the use of streets 
and lanes? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It is still the policy of the Government that if the licences were given under what is 
known as a partial system we would deny the use of the streets and lanes. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — A further supplementary. Would the Minister agree that only Saskatchewan and 
Quebec have this policy and that the other eight provinces are happy enough with the way that cable 
operates within the federal-provincial relations of the Dominion? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, I won’t admit that, other provinces in fact have adopted the position that 
Saskatchewan has. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Could I ask one last supplementary? Are you then saying if the parcel application is 
refused, that the 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1130 
 

position of the Government of Saskatchewan will be that cable will again be denied to the people of this 
province because of your activity? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, it is hypothetical and the whole question is much more complex than that. 
 
Mr. Lane: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister not admit that the reason that the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t have cable television is because of your blockading of attempts to get 
cable television? 
 

Questions on Porcupine Cubing Plant 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, some time ago the Hon. Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. 
Nelson) asked me some questions about the Porcupine Cubing Plant. I would like to respond to them 
now if I could, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The details of the loans that were guaranteed to the Porcupine Cubing Plant are fairly expensive. I will 
give them all to you if you wish. It isn’t clear from your question whether or not you wanted that. 
Perhaps if you prefer I will table the information, or perhaps I could just give it to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the Minister consider putting that information in a form that could be tabled? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Sure, if you would rather I will table the answer. 
 

Land Bank 
 
Mr. R. L. Collver (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 
of Agriculture. Do the regulations under the Land Bank Commission, at the moment, permit a father to 
sell to the Land Bank, the Land Bank then rent to the son, the son takes a job 300 miles away — a 
permanent job and the father farms the land? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — That is not a normal situation and there can be situations, I suppose, where the son 
would go away for a job for the winter. I wouldn’t assume that if a son went and took a permanent job 
away from home, I think that he would then be reneging on his lease and it might be a cause for 
cancellation. That would have to be considered. We would have to look at that. 
 
Mr. Collver: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister saying that that is not permitted 
under the lease and the regulations of the Land Bank Commission? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Well, the lease says that he must be farming as his full time occupation. He is 
permitted to take off-farm income or off-farm employment for a part of the year, but he must make 
farming his major occupation. 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1131 
 

Mr. Collver: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. What is the limitation on income from outside 
employment relative to income from farming? Is there any in the leases or the regulations? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — No, there is no limit to the amount he could earn off the farm as long as he is doing a 
good job of farming and taking care of his lease and making his payments, that is his privilege. 
 
Mr. Collver: — A further supplementary then, Mr. Speaker. In the Minister’s opinion then, I gather that 
the son could in fact earn $50,000 in a job outside farming and could earn $5,000 in farming, having 
paid . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Next question. 
 
Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. Is it now possible for a farmer then to 
sell land to the Land Bank and lease the land back to himself? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Yes, under certain circumstances. 
 
Mr. R. E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — A supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. Would 
he consider a teacher teaching in Saskatoon would have the right to have land under the Land Bank 250 
miles south? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I just might point out that the last three questions have been questions asking 
for information which is equally accessible to all Members by examining the regulations or the 
legislation and, therefore, on that basis, I rule the last three questioners out of order. 
 

SGIO Rates 
 
Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier. 
 
A short time ago I wrote to the Saskatchewan Prices and Compensation Board asking them if they 
would review the SGIO rates and other rates. I received a letter back today from Mr. Boychuk indicating 
that the SGIO rates and other Crown corporations are being reviewed and when a decision is made that 
they will then be made public. Would the Premier tell me what the Government is going to do now that 
all of the citizens of Saskatchewan are busy buying their licences at the SGIO rates that have not yet 
been approved, if the Prices and Compensation Board rejects the SGIO approval? Just exactly what is 
the Government of Saskatchewan going to do? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — That is clearly a hypothetical question and if the Board rejects, the problem will arise 
and we will advise you what we are going to do if the problem arises. 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1132 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — A supplementary question. Is what the Premier is saying, is that the Prices and 
Compensation Board are rubber-stamped and that the Cabinet will overrule it? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 

Conversion of Provincial Community Pastures 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is it true that the provincial community 
pastures are being converted into co-op pastures? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — We would like to see some of our community pastures being incorporated into and 
made up into co-op pastures. We think that we would like to see the farmers operate their own pasture 
system. So we are attempting in some cases where it is convenient to do so, to get these people to 
organize themselves into co-ops. In other cases we wouldn’t recommend that. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will this conversion provide more farmers with 
grazing privileges? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Well, there are regulations under which farmers can put cattle into co-op pastures at 
the present time and those same regulations would apply and I am sure that the local co-operative 
association, which was being formed, would be the ones who would be working for the benefit of their 
patrons and, therefore, I would expect that they would be responsible. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — What financial assistance would be available for these co-op pastures? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — I don’t recall the total extent of assistance to the co-op pastures, but there has been 
assistance in terms of providing grants for fencing and for corrals and that sort of thing. There has been a 
substantial amount of assistance in that area. 
 

Guaranteed Annual Income Plan 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance. We heard yesterday some references to the 
Guaranteed Annual Income Plan and the opinions of the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Has the Government done any estimates on the cost to the province of entering into the Guaranteed 
Annual Income Plan proposed at the meeting which you chose not to attend and, secondly, is the 
Minister aware that Ontario finds that the figures of the Federal Government are out by 300 per cent and 
their Minister of Finance believes that it will be three times more costly for the provinces and 4.4 times 
more costly by 1978 than the federal estimates? 
 
Have you done estimates and do you consider the federal figures correct? 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1133 
 

Hon. W. E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Hon. Member might direct that 
question more to the Minister of Social Services. Our Department does provide assistance to all the 
departments on these kinds of matters, but I have not had a report from my officials on the matter. 
Perhaps the Minister of Social Services may have some information. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Does the Minister of Social Services contemplate the question? What is the 
anticipated cost of the program that you told us yesterday you approved of personally, and do you accept 
the federal figures in light of the fact that Ontario says that they are wrong by 300 per cent? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — He said that yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don’t care what he said yesterday. The question is out of order. 
 

Conversion of Provincial Community Pastures 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is it true that money has been 
left out purposely of the Budget of the Department of Agriculture applicable to the community pastures 
so that the community pastures are not able to function and, therefore, forcing the community pastures 
into co-op pastures? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — No. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Then what are the prerequisites for co-op membership in the pastures? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — I’m sorry, I didn’t get the question. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — What are the prerequisites for co-op membership in the pastures? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Those regulations have been there for many years as to who can be a member of a 
co-op pasture and I’m sure that if the Member would examine the regulations he would find the 
prerequisites there. I’m sure that I couldn’t keep them in my head and I’m sure that you couldn’t either. I 
suggest that you go to the regulations and find out. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, is the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If you are not going to pursue the line that was followed by the Member for 
Moosomin, you can go ahead with the supplementary. 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1134 
 

Mr. Collver: — Supplementary question. Is the Minister aware that in the constituency of Nipawin that 
the community pasture is short funded and is not able to staff itself and therefore is being required to 
convert into a co-op pasture? 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — No, I’m not aware of that and I don’t think it’s probably true. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Question Period 
 
Mr. Malone: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, on the Question Period. In connection with the 
question that you cut me off on, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation, I 
would draw your attention to the fact that only yesterday we received the announcement from the 
Minister of Mineral Resources about the new uranium royalties situation. I think that it’s a legitimate 
comparison to talk about uranium royalties on one side, potash royalties on the other side and I merely 
asked the Minister, would he not agree . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m aware of what the Member asked the Minister and the point of the Member’s 
question I believe, if I’m not anticipating him, is why did I cut you off? 
 
Mr. Malone: — Right. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The reason I cut you off is because I judged it to be debatable. I think the record will 
show that. Next point. 
 
Mr. Malone: — Are you cutting me off now? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lane: — I’d like to raise what is becoming an obvious inconsistency, Mr. Speaker. The Member 
for Regina Wascana asked a question, you cut him off. It was getting too long and that was your ruling 
and yet when the Minister of Consumer Affairs was prepared to go into a long and five minute answer 
and reading it, you made no move to cut him off. Now when an Opposition Member gets up and starts 
getting long you cut him off . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Do I understand the Member’s Point of Order to be he wants to know why I 
didn’t cut the Minister of Consumer Affairs off? 
 
Mr. Lane: — How do you apply such rules consistently? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, we’ll deal with one rule at a time. Now if he wants to know why I didn’t cut the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs off, I’d be glad to tell him. 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1135 
 

Mr. Lane: — Fine. Tell me. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Because I didn’t judge him to be reading a long statement, he read a few lines, some 
Member said would the Minister table it. I asked the Minister if he would table it. He said, yes he would. 
End of incident. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the question was cut off at about 45 seconds into the question by the 
Opposition. He went over a minute and a half before you . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What question is the Member talking about? I don’t understand it. 
 
Mr. Lane: — The answer by the Cabinet Minister was a minute and a half before you moved to cut him 
off and you’re not applying the same rules to both. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Specifically, what question was the Member referring to? I don’t understand that. 
 
Mr. Lane: — The one by the Member for Regina Wascana. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Member for Regina Wascana on the question on cable television was entirely in 
order and was not cut off according to my records. Next Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, in my line of questioning to the Minister of Agriculture, I did have 
one further supplementary and you didn’t allow me that supplementary. I’m just wondering is that 
because I didn’t preface it with supplementary, Mr. Speaker? Is that an absolute necessity to say 
‘supplementary’ when I’m on a direct line of questioning? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the Member referring to the question about community pastures? 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The reason I cut the Member off was that I feel that the information he was seeking 
was the same type as other questioners had been seeking, i.e. information which is equally accessible to 
all Members of the House because it’s laid down in regulations and statutes. 
 
Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on a further Point of Order. I was led to believe by the guidelines laid 
down by the committee, that there would be no Points of Order entertained during Question Period, yet 
when the Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Nelson) stood up on a Point of Order, you did 
entertain that Point of Order which was to ask to table a document from the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs. 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1136 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t understand the point. I think the Member was offering to take the information 
in a tabled form. 
 
Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he did stand up on a Point of Order and you did entertain the Point of 
Order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, I don’t think it was raised as a Point of Order. Possibly it was. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize on a Point of Order, it was the Member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg whom you cut off and that time frame still applied, that you cut him off after 45 
seconds and yet you allowed the Minister to go on for some considerable length of time before you 
moved. Now, seemingly, and what my Point of Order is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What question was the Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg asking at the time? 
Perhaps you’d let the Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg make the Point of Order. 
 
Mr. Nelson: — On my Point of Order I was questioning policy of the Government and it was my 
understanding that that was your right in Question Period. I was ruled out of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Absolutely correct. It is right to ask the Government what their policy is. However, the 
Member was asking for information and I specified this, that it was equally accessible to all Members 
either through regulations or legislation. It’s very clear in the Interim Report that this is not a proper 
question for an oral question period. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, what the particular problem was with the question as I posed it, it 
almost seems to me that if it’s not possible to correlate to some extent and indicate what’s happening in 
other provinces, as if the Question Period will be limited to asking whether the Minister of Highways 
was aware that there are dandelions growing on some . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I gather the Member is asking why his question to the Minister of Social 
Services was cut off? About the Guaranteed Annual Income? 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The reason it was cut off was because you asked the Minister for the cost of his 
personal plan. That’s not a proper question for the oral question period. You can’t ask Members of the 
Cabinet what are their personal views. 
 
The second reason was that you were asking the Member to comment on another jurisdiction, i.e. 
Ontario, which is not really within the jurisdiction of the Minister. 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1137 
 

Mr. Merchant: — Could I just make some comment? Obviously there was some misunderstanding 
because all that I was referring to in reference to him personally is that he had yesterday indicated that 
he was in favor of the program, while that hadn’t gone through Cabinet as yet. But one then makes some 
reference to other jurisdictions and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that very frequently it will be necessary to 
say some province says this, do you agree; the Federal Government has said this, do you agree? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think we are getting into arguing whether I made the right decision or not. 
Maybe I made the wrong decision. I’ll stand on the record, whatever the record says. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Mr. Speaker, on a further Point of Order on the Point of Order period. Is it your 
intention to continue to allow Members to express further views on the questions in the Point of Order 
period to explain what they meant to say and to bring out their case more on the Point of Order period 
after the Question Period? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think that I have had unhappy experiences with that, I might say, from a personal 
point of view. Maybe it’s because I like to get into the debate. I find myself getting into the debate when 
I allow Members to express further views on their question, whether it was a legitimate question or not. I 
intend to allow them to put the Point of Order and I’ll tell them why I ruled it out and after that it’s just a 
question of whether the record bears me or the Member out. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Would you not feel then if in a Question Period, are you not taking the gamble that in 
the Point of Order period afterwards those questions that were not able to be posed that were ruled out of 
order in Question Period are subsequently going to be posed and answered by Members in the Point of 
Order period? And, while we, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if I might, that in the last three or four days 
one or two Members at least have used the Point of Order period to bring out further questions and to 
present their case a little bit more fully to this Assembly. If that is acceptable to Mr. Speaker, we would 
like to know so that we can use the Point of Order period for the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The observation made by the Member for Nipawin is well taken, because this 
is the very thing I was talking about. I was allowing Members to give reasons why they thought they had 
a good question, rather than making a Point of Order and asking me why I ruled it out. Therefore, I have 
stated that I don’t intend to allow Members to comment, I intend to allow them to make the Point of 
Order. But they can not say what a good question they had and all the reasons why it’s a good question. 
You’ll notice that I interrupted some Members today, I appreciate that I’m shifting a little bit because I 
was getting into trouble with that other procedure. I want to see that this is able to work. 
 
Mr. Cameron: — . . . Points of Order . . . 



 
April 15, 1976 
 

1138 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the Member for Regina South have a Point of Order? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Can you get on your feet and express it? 
 
Mr. Cameron: — You had indicated to us that you would permit us, I gather you’ve changed your 
mind, you were going to permit us Points of Order, but we can’t precede the Point of Order with any 
explanation. Simply all we can do is say why was that question ruled out of order, is that what we are 
getting to? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, I think that the Member will have to be satisfied with the interim report. They ask 
the Speaker on a Point of Order, why was my question ruled out? I think that you will find, and I’ve 
examined the House of Commons Oral Question Period for the days that the Committee was in the 
House of Commons observing it in action, that this is the type of reason that Speaker Jerome gives to the 
Members when they raise Points of Order after the Oral Question Period. 
 

CHALLENGE OF RULING IN COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. J. A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, during the proceedings of the Committee of Finance I 
ruled that the Minister of Finance had made some unparliamentary remarks which I asked him to explain 
or substantiate. The Minister then explained and withdrew his remarks which met my satisfaction. My 
ruling was challenged. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Merchant: — On a Point of Order. That is supposed to be submitted in writing and if the matter is 
not submitted in writing I submit to you that there is more that could have been submitted. Namely, that 
when the Minister purported to withdraw he did not withdraw unconditionally, but, in essence said that 
what he had said was true but to expedite the matter he would withdraw. And the rule is very clear that it 
should be submitted in writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — With regard to the Member’s Point of Order, I’m informed that the usual practice of 
the House has been carried out, to this point. The question before the House is: shall the ruling of the 
Chairman be sustained? 
 
Ruling of Chairman sustained on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 25 
 
Thibault Kwasnica Tchorzewski 
Smishek Dyck Matsalla 
Romanow McNeill Skoberg 
Messer MacAuley Nelson (Yorkton) 
Snyder Feschuk Allen 
Byers Shillington Koskie 



 
April 15, 1976 

 

1139 
 

 
Kramer Rolfes Johnson 
Lange Cowley Banda 
Mostoway   

 
NAYS — 18 

 
Steuart Nelson (Assiniboia- Thatcher 
Stodalka Gravelbourg) Collver 
Lane Clifford Larter 
Malone Anderson Bailey 
MacDonald Merchant Berntson 
Cameron McMillan Katzman 
  Birkbeck 
 
 
Mr. Malone: — On a Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the Point of Privilege? 
 
Mr. Malone: — On a Point of Personal Privilege, Mr. Speaker, I want to advise you and through you to 
the House, that I was not one of the Members referred to in his remarks. 
 
Mr. Merchant: — Point of Privilege, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform you and the House that I was not 
one of the two Members referred to by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order! Committee of Finance has been called. 
 
Mr. Collver: — I believe I have prima facie evidence to exhibit to Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Then the Member will do it in the usual form. 
 
Mr. Collver: — Is the usual form . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — As laid out in the Rule Book. 
 
It’s now Committee of Finance and I do leave the Chair. I’ve already informed the Members. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 o’clock p.m. 
 


