


























































Hansard: April 20, 1977


2320 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

42nd Day 
 

Wednesday, April 20, 1977. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and 
through you to the Members of this Assembly 23 Grade Eight students from the Cabri public school. 
They are accompanied here today by Mr. Monty Bissett, Grant and Jan Duthie. It is my understanding as 
well that they arrived this morning about an hour earlier than scheduled and had a considerable amount 
of ‘participaction’ walking around the Legislative Building. 
 
I should like to point out as well that this group of students is sponsored by the Cabri Lions Club and it 
is an activity which the Lions Club undertakes each and every year. They have had a busy morning and I 
look forward to meeting with them later on this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. H. LANGE (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 34 
Grade Seven and Grade Eight students seated in the west gallery. They are from Lake Alma and they are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Cameron Mitchell, Mr. Ken Johnson and by chaperons, Mrs. Casler 
and Mrs. Backlon. Their bus driver is Mr. Hofseth. 
 
I should like to welcome them to the Chamber this afternoon and hope that they enjoy their visit, and 
inform them that we will be meeting with them to answer questions after they leave the Chamber. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

CABLE PAY CO-OPS 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question 
to the Minister responsible for Cable TV. As the house well knows, the Government has recently 
announced a policy that essentially says that the Cable pay co-ops would have absolute control over 
community programming. The question that I direct to the Minister is that since that is such a wide 
variance from previous policy and since the Minister has recently come back from meetings with the 
Federal Government which he thought in Edmonton went very well and were very congenial, I would 
assume, but would appreciate the Minister confirming, that such a wide variance from previous policy 
was something that the Minister discussed with his federal counterparts and took up with them or is this 
as much a shock to the federal counterparts as it is to Saskatchewan people? 



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2321 
 

HON. N. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I am at something of 
a loss to understand what and how the Hon. Member for Wascana may have misunderstood our policy. 
Our policy has been consistent for several years now. We have said that cable TV and closed circuit TV 
is a resource, a resource that ought to be used to benefit the community and not a narrow group of 
individuals within the community. We have said that co-ops ought to be the operators of the system. We 
urged that point of view upon the CRTC and they partially accepted and partially rejected it. With 
respect to closed circuit TV, which is a provincial responsibility, we have taken the same position. Our 
position has been consistent for years. 
 
As to the second part of his question whether or not this would surprise the Federal Government, I am 
not sure what would surprise them. However, I can say that it ought not to surprise them since at the 
Edmonton conference I told my federal counterparts that we were going to be introducing this 
legislation and that it had been announced in the Throne Speech. I told them in very general terms what I 
would be doing. So it ought not to surprise them. However, one never knows what might surprise them. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and a brief one. First, did the Minister advise 
your federal counterpart that it was your intention to indicate that community programming could only 
be handled by co-ops? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The answer is, No. Nor is that the intention of the Bill. It is recognized that 
some people have made the argument that the Bill has the effect of saying that even where cable 
licensees operated a community channel that that must be done under the auspices of our legislation. 
That was not the intention of the legislation. I have asked the legal officers to do a review of it to 
determine if that’s its effect. It is not the intention of the legislation. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister would not agree that the control of 
community programming by the federal authority is almost the cornerstone of the CRTC method of 
granting licences. And if this legislation does what I think a fair reading would indicate it will do, 
namely force all of this control into provincial hands, won’t that mean that the CRTC will be faced with 
handing control of community programming to the Bev Dycks of this world, and since they are so 
passionately determined that community programming shall not be controlled under the federal 
authority, the result will be to put back the advent of cable to this province perhaps for a year or a year 
and a half until this Government is defeated. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know if the Hon. Member intended to compliment Bev Dyck but I 
am sure he will accept it. How I wished, Mr. Speaker, that community programming had been a 
cornerstone of the CRTC policy. The CRTC policy, so far as I can make any sense out of it, is one of 
pandering to the private industry, paying lip service to a number of ideals including community 
programming and making very little effort to meet those goals. How I wished community programming 
were in fact a cornerstone 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2322 
 

of the CRTC policy. But beyond that I may say again that the intention of the legislation was not to 
affect anything done by a CRTC licensee. If that is the effect of the Bill, if our legal officers determine 
that is the effect of the Bill, then we may have to consider what House amendments might be introduced 
but it was not the intention of the legislation to affect anything the CRTC licensees do, including the 
operation of the community programming. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs. Yesterday I believe the cost of living index figures were published for Canada that show that 
Regina’s rate exceeded the national rate by approximately 30 per cent, in Saskatoon by 50 per cent. 
Even more alarming than that is that if you take the past year, Regina’s rate of increase in the cost of 
living index exceeds the national average by 30 per cent. At the time we began our anti-inflation 
program, Regina was declared as being the cheapest city in Canada in which one could live. It may 
possibly still be one of them, but certainly this gap is narrowing. But because of the dramatic increase in 
the price of living increase in Regina in relation to the rest of Canada, would the Minister not agree that 
possibly the federal Anti-inflation Program has been more successful than Saskatchewan’s provincial 
plan? 
 
HON. E. C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I wouldn’t agree except that the federal 
Anti-inflation Program isn’t working at all. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Minister, with this increase it must be working much more satisfactorily 
than yours if their increases are held below yours. Would the Minister not agree though that some of the 
increases that we have had through our program in Saskatchewan, such as the increases in telephone 
rates, the insurance rates and the power rates and some of these, are directly attributable to this increase? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — No, I would not agree with that. It is not a good example. We are under the 
impression that price controls are in the hands of the Federal Government. Perhaps the most drastic 
increase that you could possibly point at, and it shows clearly in the consumer index, is the increase in 
postage. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I hope the Minister really isn’t serious in that response. But certainly I am sure 
that the Minister must realize that there is something wrong, something that is attributable to 
Saskatchewan and would the Minister please tell us what he is contemplating on doing in the future so 
that we could sort of narrow this gap and at least not exceed the national average? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I think we are going to do everything we can to try and see that the Federal 
Government does control prices rather than talk about it. I think that the main increases were in areas 
such as cigarettes and liquor and I don’t think that we should be protesting those increases, should we? I 
think that  



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2323 
 

the increases that are justified in the transportation field came about largely because of the increase in 
the price of crude oil that was paid to the people of Saskatchewan, which was justified. After all, we 
should get at least almost as much as we pay the people in Venezuela and other places around the world. 
 

SHUTTING DOWN OF WESTERN FEED LOTS AT VANSCOY 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday 
in Crown Corporations I asked the Minister responsible for the water supply how the shutting down of 
the Western Feed Lots at Vanscoy will affect them. I now ask you, what effect will it have on the 
livestock market in this province? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I am not aware of the 
problem that he is talking about. If he could enlighten me a little more I could probably give him an 
answer. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — A supplementary. Western Feed Lots, which has about 14,000 head produced 
there for finishing, will be shutting its doors approximately May 1st the employees have been notified. It 
is owned by the Mendel family at Vanscoy. I am concerned with what it will cause for the feeder market 
in Saskatchewan, from which they do a lot of buying, and the slaughter market in Saskatchewan, 
because I understand 14,000 is approximately 5 per cent. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure what effect that will have on the feeder market in that 
area. I am sure that it might have some effect, but I don’t know what you really propose that we should 
do about it. If they decide that they want to close up, I guess we can’t stop them. 
 

PRICE AND COMPENSATION BOARD RE - WEYBURN EMPLOYEES 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Premier. 
 
A recent ruling came out of the city of Weyburn in regard to some 60 employees there of the city of 
Weyburn by the Public Sector Price and Compensation Board of the province. It has rolled back a 
negotiated salary for some 60 workers there, from approximately 8 per cent back to 6 per cent. Can the 
Premier provide us with some degree of assurance that this will be the pattern of percentage which will 
be followed for the different organizations in Saskatchewan which are negotiating their salaries at the 
present time? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I regret to advise the Member that I can give 
him no assurance. I don’t make the decisions for the Public Sector Prices and Compensation Board. I 
have a good deal of confidence in the Board itself, in the three members of the Board, taking all 
appropriate items into consideration. I am unable to say that the percentage pattern which applied to one 
contract will apply to other contracts, because I am sure in each case there are individual circumstances 
to be 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2324 
 

considered, which the Board is authorized to consider and I am not. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question. It seems as if we have gone full circle if we go back to 
the time of the 6 per cent which was advocated by the former government. It is now public knowledge, 
Mr. Speaker, that the five-man government team has voted against the four-man trustees team in the way 
of teachers’ negotiations. Would it not seem logical then that 12,000 teachers in the province to be 
granted say an 8 per cent salary increase with no intervention by the Public Sector of Prices and 
Compensation Board. It would seem that the numbers would frighten off the Board from making a 
rollback, whereas only 60 people involved, they get a rollback of 2 per cent. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is a very considerable reflection on the Board. I rather 
fancy that Mr. Maher and Mr. Wood and Judge Boychuk would make a decision on the merits and 
would not be scared off, or not be rendered afraid by the fact that the decision might affect 60, 600, or 
6,000. I think that these are men of probity and integrity and to suggest that they are going to be scared 
off, as is the fair inference from what the Hon. Member has said, by the numbers involved, is an 
unwarranted and unfortunate reflection on these three distinguished citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 

MAFIA CONTROL OF BEEF INDUSTRY 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Highways. Earlier this week the 
Minister had made a public statement to the effect that the Mafia controlled the beef industry and 
packaging and marketing industry in Montreal and also that a beef marketing commission would not be 
accepted in this province because of the Mafia. 
 
Does the Minister mean, by that statement, that (a) the Mafia is in operation in this province, and (b) 
does he have documentation to that effect? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — I have difficulty in discerning the difference between 
some people and the Mafia. They operate the same way, they talk alike and look alike and sound alike. 
But, again, the Member has got all his signals wrong. He needs a hearing aid or a reading aid. I don’t 
know what he is referring to, but I did make the statement that the Quebec Crime Commission indicated 
that the mob was very deeply into the meat marketing in places in eastern Canada. I said that I wouldn’t 
be surprised if they were involved in other parts of Canada and the United States. Any place where there 
is money to be made, the mob is there. You can make your choice. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In the voice clip that was used quoting the 
exact words of the Minister of Highways, he stated at that point in time that a cattle marketing 
commission in this province would not be accepted by the Mafia if one were implemented. Is he still 
standing by that particular statement? 



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2325 
 

MR. KRAMER: — I didn’t say that! I said that a beef marketing commission in Saskatchewan, alone, 
would be very difficult to operate because of the fact that we do not have a control provincially of a 
large share of the market. I am saying that if you are going to move into that marketing area, this could 
involve enemies that you would make, not only among the packers and the chain stores but anyone who 
may be behind them, and it could well be the Mafia, because they have their fingers in every business 
throughout the world where there is a quick dollar to be made. Maybe you will deny that. I am saying 
that it would be foolhardy for us to try to proceed on a provincial basis, regardless of how much we may 
need orderly marketing and how much benefit it might provide for the producers, the beef producers of 
western Canada. 
 

RESIGNATION OF PRINCE ALBERT HEAD OFFICE MANAGEMENT TEAM 
 
MR. G. N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
 
I understand that in the past month some of the management team in the Prince Albert head office have 
resigned. Can the Minister tell this Assembly how many have resigned; how many are left on that team 
and the reasons for the resignations? 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, 
two management people have accepted positions with other forest corporations. They have given notice. 
I am not precisely clear whether they have both left at this point in time or not. 
 
MR. WIPF: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that Saskatchewan Forest Products is 
having some problem in keeping a management team together and that the corporation lost $4 million 
last year, is the corporation still planning to build their large office building in Prince Albert? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Member alludes to the position of the corporation and I don’t 
think that that had any bearing on the decisions of the two management people. They were not the senior 
management persons of the corporation. They have conveyed to me no concern in regard to the 
operations of the corporation from their individual point of view other than that they had found positions 
with other corporations that attracted them. I don’t know for what reasons. It may have been better pay 
and an advancement as far as their personal position is concerned. 
 
The building at Prince Albert is under review by the Sask Forest Products Corporation and the 
Government of Saskatchewan, due to some change in plans in regard to the design of that building. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will take the next question. 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2326 
 

CABLE PAY CO-OPS 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister in charge of cable television has told us three things 
over the course of some time. First, if I may just for a second set the stage; the Minister shortly after 
coming back from Edmonton indicated to the House, in response to a question I directed to him, that he 
would assure the House that cable licensees now licensed would get the assistance, if I can paraphrase, 
of the Government to proceed with their licences, that the Government was not trying to change the 
licensees and was not trying to stop the private licensees from getting the licence. He has told us through 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that through a Bill, that I suggest is basically designed to stop the private 
companies, that he is not prepared to make good on that guarantee. I wonder if the Minister would not 
agree with me that, quite clearly, if the private companies are not given the right of control over 
community programming, they would fly in the face of the CRTC regulations, and it would be 
impossible for them to proceed with CRTC licences: — that it is a sort of a Catch 22, Mr. Speaker? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have every sympathy for the Member for Wascana in trying to create an 
issue where in fact none exists. It is a difficult task. What he is trying to do is to turn an error in drafting 
legislation into a major confrontation between the Federal and Provincial Governments. I am sure that 
neither the cable licensees nor the Federal Government see this as a major issue, although the Member 
for Wascana might. I have told the Hon. Member for Wascana once today that the intention of the 
legislation was not to affect in any way anything the cable licensees now do, including their community 
programming, and that, if in fact it had that effect, through error or otherwise, appropriate steps would 
be taken. That isn’t a major confrontation in the Federal and Provincial Governments. It is merely, if it 
exists at all, an error in drafting legislation. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister then saying that the legislation, which clearly 
would exclude the two licensees who are private from carrying community broadcasting, that that 
legislation was not intended and a change will be made to allow the private licensees to proceed just as 
any co-op would be able to proceed? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, I am not saying that, but I am saying if the legislation has the effect of 
preventing the CRTC licensees from carrying the community channel, then appropriate steps would be 
taken to bring to the House an amendment. 
 

MAFIA INVOLVEMENT IN BUSINESS IN CANADA 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Highways. You 
have indicated in question period today that perhaps the Mafia is behind the, and you said maybe, 
behind the major food chains and you said and left the implication that they were involved in all parts of 
Canada and in all sorts of businesses. First of all, what evidence do you have and secondly, have you 
transmitted any evidence that you may have over to the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) for 
investigation? 



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2327 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will take the next question. The Member for Kindersley. 
 

REINSTATEMENT OF MR. WILSON AT MUSEUM OF WESTERN DEVELOPMENT 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to address a question to the 
Minister responsible for the Department of Culture and Youth. In view of the fact that over the past few 
days considerable evidence has come to light that would suggest that the Board of Directors for the 
Museum of Western Development in Saskatoon was to some extent illegitimate, is your Government 
prepared to order reinstatement of Mr. Wilson, who was relieved of his services by the Board, at least 
until this matter is cleared up by your Government or the necessary authorities? 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, I am glad the Member 
asked the question because I was going to try to get your attention to answer the question as it was asked 
yesterday, anyhow. There are two or three questions that have been asked over the course of the last two 
or three days, which I would like to give an answer to. 
 
The question that the Member now asks was asked by the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) 
yesterday and it dealt with the number of people on the Board of the Western Development Museum. I 
am making some inquiries about the matter which he raised and as the Attorney General indicated 
yesterday, we have asked for some legal opinions on this matter and when we have them - and we do not 
have them yet - I will be making a fuller statement to the House. 
 
Now the Member for Sutherland (Mr. H. Lane) and the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) 
also raised a question about a certain study that was commissioned by the Western Development 
Museum, a study which the Board commissioned as a Board and which it had received, as was 
mentioned in a reply to the discussion during the question period at that time, I believe by the Premier. 
The report is the property of the Western Development Museum and not the property of the 
Government. Nevertheless I want the Member to know and the House to know that I have passed on the 
requests of the Opposition to the Board that the report be made public. The Board is having a regular 
meeting next week on the 29th, at which time it will no doubt deal with that request. 
 
Another question that was raised on this matter was dealing with the Executive of the Western 
Development Museum Board. As I have indicated, the Board is meeting on April 29, next week. It will, 
at that time, select and name its Executive as that will be the first meeting of the new Board appointed 
on the first part of this month. There has been some discussion in this Legislature about the mention of 
the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman in the Order in Council appointing the new Board, but I think that 
has also been explained that because of the form of those bracket indications, this does not in fact 
appoint a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman. It is clearly understood that the Western Development 
Museum Board under the legislation, being an independent body, is to make the decision or election of 
its Executive and this will also be done on the 29th as I have indicated. 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2328 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. It is unfortunate that I have to ask the 
supplementary to get an answer to my first question. I asked you - until you have managed to clear up 
some of the questions that are floating around about the Board last year and its legitimacy, its 
questionable authority in relieving Mr. Wilson of his duties, until that is cleared up - are you prepared to 
ask for his reinstatement as Director of the Museum until a legitimate Board can deal with that 
employment? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, as I said, we are making inquiries into the question raised. It is a 
decision of the Board and as far as I am concerned, unless I know otherwise, the Board acted in its 
wisdom correctly and it was a decision of that Board. I think I make that very clear. As I indicated, I will 
have a fuller statement to make when I have had all of the questions, which I am asking, answered and a 
legal opinion provided. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You make reference to some general 
inquiries you are conducting yourself. In view of the fact that the Western Development Museum, 
Moose Jaw Branch, and the Canadian Museums Association have both supported the idea of holding a 
formal inquiry into this situation, is your Government prepared to extend your inquiries some small step 
further to the form of a formal inquiry into the release of Mr. Wilson and the status of the Board at that 
time? Can you give us an assurance at this time that you will do that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That is something once again, Mr. Speaker, that I will be determining after 
the meeting of the Board on the 29th. I want to make some comment on the matter of the Canadian 
Museums Association, which has been requested by some to do some inquiry into the dispute that exists. 
My officials have been contacted by a representative of the Canadian Museums Association, where they 
have indicated that they will, in fact, be looking into the matter and I think that until they have done so, 
we will not be making any decision as the Member requests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was another question raised yesterday. May I be permitted to give an answer at this 
time? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I will permit the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland to ask a question. 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question for the Minister 
of Culture and Youth. In your meeting in Saskatoon with George Dyck last Friday afternoon, were you 
able to come to some resolution of what on the face of it appears to be a conflict of interests, namely Mr. 
Dyck being a member of a so-called independent board and also head consultant with your department? 
I ask you if you have come to some resolution of that with Mr. Dyck? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I think it has been made clear, Mr. Speaker, that there is no conflict of 
interest involved. Mr. Dyck, in the last year, has not been on contract with the department. It was a 
contract that was in the 1975-76 fiscal year and it was 



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2329 
 

not on an employee basis; it was on a contract basis to do some specific work which has been very 
useful to the department, as we are developing a museum policy for the Province of Saskatchewan. So I 
don’t think there is any conflict of interest at all. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The original reaction of your Government that Mr. Dyck 
was consultant to deal with cable television, when it was funded through the Department of Culture and 
Youth, was very strange indeed. Could you tell us what, in fact, was the purpose of the meeting with Mr. 
Dyck and what resolutions you did come up with? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, it was simply for me to get an update of the activities of the 
Western Development Museum and certainly an update on the situation with regard to the Executive 
Director and I think that was certainly in order. 
 

CATTLE MARKETING COMMISSION 
 
MR. J. WIEBE: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. In light of the statements of the Minister 
of Highways, is the reason why we do not have a cattle marketing commission in the province today 
because this Government is adhering to the wishes of the cattle producers or because they are afraid of 
any influence that the Mafia may have on such operations in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the Mafia has 
not infiltrated into my office at this time. 
 
MR. R. BAILEY: — To the Minister of Agriculture. It is apparent from the Minister of Highways that 
he has some inside information as to very intrinsic things. Does the Minister of Agriculture know how a 
Mafia sounds? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 

DELTA HOLDINGS LIMITED 
 
MR. G. WIPF: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct this question to the Minister of DNS. Is it true 
that the Government of Saskatchewan, through the DNS, at this time, is doing maintenance work on 
Delta Holdings Limited apartment buildings in La Ronge at no charge to Delta Holdings Limited? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — I can’t give you a specific 
answer, Mr. Speaker, but I doubt that it is true. 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2330 
 

STATEMENT 
 

INTERPRETATION RULE NO. 9 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before Orders of the Day, I have a statement to make. 
 
Over the past few weeks, there has been some confusion over the interpretation of Rule No. 9, and the 
matter of standing items on the Order Paper. 
 
I wish to make a statement in order to clarify this matter for all Members. There are two categories of 
items of business on Orders of the Day. (1) Those items which have been given notice but have not yet 
been moved, and (2) those items which have been moved and adjourned. 
 
An item which has yet not been moved is still the property of the Member and he cannot be forced by 
the Assembly to move the motion, but he may, or a Member on his behalf may, ask for the item to stand. 
If the item is called and no one asks for it to stand, the item will drop from the Order paper; but it may 
be renewed by submitting a new notice. This is Rule 9(1). 
 
With regard to an item which has been moved and adjourned, this is the property of the whole House. 
This item stands in the adjourned debate section showing the name of the Member who adjourned the 
debate. This Member or any other Member may ask for the item to stand when it is called. Yet, on the 
other hand, the one Member who adjourned the debate cannot block any further debate on this item. For 
example, if the item was called and even though a Member asked for it to stand, another Member may 
rise to speak to the matter and if recognized by Mr. Speaker, may take part in the debate. The Member 
who previously adjourned the debate may re-enter the debate at a later time if the debate has not been 
concluded. 
 
If there is any disagreement over whether an item should stand, the matter may be decided forthwith by 
a division without debate. This is based on the principle that an adjourned item belongs to the entire 
House and whether it should stand or it should not should be decided ultimately by the Assembly. 
 
It must be remembered that there is a difference between the items on the Order Paper which have not 
been moved and those that are in an adjourned debate category. 
 
I hope this statement will clarify Rule 9 and the practices of the Assembly with regard to orders not 
taken up when called. 
 

BILL NO. 87 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have another statement. 
 
Yesterday Bill No. 87 was called for consideration of second reading at which time a Point of Order was 
raised to the effect that the Bill was out of order under Rule 30. I allowed several Members to comment 
on the Point of Order before deferring my ruling. I have carefully checked the verbatim record of the 
Points of Order raised and have re-examined the Bill. The Bill, if passed, would require an economic 
impact statement to be tabled with the Bill on introduction. It can be argued that the preparation of this 
statement would necessitate an expenditure of money but indeed all Bills introduced in the Assembly 



 
  April 20, 1977 
 

2331 
 

by Ministers and private Members require work by the department resulting in extra cost, as do all 
questions and motions for return. It can be further argued that extra legislation being proposed will 
lengthen the Session, and thus create an extra expense to the public purse. Yet I am sure that all Hon. 
Members will agree that these expenditures are all part of the functioning of the Legislative Assembly 
and the departments of government for which funds have already been allotted by the Assembly. 
 
I refer all Hon. Members to Sir Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 17th Edition, pages 779 and 780. 
Since Bill No. 87 does not impose a new charge on the public revenue, I rule that Bill No. 87 is in order. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, just on that point. I, of course, accept Mr. 
Speaker’s ruling, but surely, Mr. Speaker, there is a point which you have not addressed yourself to, and 
that is the point that I make and the point that the Provincial Secretary makes. No one argues that there 
is an additional effort in terms of printing or whatever, as you have indicated. The argument that has 
been advanced by the Provincial Secretary and the argument that is advanced by myself on the Point of 
Order is that if that Bill passes, somebody is going to have to do an economic analysis, in the estimate of 
the Provincial Secretary up to a million dollars. That is a charge, an obligation. It seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is something in your ruling, unless I didn’t hear it carefully, you made no mention of. I 
agree that every order that is passed places a charge on my people doing more work. They have to dig 
out the crime statistics and all of that; I can’t quarrel with that. But that is one issue. 
 
The issue is whether or not, by the passage of that Bill, there will be an economic charge on the 
province. I am saying how else could one interpret but that there has to be, because someone is going to 
have to do the economic analysis. Who does it? I think that is a charge on the public purse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe the matter is covered in the ruling and the Attorney General is making 
essentially the same argument that he made yesterday. Consequently I will have to stay with the ruling. 
 

POINT OF ORDER ON THE QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, a new Point of 
Order, if I may. It is merely a clarification. It is our understanding of the rules of the Assembly that 
when a bill is placed on the Order Paper that questions pertaining to that bill should be raised during the 
course of the debate of the bill, and that questions during Question Period about the bill are therefore out 
of order. 
 
In today’s Question Period, I believe all of the questions pertaining to cable television were pertaining to 
a particular Bill that is on the Order Paper presently of this Legislature. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, for our 
information, if it is satisfactory 



 
April 20, 1977 
 

2332 
 

to ask questions pertaining to bills during Question Period. We would like to know, and we would also 
like a ruling on that particular aspect. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It is clear that the debate with regard to the principle or the detail of the bill should 
take place in second reading and in committee. I think all Members understand that. So there is nothing 
new there. However, the fact that a bill appears on the Order Paper and is in some stage or other of 
development or progress through the House, doesn’t preclude the possibility of some question on the bill 
or relating to an aspect of the bill. However, I will attempt at all times to prevent discussion of the 
principle of the bill or detail of the bill. 
 
Members may raise questions with regard to some aspect of the bill which they think of urgent public 
concern and seek some clarification from a Minister. However, I would make an attempt to exclude a 
general discussion of the principle of the bill or fine details of the bill. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, with deference. Today, the Minister answered at least two questions 
with the phrase, the Bill, the legislation will be changed if certain implications are in order for that Bill. 
He furthermore suggested that he had turned the Bill over to the legal department for examination and 
surely that is a discussion of principle. This is really for our guidance, Mr. Speaker, we have no quarrel 
with the question being asked. On previous occasions we have been ruled out of order by discussing a 
bill that is on the Order Paper. We would just like some clarification. Perhaps it is possible that Mr. 
Speaker might be able to review the record today and perhaps come up with something that is a little 
more definitive in terms of discussion of bills that are on the Order Paper as to what kinds of questions 
might possibly be asked. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If my recollection is correct and I believe it is, the Member for Wascana felt that it 
was of urgent public concern that a certain section be clarified, namely the section dealing with the 
licensing of closed circuit television as it relates to federal licensees. The Minister, as I recall, responded 
that that wasn’t his interpretation of the Bill and if it was, there would be a change in the Bill. I felt that 
that wasn’t getting too deeply into the discussion of the principle of the Bill. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RENEWABLE RESOURCES - VOTE 39 (cont’d) 
 

ITEM 1 - (cont’d) 
 
HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Chairman, there 
are a few more here from the staff. I should like to introduce at this time Freda McEwen, the Budget 
Coordinator, and behind me is Walt Bailey, Director of Forestry. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at the time we broke up last, we were on the forestry subject and there were I think 
several questions asked by the Hon. Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) that we didn’t have 
complete answers for. I would like to, at this time, 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2333 
 

explain the questions that were asked and clarify some of the answers. 
 
I believe one of the questions asked was why is the permit information not contained in this year’s 
report? The reason for the information not being contained in the report is because we found it to 
provide a misleading picture of sawmill operation. The number of permits in fact bears no relationship 
to the sawmill production because many of the permits issued are not fully used. There are situations 
where log production in the forest is carried forward to the next year. 
 
One of the other questions, if I interpret it correctly, was, why was there less production in the Hudson 
Bay region in 1975-76 as compared to 1974-75? My answer to that is, in 1974-75 year, the figure 
represents, for the most part, Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation production in bush mills and 
lumber finished at the Carrot River planer. During 1975-76, Saskatchewan Forest Products was phasing 
out sawmill production in bush and building up a log inventory at the Carrot River Mill site. If the Hon. 
Member is comparing the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation annual report with the department 
report, it is most difficult to get a true comparison. The fiscal years are different. Saskatchewan Forest 
Products’ year ends October 31, while the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources year ends 
March 31. 
 
Another question, why was the sawmill production so much greater in the Prince Albert region than in 
the Hudson Bay region? The old Big River Mill in the PA region continued production until the new 
mill was ready for operation. The new mill started up in the fall of 1976. The only operations in the 
Hudson Bay region prior to the opening of the Carrot River Mill were the bush sawmills and the farm 
permits. In the PA region the increase in sawmill production in the 1975-76 over 1974-75 was primarily 
due to the improved sawmill operation at Big River. 
 
Another question, are there to be any changes in the volume of white spruce timber to be pulped by 
Papco from 1975-76? There are no changes insofar as this department is concerned. We do expect some 
reduction in the 1976-77 year. I believe the Member asked, how about 1977-78? We expect there is 
going to be a drastic reduction in the white spruce production for pulpwood. Because of Papco’s 
inability to sort sawed timber as required by our department under the authority of The Forest Act, 
Papco was required to go into pulpwood stands, taking other species along with white spruce. The white 
spruce stands are those that will not develop into saw timber. These changes should not have any 
bearing on the volume of pulp production. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that raises a myriad of questions. I would like the Minister 
to quickly give me - I accept the argument that perhaps the figures given in the annual report for 
1975-76 were misleading - I wonder if the Minister could give me the figures that he has in thousands of 
board feet for the Hudson Bay region of the white spruce utilization in saw timber, for the years 
1975-76-77 and 1974-75. What I would like to know is how many feet were actually sawed. You said 
that these figures represented the amount that were let on permit. I would like to know actually how 
many feet were sawed. Now I know you have those figures available somewhere. 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2334 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, the number of feet 
actually sawed would be found in the tables of the reports for 1975 and 1976. Table 4 in the 1974-75 
report and Table 12 in the 1975-76 report. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Can you tell me then how many feet in that year were let by permit for the 
Hudson Bay region, particularly for 1974-75? You’re saying that the figures here indicate the actual 
production is what I thought and I was somewhat confused by your statement that the report here 
indicated that there was some confusion because it showed how much was let by permit, not how much 
was cut. You indicate in 1974 and 1975 that there were 5 million board feet cut and I would like to know 
how much you let by permit; does that represent 50 per cent of the timber left or . .  
 
MR. MATSALLA: — For the 1974-75 year, we would have to refer to Table No. 3A and that would 
indicate the number of board feet under permit. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Here is the point I am getting at. You indicate, Table 3A indicates, that there are 
roughly 3 million board feet of spruce under permit, that is for a given fiscal year as far as your 
department goes; am I correct in assuming that? 
 
All right, this Table refers to the fiscal year of 1974-75. It said your department let 13 million board feet 
of white spruce permits for the Hudson Bay region. Am I correct in assuming that? That was an 
allowable cut for 1974-75. I will deal with these figures because they are here. All right, on what basis 
do you let those figures? How many years did that 13 million board feet allow for? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The 13 million that you are referring to is the volume that has been permitted for 
that year. It is not the annual allowable cut. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Would you tell me then why you would issue permits for sawmill production of 
a larger volume than your annual allowable cut. That is the indication that I can get from your remarks. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I am informed that the annual allowable cut for the Hudson Bay region is 110 
million. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — We are going to have to be careful here and my fault more than yours, I am sure. 
 
You are suggesting that the annual allowable cut, or that cut which that Hudson Bay region could 
withstand on an annual basis, would be 110 million board feet of white spruce, is that correct? And in 
1974-75 we see that, actually cut, there were only 5 million board feet of white spruce. Now that would 
have to leave me with the impression that we cut about one-twentieth as much white spruce or actually 
sawed one-twentieth as much white spruce in the Hudson Bay region as we actually could have done 
and still maintained our forest reserves in Northern 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2335 
 

Saskatchewan. Okay, your official shakes his head; I would like to know where the discrepancy falls. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The 110 million annual allowable cut includes the saw timber, the plywood and 
the studs. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Okay, my question then to you is, I will try to simplify it a little bit, what 
percentage of that annual allowable cut was not utilized? You say your annual allowable cut for white 
spruce is 110 million board feet. Did you utilize that in every respect - Simpson’s timber stud mill, 
sawmill and your plywood mill? Did they utilize the total 110 million board feet? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The question was, Mr. Chairman, how much of the 110 million feet was utilized; 
83 million feet were utilized for the purpose of manufacturing studs, 2.5 million for the purpose of saw 
timber, and 12.5 million feet for the purpose of plywood. Converting that to cords, 110 million feet is 
roughly equal to 220 cords and then you can say 165 cords were used for stud purposes, 5 for saw 
timber purposes and 25 for plywood purposes, giving a total of 195. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Forgive me if I deal in thousand board feet, because it is the only way I am 
familiar with in dealing with the timber business. We are talking about 97 million board feet having 
been utilized out of a potential 110 million, is that correct? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I said 195. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You are talking about cords; I am talking about board feet, 97 million board feet 
out of 110. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — 98. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Okay 98, I won’t quarrel with you there. But we are talking about 12 million 
board feet in this one region alone that was not utilized, that we could have safely utilized in 
Saskatchewan. The point I would like to make is one that has been made to you before, but I suspect 
never using your statistics that you published and that you are well aware of because I believe you are 
responsible for this happening, or at least were sitting in the Cabinet at the time certainly in the 
Government. Forty one independent sawmill producers in this province operated under B2l permits in 
Saskatchewan up until the year 1973 and what these people did was go into the bush generally with 
small portable sawmills, sometimes with small sawmills set up on farms or in small sawmill yards, they 
were permitted a very modest percentage of the annual allowable cut of white spruce in Saskatchewan 
each year. I would suggest that it was between one and three per cent of the annual allowable cut and 
these people in many cases supplemented meagre farm incomes or made their living sawing white 
spruce in Saskatchewan. In 1973 your Government told these people, the people who have now come to 
be known as the White Spruce Cutters Association, that they would no longer qualify for sawmill 
permits under B2l of the Act. You put them out of business, 41 families. Now I understand that four 
families are still operating in the Meadow Lake 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2336 
 

area which is an exceptional contradiction to your policy that came out in Crown Corporations and we 
may discuss that in a few minutes. The fact remains you put 41 families out of business in 1973, your 
reason at that time was that there was not enough white spruce in Saskatchewan and this was your 
primary reason. There wasn’t enough white spruce in Saskatchewan for these people to utilize. 
 
Now we were talking about a province, the Province of Saskatchewan, as a whole, these people wanted 
an annual allowable permit for their operations between one and three per cent and you told them it 
wasn’t available, couldn’t do it. Right here we have in one region alone, 12 million board feet of white 
spruce that was not utilized that could have safely been utilized. I don’t know where it was, it may have 
stood in the bush, maybe it was salvage timber, burned out timber, maybe it was small pockets of mature 
timber that were not utilized, maybe it was sawed and left sitting in a yard somewhere. 
 
My point is two things: number one, your treatment of the B21 operators in my estimation, and I suspect 
in the estimation of those people in Saskatchewan that are familiar with the timber business, is a 
disgrace and the reason for that is because the reasons you gave them for moving them out of the bush 
are a joke. You told them on the one hand there wasn’t enough timber available and in the one region 
alone in one year, there was enough timber there that wasn’t utilized that would satisfy the entire 41 
families that used to operate under B21 contracts, in one region alone. Now I ask you what about the 
Prince Albert region. We can go under the figures there if you like. That was the one thing. The big 
reason at that time was that you refused them one or two per cent of the annual allowable cut. 
 
The other reason your department gave them was that they were not efficient enough. They were not 
efficient enough to operate in the bush and I will tell you one of the reasons that you still have 12 
million board feet of your annual allowable cut sitting in the bush somewhere and that’s because it’s 
uneconomic or impractical for a centralized sawmill operation to build large hauling roads back into 
small pockets of salvage timber, haul those logs out in an unprocessed form all the way to Carrot River 
or to Big River for processing. The salvage timber used to be handled by the B21 contract operators who 
never went in and took the meat of your white spruce operations, never. Their primary usage of the 
white spruce timber in the bush was salvage or small stands or scattered stands. 
 
I suspect that if one got looking very closely at the North, and your cruisers could certainly tell me this if 
they were willing, that there is a lot of timber standing out there now that isn’t being utilized, maybe 12 
million feet in the Hudson Bay region this year, maybe 10 million feet in the Prince Albert region, 
maybe 15 million feet in the Meadow Lake region, I don’t know. I suspect a considerable amount of 
timber is left standing, mature timber that is rotting, burnt timber that is of no good to anyone standing 
there for the next four or five years. I understand it can be utilized up to four years after it’s burnt out 
before it becomes worm-eaten or damaged beyond use in any other way. So you have taken 41 families 
and you try and figure out the logic in this, 41 families who certainly didn’t offer any great threat to 
Saskatchewan Forest Products as far as competition for good timber went because they used marginal 
timber anyway, 41 families that you took and put out of business. You said, well go apply for jack pine 
permits, saw jack pine if 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2337 
 

you want. Fine, you know what kind of business that is. Saskatchewan Forest Products does a very 
limited amount of it because it doesn’t pay. You said, If you want work, go contract logs for 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, saw white spruce for the Government. Forget your small 
independent sawmills and the income you people had from the rough cutting lumber; they aren’t selling 
all these to Saskatchewan Forest Products. So you put them out of business for what reason? You 
suggested at one time it was because there wasn’t enough timber to go around. You turn around and 
suggested that, secondly, when pressed on that issue, that they were not efficient enough. And now I 
suspect that because your large centralized operation in Saskatchewan is not efficient, much of the 
timber that these small operators use is not now being used. So in fact your department has made a move 
which, instead of increasing the efficiency in the usage of our white spruce in Saskatchewan, has 
decreased it. There is even some considerable question about the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation with their utilization of timber and with what kind of management practices they have, with 
a $4 million loss this year. I would like you to get up here and tell me today if you still have a reason in 
Saskatchewan for preventing private sawmill operators from operating under what used to be known as 
the B21 segment of your contract. Could you tell me that? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, first of all let us get the figures straight. There were 43 permit 
holders rather than 21, I believe it is; 26 of them were for white spruce and another 14 or so had mills. 
Only 14 of them had mills, and a total of some 72 employees. I want to first of all say that I think the 
Hon. Member had indicated this a year ago when we introduced the Amendments to the Forest Act. He 
indicated that he welcomed the Amendments to the Act because they would give better control of forest 
to the people of Saskatchewan and he felt too at that time, that we do have a responsibility to manage 
our forest property. And I might say too that this Government has been elected on a forest policy that 
will put the control of our forests with the people of Saskatchewan, and may I interpret and repeat the 
policy to the Hon. Member. The policy is to restrict the harvest of white spruce saw timber to improve 
the utilization of the timber resource. The operation of the portable sawmills, that he was referring to, 
has resulted in poor utilization of the timber resource, the slabs and edgings were burnt, the large sized 
logs suitable for plywood were used up for studs and saw timber. Using all logs in a licensed area for 
simply one purpose is certainly not good utilization of forests. 
 
We believe that if the timber is suitable for plywood purposes, it should be used for plywood purposes. 
If it’s suitable for dimensional lumber, it should be used for that purpose only and not stud lumber. The 
rest could be used for pulp purposes. 
 
So, therefore, the point I want to make is that the small sawmills that are being referred to have been 
wasteful and haven’t utilized our timber resources to the best possible use. Now this policy was 
undertaken by this Government in order to provide the greatest possible economic and social benefit to 
the people of this province. In order to control the harvesting of timber so that there is no over-cutting, 
we certainly had to restrict the use of the timber resource. At the same time, I might say too, that the 
reforestation, since our new forest policy has come into effect, has been stepped up. 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2338 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Minister, you have explained to me here inadvertently, because you never 
directly answered my question, that the reason that private sawmill operators in Saskatchewan are not 
allowed to operate in this province in the cutting of white spruce is because they are inefficient; yet there 
are four of them that are doing it in Meadow Lake now. You might check with your officials about that. 
They may have suspended operations in the last two weeks. 
 
Well, let me make two suggestions to you, maybe more. Firstly, I’ll tell you what’s inefficient. You 
suggest that a stand of timber that’s fit for studding should be used for studs and one that’s got high 
enough dimensions and is fit to be utilized for plywood should be utilized for plywood, and general saw 
timber should be used for general saw timber and pockets that should be rotted in Saskatchewan should 
be rotted and that’s the logical conclusion to your statement. I’ve suggested to you that because of your 
policy, there is timber in northern Saskatchewan, right now, that is rotting because you won’t allow 
people to go in and saw it. The people who used to saw your marginal timber, scavengers in the timber 
business is what they amounted to, they went and took everything that the government didn’t want to 
give to their own people or that their own government operated mills didn’t want to use. That’s what 
those people sawed. 
 
We find there are 12 million board feet of that sitting in northern Saskatchewan right now or last year. It 
was never utilized. I assume it sits there to rot or get worm-eaten or to mature beyond use. That’s the 
first question of efficiency. Is it efficient for your Government to leave that timber in the bush and I refer 
specifically to scattered stands and burn-overs? Is it efficiency for you to leave that there, rather than 
have someone go in and salvage it? The answer is obviously no. I say that’s happening right now. 
 
Your second remark is about inefficiency of cutting the timber that these people did utilize and you’ve 
suggested that. Burning of slabs, etc. You obviously haven’t been in contact with those people who 
operated the private sawmills. I’ll tell you what the difference is between them and your government 
operated sawmill right now. When the government operated sawmill is given a contract, they are given a 
block or an area and it is said there are 22 million board feet in here or four million board feet, go in and 
take your timber out. They go in and they start cutting timber and they take timber out until they’ve got 
their 22 million board feet. Private sawmill operators were never allowed to cut unless that timber was 
cruised and marked for them. So if your cruiser went through there and marked that timber and said 
there are 500,000 board feet in there, I’ve marked the trees, any timber they went in there and wasted, 
came off their allotment. Much unlike the case with Saskatchewan Forest Products, that just keeps 
hacking away until they get their allotment, up to the limits you establish. 
 
You talk about efficiency. Every time a puff of smoke went up from one of those private sawmills back 
in the bush, one of your men was in there to find out what they were burning. In many instances, those 
people hauled slabs out of the bush at a loss to themselves, in order to dispose of them with the public 
rather than burn them, so that they wouldn’t be penalized by your department for lack of efficient work. 
You had control over that. You had absolute and total control and your men did a good job of seeing that 
those people didn’t waste timber or the 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2339 
 

by-products. They did a good job and are probably far more efficient in the way they utilize slabs and 
edgings and tree tops than the way they do at the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation mill at 
Carrot River right now, where they are chipped and sold to the pulp mill for $20 a ton. There is some 
considerable argument about the merits of that. 
 
I’d like you to stand up and answer those two allegations. Number one, that we have timber standing in 
Saskatchewan now that is not being utilized, that could and would be cut by private sawmill operators. 
Secondly, I think that your accusations about their inefficiency with the timber they did cut are totally 
unfounded. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, please. I would like to draw to the attention of the House and to 
the Member who just took his seat, I can’t recognize him as altogether a new Member anymore and I 
know he knows the rules of the House, but this applies to all Members in addressing their remarks, I 
would appreciate it if they would address them to the Chair. I think it assists and helps the decorum of 
the House and this applies to all Members. Please adhere to it as closely as possible. 
 
Member for Shellbrook. 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Chairman, the Member 
doing the questioning, in talking about proper forest management procedures and conservation of 
forests, is really like KOD (Keep Our Doctors) Liberals talking about medicare. It really gives us about 
the same kind of an impression on this side of the House. He talks about a $4 million loss in the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation as being something tremendously significant. Tremendously 
significant. He has forgotten, maybe he never knew because he probably wasn’t around at the time, he 
has really forgotten that when his government put together in this province an industry, a pulping 
industry, that they inaugurated, and even to this day we are still committed to that corporation, a million 
dollars a year in roads. You never talk about that. You never talk about the million dollars of roads that 
are committed in the forest agreement to Papco, that we build every year for these people. You don’t 
talk about the benefits given to Papco with respect to hauling up there, 128,000 pounds over roads which 
farmers and other people in the forest industry business can’t haul. Mr. Chairman, 75,000 or 78,000 
pounds, but they get a permit to haul 128,000 or 130,000 pounds. No mention of that. 
 
We don’t have any mention either of the $1.5 or $2 million that is given to the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company in the price of dues that we receive. You know we only get 75 cents or 80 cents a cord for 
white spruce timber that, if you sell it to Saskatchewan Forest Products, you’ll pay $2.50 or $3 a cord 
for. You don’t talk about that. No, you wouldn’t want to talk about that. Maybe you didn’t even know 
that that existed. 
 
AN. HON. MEMBER: — You want to talk about that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, I’d like to talk about it. Be happy to talk about it in fact. I know, I’ll sit 
down when I get ready. 
 
You don’t talk about the $4 or $6 per cord subsidy which we 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2340 
 

paid to have timber hauled into the Prince Albert Pulp Company through your government, Your 
government that was in office. You don’t talk about that straight subsidy for a half a million cords a 
year, where we guaranteed to deliver those cords of wood to the Prince Albert Pulp Company for a fixed 
fee, regardless of what the cost was in the bush. We picked up the tab. In fact, the tab was picked up by 
the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corp oration. That’s who it was picked up by. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Change it. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Oh, change it. We did change it in fact. But you don’t talk about that. You get 
all upset and you get all nervous about trying to dramatize what you think and what you try to suggest at 
least is a proper forest management program. You talk about the white spruce wood producers’ group. 
Do you know, and you probably don’t know and even if you did, you probably wouldn’t admit it, and 
that is that these people, the 21B permit holders were first written to and told that their operations would 
cease, were first written to by your government. Those wood permit holders were advised that they 
would be out of the woods in another year or two. Now you forget that. Maybe you didn’t know it, but if 
you don’t know it, you should know it now. If you would inform yourselves about the facts, you 
wouldn’t stand up here and demonstrate your ignorance. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order please. May I just draw to the attention of the Minister for 
Shellbrook to please address the Chair as well. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to address the Chair. 
 
This Member who stands and attempts to demonstrate his party as being the party which implemented or 
attempts to implement a sound proper forest management program, is just as I say, like KOD Liberals 
adopting the medicare program. 
 
With regard to white spruce wood producers, and I want to repeat it again for your benefit, that they 
were first written to by your party, then the government, by your government. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Table the letter. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Oh, the letters can be tabled and you’ve got access to them because your 
running mate out in the Kinistino constituency provided you with them, and if he didn’t, he wasn’t 
honest with you. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I saw the letter. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — That’s right and therefore, Mr. Chairman, the Member shouldn’t really be too 
concerned about having them tabled in the House at this point in time. 
 
With regard to the access and the availability of white spruce or a commercial forest to the people of this 
province, let me remind you that it was your government which committed, by agreement, Mr. 
Chairman, it was that Member’s government, that committed 98 per cent of the commercial forests of 
this province to two corporations, Simpson Timber Company and Prince 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2341 
 

Albert Pulp Company. Ninety-eight per cent and now he’s up here trying to dramatize the idea that he’s 
the great crusader for the white spruce wood producers of this province, when 98 per cent of the 
commercial white spruce of this province was committed to two corporations. One, Simpson Timber 
Company, which controlled 22,000 square miles of forest on the eastern side and the remainder of the 
commercial forest committed to Prince Albert Pulp Company, or Parsons and Whittemore. In two 
blocks. One, Prince Albert Pulp Company and the other, the one that you lost the government on, was 
the proposed Athabasca Pulp Mill on the west side of the province. 
 
Now, for the Member to get up here and suggest that somehow we’re not managing the forests of this 
province, we are having some difficulty in getting out of the agreements which you fellows put together, 
having some difficulty in getting out of the kinds of agreements which you people put together and 
committed the people of this province to. Your white spruce wood producers, if any government made a 
decision to put them out of the forest, it was your government from 1964 to 1971. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, I’d love to take the time to respond to the Minister, but I don’t know, it 
would sort of be like discussing the way a baseball game is going to go to some one who has just been 
thrown off the team. The Minister has been removed from any responsibility he has in management of 
our timber resources, with the exception of that stuff that he’s messing up in the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and we may get some discussion about that in DNS Estimates. 
 
I have a lot of questions that I would like to direct to the Minister regarding the Papco operations and if 
you want to heap grief on my head for anything that was done by a previous administration, I accept all 
that you can unload on me, because it’s expending any useless energy you might have. 
 
The Minister has had a chance to respond to the allegations that I made and I only want to add one 
further point before you respond, for your consideration. When we talk about general forest management 
in northern Saskatchewan and I’ve sat and talked to the Minister before and I told him that I was 
confident that he had enough principle to see that Ministers who were responsible for Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation and Members that currently are, he wouldn’t be allowed to be pressured 
into allowing a greater cut in the annual allowable cut and I say there is a significant danger of that 
happening in northern Saskatchewan and I’ll he discussing that in a few minutes. That’s one of my 
concerns. 
 
In a positive note, and I think the Minister and certainly his Government must have this as an objective, 
it seems he, in some perverse way, refers to the B2l contracts in this light, that it’s the intention of this 
Government to try and make maximum efficiency or maximum use out of every board foot of white 
timber that is sawed in northern Saskatchewan. I assume the Minister refers to the question of labour 
intensive operations, etc. and I want you to consider, before you stand to respond, that the number of 
employees you suggested . .  I’ll tell you what prompted this . .  your suggestion that there were only 72 
employees that were related to the whites, the B21 operators, anyway in the Hudson Bay region, 
probably in the whole province, so there was no problem there, that you weren’t really hurting anybody. 
The number of employees that they employed directly 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2342 
 

and indirectly was far greater than that. You are well aware of that. The one figure you should be 
interested in today is the one that shows that the number of people employed in the Hudson Bay region, 
in the sawmill industry and forest based industries as well, for 1975-76, is down significantly from the 
number that were employed the year previous. I’d like to know, that’s another rock out of your 
foundation of efficient timber use, I’d like you to get up and explain to me how these things have been 
in the best interests of timber utilization. I’d like you to explain to me how putting the B21 operators out 
of the bush was in the best interests, how the labour thing is in the best interests, how Saskatchewan 
Forest Products utilization of the timber industry is in the best interests? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to remind the Hon. Member that during the Liberal years, 
tough, tough seven years, 1964-1971, things hadn’t been that rosy for private operators. I think the Hon. 
Member knows well the Parsons and Whittemore group and the Simpson group who were going to take 
control, or pretty well had control of the entire forest area in our province. Certainly that wasn’t in the 
best interests of any private operator or the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I might say, too, that the Parsons and Whittemore proposals were such that they were going to curtail all 
sawmill operators in time. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not curtail, were going to kick them out. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Kick them right out, the Member says. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, I think we can do with a little less crossfiring and a little assistance here. 
I think if we could answer the questions directly and through the Chair, here, I think things would be 
expedited very much. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — With respect to the 21B permits, things really aren’t that serious as the Hon. 
Member describes it. About 50 per cent of the operators are operating in the forest. They are not out of a 
job. They are cutting pine, black spruce and poplar and their livelihood hasn’t really been taken away 
from them. 
 
With respect to the salvage material in the forest, or the forest that might go to waste, I just can’t see 
how that is happening. I just indicated to the Hon. Member that last year over 6,000 cords have been 
picked up by the forest operators and brought in for timber utilization. 
 
Another point I should like to raise with the Hon. Member is that the small sawmills were not able to cut 
to as close a tolerance as the large centralized mills are able to do. In that sense certainly there is waste 
and was waste. The centralized mills are designed in such a manner so as to create as little waste as 
possible. 
 
With respect to the number of employees, I should like to indicate to the Hon. Member, Mr. Chairman, 
that the decrease in employment in the Hudson Bay region was due to the curtailment of the Carrot 
River operators awaiting the operation and 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2343 
 

the opening of the new mill. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, that last statement is inaccurate, but I will deal with a few things at a time. 
 
You suggest that things are fine for the former B21 operators because they can cut pine and black spruce 
and poplar. Your own government operations, with tremendous financial backing from the Provincial 
Government, interest free backing, the finest equipment available on the market today for sawing 
timber, and some of the highest technology available in western Canada today, can’t cut poplar and 
black spruce and make a go of it. How you expect someone with exceptionally limited resources, limited 
in every area except labour, is supposed to make a dollar cutting - do you know what black spruce looks 
like? It’s about that big around, in swamps . .  haul it out of swamps. I asked the Minister who was 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation how much black spruce Carrot River 
cuts, and do you know what the answer was? You issue the permits. 
 
Another thing I would like you to answer for me is, what percentage of your annual allowable cut is 
salvage timber in the Hudson Bay region? 
 
Another point I would like to make, and you suggest that the private sawmills can’t cut down to very 
detailed size and for that reason they waste timber. I explained to you the procedure they had to go 
through to cut timber; there was a built-in incentive for them to cut timber. Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation’s operation at Carrot River now, I believe, can cut down to five inch diameter 
logs. I am under the impression, from the results of answers given to us in Crown Corporations, that 
they are cutting down to 10 inches and not taking anything else. Now that argument still doesn’t stand 
up. 
 
I should like, in a short answer, for you to stand up and tell why you don’t allow private sawmill 
operators to operate in Saskatchewan? A very simple answer. Is it a question of efficiency? Secondly, I 
should like to know what percentage of your annual allowable cut in Hudson Bay is salvage timber? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the first question, I believe I have answered that 
one. So I am proceeding to the next one. 
 
What percentage of the annual allowable cut is salvage? That is about three per cent in the Hudson Bay 
region. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Can you tell me why you don’t allow private sawmill operators to contract white 
spruce in Saskatchewan? Very simply tell me what it is, there is some confusion. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I think I have indicated to the Hon. Member why we don’t do it. 
We don’t allow the small sawmill operators to continue operating in the forest because of the fact that 
we believe that we should have complete utilization of our forest industry. From our observation, the 
small sawmill operators are not necessarily inefficient operators. I don’t like to use the word 
“inefficient” but I would like to say that the results of their operation have contributed to a lot of waste 
of timber material. 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2344 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, that point has yet to be proven. My point to you is, and something that I 
think you should consider is, the different nature of the two different operations lent themselves in many 
instances in favour of the B2l operators as being more efficient because they had portable sawmills. 
They could provide for their own transportation back into small and scattered stands without building 
large haul roads for contract timber. The advantages are many. I hope that you won’t reject those out of 
hand. 
 
I am sure that you had some problems with your own conscience when those people were first put out of 
business in 1973. I don’t suspect that this suggestion came from you or even from members of your 
department. I suspect that the initiative came from the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. As 
far as putting them out of business and the fact that they were put out of business before, I will only say 
to the former Minister in charge of the timber industry, of sawmill operations, if he would have the 
courage to go before any assembly of private sawmill operators, former or those who presently operate 
in jack pine, and ask them what they thought about the way they were treated under this Government 
and the previous government; if he had the courage to go and ask, I would suspect he would get his 
answer. I don’t think it would be the one he wanted. 
 
I should like to know how many private sawmill operators are operating and contracting white spruce in 
Saskatchewan for sawmills, sawing it themselves, aside from farm permits that are issued? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, there are four operators in the Meadow Lake area. Then we do 
have some small operators operating in vacant Crown land, land which has forest that is being disposed 
of because of agricultural interests. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Could you tell me how many are operating in that second instance, Crown land. 
It’s all Crown land, but . .  
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The land that the operators are operating on is not provincial forest land. We are 
unable to give you any exact figure. The numbers aren’t that great. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — All right, can you tell me why the four private sawmill operators are in 
contravention of your determined policy to eliminate private individuals from white spruce stands, are 
sawing timber in Meadow Lake? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The four operators in the Meadow Lake area are operating under contract for 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. These operators are going to be phased out over a three-year period. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Technically, when people were given a permit to log and saw white spruce and 
then were forced to sell it through the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, previously they were 
operating under contract to the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation in many instances. Can you 
tell me why they are 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2345 
 

being phased out of operation? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The reason why the operators are being phased out is the same as the B2l permit 
holders. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I am not going to bother the Minister with the issue any further. I think he is 
probably very well aware and I am sure he has had second thoughts on many occasions about the 
elimination of the private operators from the timber business. 
 
I can only say at this time that I hope in the future, if it comes to your attention and if it already hasn’t I 
am telling you that there are stands, scattered stands of timber in northern Saskatchewan and burnt out 
areas of white spruce that aren’t being logged under your conventional policy, that you will give serious 
consideration to allowing someone who is willing to go in there and utilize that timber by going in. I 
hope you will give that consideration. 
 
I have another question for you now. I would like to know if Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 
pays you stumpage fees? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation is paying stumpage fees. I’ll 
give you more information than what you have asked for. The stumpage fees are $6 per thousand on saw 
timber, $1.50 per cord for pulp, $1.50 per cord for pine, and approximately $9.60 per cord for plywood, 
depending on the market. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Of the stumpage fees that Saskatchewan Forest Products paid to your department 
in this past year, did you retain those fees or were they disposed of in some other manner? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The fees were transferred to general revenue. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Were they simply sent to GFO or were they returned through Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The fees are payable to the Crown, that’s where they end up. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — When you draw up your budget in the year to determine the reforestation 
program that you would like to undertake or would like to subsidize other people to undertake, would 
like to initiate, when you approach the Budget Bureau for funds, do you base your application for funds 
for reforestation on the amount of stumpage fees you received in the previous year? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, I have some other questions about a different matter at this time. 
 
I should like to know if - we have heard some inane 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2346 
 

babbling about Papco (Prince Albert Pulp Company) from the former Minister over there a little earlier - 
Mr. Chairman, I direct my comments through you, I should like to know if Papco pulped any saw 
timber, white spruce saw timber, last year to the best of your knowledge? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, they have operated in stands where there was some saw timber. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I know that the Premier has made reference to this issue several years ago about 
being no different than making hamburger out of tenderloin. I think all Members of the House would 
agree that it is a practice that shouldn’t be continued if it can be avoided. 
 
I would like to ask you, firstly, why the practice has been allowed to continue since 1971, if, in fact, you 
people suggested it was improper at that time? Mr. Chairman, the Member suggests some reference to 
contractual agreements. I find it strange coming from him how he can put any emphasis on the validity 
of a contract or a lease when he has been party to tearing up so many of them as to make their use, as far 
as the Government goes, almost worthless. 
 
I would like to know why it has taken this Government, if in fact you have taken steps to eliminate this 
practice, why it has taken you six years to do so? What has been the problem? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — May I first of all indicate to you that it was the former government who had 
negotiated an agreement with Papco that allowed them to operate in all stands, big and small. We have 
taken steps, this Government has taken steps, to change that, with the hope of providing better utilization 
of the timber. 
 
We have now required Papco to operate in pulp stands only. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, I’ll switch to a different subject. 
 
I am satisfied that, despite the derogatory means in which the Minister has referred to me on several 
times, by association with previous administrations, I would like to say that I am confident that he is 
going to try and do a good job, at least of conserving our timber in northern Saskatchewan. We 
obviously have a quarrel about utilization. I hope, as I said before, you won’t bow to indiscreet pressures 
from other Members of your Cabinet to overcut in areas where the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation is starved for good saw timber. 
 
I would like to switch to a different area now. That’s the area of game management, and ask the 
department if they have anyone contracted this year, or used any means by which to manage predator 
control in Saskatchewan? I refer to coyotes and wolves. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, no, the department hasn’t contracted anyone for that purpose. 
The program is really a co-operative program at this time between the municipalities and the 
department. 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2347 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Have you in the past contracted people to undertake predator control for you? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, we simply employ 
people for the purpose, but we do not contract. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Okay, would you tell me what means are used for predator control by the people 
that you employ? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the means that are being used for predator control, particularly 
with reference to coyotes and wolves, - there is den hunting, and the use of poison baits, 1080. I might 
say with respect to the use of poison baits, that this is used at the request of the municipalities, in areas 
where coyotes are a problem. 
 
In the North, in the remote locations, where there is a need to control wolves, strychnine poison is used. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I would like to know as well if you put out any permits or allowed permits either 
last year, or in the upcoming year if you have any plans to do so, of allowing individuals to shoot 
wildlife from aircraft? I refer here specifically to coyotes and wolves. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, this has been done in the Swift Current area, and this has been done on the 
recommendation of the local livestock association. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Could you tell me if the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources was 
involved in any way in remunerating these individuals on a bounty system per animal taken, or if all you 
did was issue the permit? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, we didn’t remunerate anyone. All we did was issue permits. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Have you done any studies to determine the overall effect of your strychnine 
poisoning program in northern Saskatchewan as far as the kill outside of the species you are directing it 
at? I know it is of considerable concern among some of the more bleeding heart members of our wild 
life associations, etc., that while game management in some manner might be a necessity, bait poisoning 
often has the effect of reducing or having unpleasant side effects on other species. I refer to whiskey 
jacks, coyotes, foxes, fishers, martins, etc., the potential for damage there. Have you done any studies 
about the results of your strychnine poisoning in that respect? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, we had a study and the study did indicate that there was other wild life that 
would get to the bait and therefore have its harmful effects. So out of this study, what the department has 
done is to set up baits in the middle of the 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2348 
 

lakes (of course this was in the winter time) in order to discourage other wild life from getting at the 
bait. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, I am sure the Minister didn’t mean exactly what he just said, but I 
think you are probably referring to wolf bait poisoning. You just finished saying that you like to set the 
baits up in the middle of the lakes so that wild life can’t get at it. I’m not sure that is your specific 
intention. I would like to know if you have some accurate study of the number of wolves that were killed 
by this means last year in Saskatchewan, and if you have a study or have any idea of how many that you 
have taken by that means over the past winter and just where does your wolf management program stand 
in regard to numbers, etc.? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The statistics with regard to the program, I have it here by regions, the number 
under the kind of poison used - 1080 and strychnine poison. If you would like those figures, I can give 
them to you. Any particular area? The province as a whole? I would say about 125 under the 1080 bait; 
and about 104 under the strychnine bait. The first two figures which I gave you are the number of bait 
and the known kill figures are: — coyotes - 79, fox - 30 and wolves - 116. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well, I have another question regarding game management in a different area. It 
is a concern of mine with regard to your new moose management program, which I view with some 
optimism and some skepticism. I would like to point out to you some of the areas of that program that 
people have brought to my attention, which they are concerned about. Those areas generally regard 
hunter abuse and the potential for hunter abuse under the program. And it can only then be taken as a 
word of caution from hunters and wild life people in the province to the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources, something which I hope you are already aware of, but I am sure it could use 
considerable attention as far as preventive means from the system being abused. As you are well aware, 
your new moose management program allows, during one given period of the hunting season, for moose 
licences to be purchased by anyone who makes application in Saskatchewan. Within the requirements, 
you have in effect an open season on bull moose and young of the year. It is something which I think is 
very worth while looking into. A concern of not only myself (and my concerns are guarded), the concern 
of people who operate camps in northern Saskatchewan, residents, your own game wardens, is that that 
system of moose registration will be badly abused by over-enthusiastic hunters. You are well aware of 
the abuses that have taken place in your mule deer season, particularly in the Sand Hills, east of Fox 
Valley, the abuses of people receiving mule deer licences and shooting the first deer they see, and 
praying that it is a mule deer, and in many instances leaving white-tailed deer lying to rot in the bush 
and in the hills. That has been the system that has been badly abused. It is extremely difficult to enforce 
a ‘mule deer only’ permit. I suspect that you have made some prosecutions under your regulations for 
abuses of that, but a minimal amount compared to the amount of abuse that goes on. My concern is that 
the same thing will happen in the moose management program, only to an exceptionally higher degree 
and it is the question of hunter identification of the moose and whether it is a bull moose or a calf 
moose. I would like to 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2349 
 

know what steps your Government plans to take in the upcoming hunting season to try and prevent any 
abuse of that hunting privilege that has been given to hunters in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concern of the Hon. Member with respect to wild 
life management and particularly with reference to our new moose management program. With the 
introduction of this program, certainly we had concern with regard to this, and I think that regardless of 
what program you may have, there are bound to be abuses. We, to a degree, tolerate abuses that are of a 
normal nature. Now we are hoping that with the implementation of the new moose management 
program that the hunter abuse is not going to be too great. We are hoping that the hunters who are 
mainly sportsmen, who understand wild life management, will give us their full co-operation. That 
alone, of course, is not going to be the solution to proper moose management. We are going to continue 
to maintain enforcement, as we have done in the past, and if need be, we may have to reinforce it. With 
respect to the hunter abuse with the mule deer, I don’t necessarily agree with the Hon. Member that the 
abuse was as serious as he indicated. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well I have spent enough time in the Sand Hills during the mule deer and 
white-tailed deer season to see the abuses which go on, and it is difficult to get an overall picture, but 
when one hunter out of several thousand comes across several instances of it, I can only assume that it is 
quite wide-spread. I know that the department has taken extraordinary means to try and control any 
abuses, you patrol it regularly with choppers. I would like to know if you are considering that kind of 
protection of the moose population during that open season in northern Saskatchewan. The problem is, 
of course, that the potential for abuse is so much greater in northern Saskatchewan in that moose 
management program than it was in the Sand Hills and other isolated areas when you had the restricted 
seasons there. The problem, as you are well aware, could be tremendous. 
 
We have had, the Government has had, experience in the past in northeastern Saskatchewan in an area 
where they opened the elk season and there was an exceptionally high moose population in the area. It 
was open to elk only, and the hunters who walked through that bush up there, legitimate hunters, found, 
time after time, carcasses of huge bull moose, cows and calves that were shot and left during an elk 
season only. And that’s an elk season, when identification between the two species is not difficult. It 
came to the point where apparently the legitimate hunters were upset about seeing moose meat in the 
bush and went and mentioned it to the game warden and the guy said, Well, if you accidentally shoot 
one, or if you come across one that has been freshly shot and still usable, haul it out and we will let you 
take it home for meat. There was a real problem and there may be some problem of clarification and 
details of that program. I only want to extend to you my fears and I would like to know if you have any 
plans to try and enforce this program. When you send hunters up into the bush, (the legitimate hunters I 
have no concern about, they are responsible people, they want to conserve the resource, but a large 
percentage of the people who do undertake to go North with hunting licences aren’t as responsible as 
members of your department would like all hunters to be) the problem of patrolling the North and the 
problem of hunters shooting cows and leaving them in the bush during the bull and 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2350 
 

calf season is going to be an awful one. I would like to know what steps you are taking to try and 
prevent that. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — One of the first things, and possibly a very important aspect of prevention of this 
abuse, is going to be the providing of information to the sportsmen. As I mentioned earlier, I feel that 
many of our hunters are good sportsmen. I think this is the case. We are also going to have to depend on 
people, like yourself and many others, to report to us any abuses that you may find in a particular area 
and the kinds of abuses. I know that people aren’t apt to report about their neighbours, or possibly for 
that matter others. But I think this is one of the important aspects in trying to make this program work, 
providing information to the sportsman and asking for his full co-operation on it, and also depending on 
the public to provide us with reports where abuses may take place. 
 
MR. MCMILLAN: — Well, I won’t pursue that matter any further. I’ll suffice it to say that I am 
hesitant about thinking that that alone will be enough. I hope you give some consideration over the 
summer to the means you might implement during the fall hunting season to try to prevent the kind of 
abuses that are sure to happen. 
 
I have one further question on game management, and it is a problem which has been brought to my 
attention, and to the attention of the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka), regarding the goose 
hunting season. Is your department giving any consideration to reinstituting a pit only shooting area for 
geese anywhere in Saskatchewan. I must say, just in passing, that when he handed me the note to ask if I 
would put that question to you, I read it, and it looked like ‘pet’ shooting, and I thought, boy we are 
going to get on a wild one here, but it refers to pit shooting of geese and the problem of eliminating pit 
shooters. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, with regard to ‘pits only’ hunting, I might say that this was set up 
as an experiment about five years ago, and I believe this was in the southwestern part of the province, in 
the Sceptre area. We have evaluated the experiment and we have come to the conclusion that it wasn’t 
very successful. It tended to provide hunting to the relatively few privileged and some of the landowners 
did not like to have the pits on their land. I think, in the experiment, pits had been dug and perhaps not 
restored to the natural level. At this point in time, in view of this, we are not considering going into the 
‘pits only’ hunting. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — I would just like the Minister to elaborate on what he 
means by the ‘pit shooting’ had a tendency to cater only to the privileged. Certainly a shovel isn’t that 
expensive. I have dug goose pits and it is a very tough task to do it, but I can’t see how he can say that 
that caters to the privileged. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well, you will realize that if you have a special regulation in a particular area, 
then of course the goose hunter would have to go in and request permission from the landowner and the 
landowner could simply say, the fact that you are not going to use a pit for hunting purposes, I will give 
you no permission to enter my land. 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2351 
 

MR. STODALKA: — You mean by privilege, not then one of sort of a class type thing. You are saying 
it is whether or not he can get on the property. Is that what you are suggesting? 
 
I would like to ask the Minister then, there is some question about the validity of that study that you did 
down in that area, about the way it was conducted, and where it was conducted. Could you just give me 
some information as to how it was conducted? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Order! 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, first of all the 
department has designated a certain area for this experiment. This particular evaluation has taken place 
over two fall hunting periods. The landowners and the hunters who hunt in that area were contacted and 
questioned with respect to this regulation. On the basis of the contacts and the results of the contacts, we 
came to the conclusion that it wasn’t too acceptable. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether that really answered the question. I was 
just wondering how they went about actually doing the study. The people up there in that area have put a 
lot of pressure on me, as the Minister is aware; you have received a petition from the people in that area 
indicating that they are entirely dissatisfied with goose hunting in the present way it is being handled. 
They just say that the validity of the study that you did is highly questionable and the way in which 
some young fellow conducted it. I was just wondering exactly how did he conduct the study? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I’m not too sure whether I can provide the Hon. Member with all of the details 
of this study except to say that the conservation officer and the patrolman were involved. This was done 
in conjunction with the Canadian Wildlife Service. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Well, just in concluding my remarks, I should like to suggest to the Minister that 
from what I can understand, I’ll tell you what they tell me is going to happen in that area this coming 
year. You are going to see an awful lot more land being posted, and if you are worried about the 
privilege and the right of the individual to hunt, well certainly with the posting of more and more land, 
that privilege is going to disappear even further. Now I don’t know whether these people are going to 
carry out the threats that they are making but the threats are there. They say simply that they will post 
their land and they are going to keep these people off the land by posting. I understand that they can do 
so. Whether you are going to go on the land to dig a pit or whether you are going to go on the land to 
hunt, you are still going to need permission. So I would hope that the Minister would take this under 
advisement anyhow. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Chairman, just a couple of general questions. We are 
demanding of cottage owners in the provincial parks to put up more and more money for capital 
expenditures, either for sewage or effluent cutbacks or septic tanks. We are asking these people to make 
some maybe very major capital outlays as 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2352 
 

these demands increase, and they may be legitimate. Do you not think it is somewhat unfair to ask these 
people to make these major capital outlays and continue to lease, and would the Government consider 
selling to the cottage owners their property in light of these increasing demands? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, no, our department will not consider selling. We intend to 
continue leasing the property, unless it may be outside the park area. But anything that is within the park 
system at the moment, we are not prepared to sell any of that property. 
 
MR. LANE: — Would the Minister then consider any type of a grant program for any cottage owners 
who perhaps can’t afford the investments in septic tanks or effluent disposal. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, at this time, no, we certainly do not intend to set up an assistance 
program for this purpose. I just want to point out that my personal feeling is that how fortunate is the 
person who has a site in one of our park systems. I think there are many who would like to have a site 
near the water’s edge or even further away from the water’s edge, but they are unable to obtain one 
because of the fact that many of the sites have already been taken up unless there are new areas, new 
subdivisions opened up. I personally think that the cottage owners perhaps could be considered a 
privileged group. Privileged, from the fact that they are able to have a site in a particular park. 
 
MR. LANE: — My next question is, and this will be my last series of questions, there has been, I 
suggest, a rather dramatic cutback in tourism and recreation expenditures, cutback in the number of 
staff, cutback in the expenditures. There is a very obvious contradiction in the Government policy. On 
the one hand the Government talks about encouraging tourism as an industry in the province and it has 
taken some efforts in that regard and then has cut back in this year’s estimates. Now if tourism is an 
income or revenue producing industry for the province and we are getting strapped for funds, then surely 
the positive approach would be to increase expenditure. I have had complaints, and I am sure the 
Minister has had them, that the provincial parks system is deteriorating in the form of capital projects 
within the provincial parks, that not enough is being spent for upkeep, that not enough new expenditures 
are being made for capital needs in the provincial parks. Now would the Minister not admit that the 
cutback in expenditures this year, as set out in the estimates, is really a complete contradiction in the 
Government’s previously stated policy in encouraging tourism? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that it is a change in any philosophy with respect to 
promoting tourism and providing a recreation atmosphere for the people of this province or for that 
matter tourists outside the province. I think the Hon. Member understands that our entire Government is 
exercising responsible financing and, therefore, there likely are some cutbacks, not only in this 
department but in other departments as well. Let me say that the fact that there are perhaps less amounts 
of funds for a particular purpose within the department, 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2353 
 

is certainly not a change in our philosophy. It is just a matter of exercising responsible spending. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well a cutback is a cutback and the Minister cannot get away from that. I will give you 
an example that has been brought to my attention. I am advised by a constituent, and I will vouch for the 
letter, that there has been a master plan study in the, I believe it is, Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park, 
since 1969. Then people were told that there was a new plan, that the original one that had been started 
in 1969 was ended and there was a new plan to be studied and now they are told that there will be no 
appreciable amount of funds for capital improvements in the parks generally and that none can be 
expected for at least the next five years. 
 
Now, first of all, is that the long term intent of the Government to restrict capital improvements in our 
parks and if so, in particular, what happened in Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I don’t know where the Hon. Member got his information. Good Spirit 
Provincial Park happens to be in my own riding, and it is only about 20 miles away from my home, and 
I do have a special interest in this provincial park. Certainly the information that the Hon. Member has 
obtained with respect to no extra capital funding for the park for the next five years is not correct. We, in 
setting up our budget and the capital spending for provincial parks, do it on a year-at-a-time basis. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, how much of Item 17 would go for capital improvements, capital expenditures? 
What you can supply me with, and I don’t need it right now, Mr. Minister, is the capital expenditures of 
each of the provincial parks prior to the end of the session. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we will supply the Hon. Member with the information. 
 
MR. LANE: — Just one final comment. I noticed that you really didn’t answer that seeing there will be 
no appreciable capital expenditures in our provincial parks in the next five years - and again I reiterate, I 
think that that is bad, any cutback in tourism is a bad decision by the Government and I think it is a 
wrong decision - if we are to accept tourism as being one of our industries, then a cutback I don’t think 
fairly can be considered a more appropriate expenditure of funds. What you are admitting by implication 
is that you have wasted money in the past, in which case you are to be condemned and/or at this time 
you are not spending enough. Either way I think that the Government stands to be condemned for its 
approach to tourism. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I should like to beg the indulgence of the House to introduce a group of 
students, if I may, who just entered the gallery. This is a group of students, and I am introducing them on 
behalf of my colleague, Mr. Thibault, the Member for Kinistino, a group of Grade 12 students from the 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2354 
 

Kinistino High School. These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Merlin MacFarlane, Mr. 
Richard Fresson, and Mr. Larry Newfeld. As you will notice, they are sitting in the gallery and Mr. 
Thibault’s wife is up there with them as well. I understand that these students have already visited the 
Leader-Post Building, the RCMP barracks, and the Museum of Natural History and are now visiting the 
Legislative Buildings. I am sure that all Members join with me in welcoming these students and 
expressing our wish that their visit here may be educational and pleasant and that they have a safe 
journey home. 
 
I might add that I think the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Nelson) will speak to them briefly on behalf of 
Mr. Thibault once they leave the Speaker’s Gallery. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RENEWABLE RESOURCES - cont’d 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, if I might through you direct a remark or two 
to the Minister responsible for Tourism and Renewable Resources. I should like just briefly to go back 
to cottage owners. I can appreciate your comments; they are possibly a privileged group to be able to 
live in such a scenic area. On the other hand, they, for good reasons, live there on a permanent annual 
basis. They are not eligible for homeowners’ grants and it is a problem that you are going to be 
confronted with by the cottage owners associations if you haven’t been already. I should like to know if 
you are going to take any measures in the future to accommodate them in this area. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, when you speak to the question of providing assistance to cottage 
owners in the parks, I think we must consider other people as well. By assisting the cottage owners to 
install sewage facilities or whatever, it may be we must also be prepared to assist those living outside the 
park. I think that is an important consideration. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I think that that is already accepted, as the Minister should be 
aware, through the family farm improvement grants. That is already being done and I am referring 
specifically, as I said before, to these cottage owners who are living there on an annual basis, on a 
permanent basis. They are not living there for the benefit of the park and for the benefit of the lake front 
or the scenic view that they may have, they are there for a good reason, that they are working in that area 
and that is where they choose to reside. And I think they, to a large extent, have a real argument there 
and I think that you are going to have to come to grips with that problem. It isn’t a matter of providing 
for other groups in the other parts of the province, you already are. If you could just respond just once 
more on that to clarify that. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at the moment we certainly don’t have any assistance 
program for permanent residents in the park or in the lake area. What we may consider for the future I 
cannot tell, but at the moment we certainly do not have any assistance program. 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2355 
 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, I might just ask one further question in a different area regarding 
preservation of wild life, namely, the hunting licences as pertains to the white tail or mule deer 
population and for that matter moose in the northern part and in the Moose Mountain Provincial Park. 
One of the problems is that a group of people like to hunt together, four or five individuals, Mr. 
Chairman, like to get together every year, as I am sure the Minister is well aware. It may be two or three 
who drive a couple of hundred miles to a certain area to hunt on an annual basis. So let’s just think about 
that for a minute. Five guys go out and they each get a licence for a one-deer zone. As soon as you get a 
deer, it may be at 10 o’clock in the morning, then your hunting privileges are finished for that given year 
and really all you can do now is travel around with the group and you can’t really participate in the hunt. 
What they do, and I am sure you are aware of this, Mr. Chairman, they do not tag that deer, they just 
simply gut it and leave it wherever it was shot and they continue hunting as a group for the duration of 
the day, maybe two or three days, maybe it is a certain weekend or whatever. Quite often at the end of 
that day or a couple of days, they will say, well it was just a little one we got back there, we won’t 
bother going back and pick it up. I wonder, would there be any possible way that a group licence could 
be issued to a number of individuals, maybe four or five, and that it must be fulfilled in a set length of 
time, maybe seven days or you might have a variation of that, so that the group could go out and hunt 
and put a temporary tag on that deer when it is shot. It wouldn’t cancel their licence, they would still be 
able to go out and hunt because you have got five guys and you only have one or two temporary tags but 
those licenses wouldn’t be cancelled until such time as all five had their deer within that set length of 
time, and that group could hunt then as a group and they wouldn’t have to break the law in the way that 
they are doing now. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Now, Mr. Chairman, we did at one time have a system of that kind and tried to 
attempt to have the system work. This was for moose. Our experience was that it wasn’t practical 
enough and hasn’t worked out, but I want to suggest to the Hon. Member that if he feels very strongly 
that it should be reconsidered, I would suggest that he take this up with the local Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation and see how acceptable the idea would be. I want to say that our department is working very 
closely with the Wildlife Federation in setting up the various regulations for hunting purposes. 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Chairman, I am not a goose hunter so I would like just a 
clarification. When you are talking about ditch shooting, do they shoot in road allowance ditches? When 
I hunt big game and on my licence it says that I shall not discharge on or across road allowances with a 
rifle, as I recall, so how could you do ditch shooting out of a road allowance ditch? This is what they tell 
me, I am not a goose hunter, but it would be strange because if I take my rifle and it usually says on my 
licence that if you discharge your rifle when I am out hunting deer on a road allowance or across a road 
allowance it’s illegal, it’s an offence. I might be wrong, unless it has been changed as I haven’t hunted 
for about two years now. 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2356 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — What we were referring to, Mr. Chairman, is pit hunting on private land. It is not 
hunting out of a ditch, a road ditch. We weren’t referring to hunting out of a road ditch. The pits that we 
were referring to are pits on private land. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Mr. Chairman, when you are zoning a zone for just pit hunting, what are you 
doing if you are not zoning? What’s this pit hunting bit that you were speaking about - I am not a goose 
hunter, I’m serious, the only ditches I know are road ditches in a field unless it’s irrigation land, so what 
are you ditch hunting if you are not pit hunting. I mean you’ve got to go on a person’s land and it’s 
illegal to shoot if you are not on a person’s land according to my knowledge of big game hunting. I can’t 
go out and shoot on a highway; I have got to be off a road allowance. So pit or no pit, can you shoot 
geese from a road allowance with a shot gun? Maybe it is a different ruling. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The regulation of the law is that you cannot discharge a gun along or across a 
road allowance. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, to pursue that a little bit further, that doesn’t mean you can’t 
shoot then from a road allowance, does it, as long as you don’t shoot along it or across it? If you are 
shooting away from it, it is permissible. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — That is correct. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — In other words, it is possible to sit on the road allowance and shoot geese. That’s 
what I think Mr. Anderson is indicating. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Is it then, as I understand it, allowable to discharge or fire from a road allowance 
away from it? If I am out deer hunting and I can be on the road if I am 50 or 100 yards down the road 
from my car, which you have to be now, I can then discharge my rifle from the road allowance? That’s 
what I gather by your answer. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well, I have an interpretation, I hope we have it right this time. I am informed 
that one cannot shoot along or across a numbered highway but you could shoot off a highway. And with 
respect to the road allowance, apparently there is no law that says you cannot shoot across, along or off a 
road allowance. In other words, you are permitted to shoot off, along or across a road allowance. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Mr. Chairman, this means that if I come and shoot across a grid road or a 
municipal highway, I won’t be charged? We have neighbours paying fines for nothing down home. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, I would interpret it that, unless it is a numbered highway, but then of course 
it is not a grid road. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Minister, has this law just been changed? You 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2357 
 

know I would hope that the Minister would check into it a little bit further because I remember a couple 
of years back a constituent of mine was quite irate when the RCMP official charged him and took his 
firearm away for shooting at ducks from the ditch of a numbered highway. He was not shooting across 
the highway or along it but he was shooting away from it. He was shooting at the ducks that were taking 
off from the lake which happened to be on the south side of the road. So as far as the RCMP are 
concerned, they then don’t know that this exists, that this particular law exists. So I would hope that the 
Minister would check into this. Possibly the Attorney General should maybe check into that as well. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well, we will certainly take a very careful look at it as well. We are hoping that 
too much of this shooting off the highway or along or across the road allowance doesn’t take place. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Mr. Chairman, according to the Act now, it is not legal. I am interested because 
not over two months ago my neighbour shot a coyote, not from his truck but down on the road 
allowance and he lost his rifle. They fined him quite a lot of money. It’s funny, I’m going to check with 
the Attorney General’s office on that one because he would like to have his rifle back, I know that. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I think there is one other point that comes into play here. There might be a 
possibility of some municipal bylaws that we should be checking into. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Minister, if we discover through our investigation, excuse me Mr. Attorney 
General - Mr. Chairman if you would ask the Attorney General to be quiet please - can you give this 
House the assurance that if we discover in our investigations that some of our constituents have been 
charged and prosecuted for discharging a firearm on a road allowance or highway, can you give us some 
assurance that they will be reimbursed for any fines that may have been imposed if we find that they 
have been improperly prosecuted? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I think that I am not in a position to reply to this one. You would 
have to perhaps check with the Attorney General when his Estimates come up. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Minister a few questions about the 
Lombard North Study that was done on the Cypress Hills Provincial Park. It has been approximately a 
year now since you had the study and which you held hearings on in the area, maybe not quite a year. I 
was just wondering how close you are to developing a master plan for that provincial park and when you 
have developed the master plan and have decided what you think should be done, are you going to bring 
the master plan to the area in the Southwest so that the people of the southwest can get an indication of 
what you intend to do with the Cypress Hills Provincial Park? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, the results of the 
hearings have now been completed and they are 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2358 
 

at the printers. As soon as these become available, we will certainly be communicating with the people 
in the area. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — You say the results of the hearing are at the printers. I thought I got a copy of all 
the briefs that were presented and a summary quite some time ago of all the remarks and everything that 
came about at those particular hearings that we had in the area last year, so what’s at the printers? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, when the public hearings were held then, we had the transcripts done up, 
now it is the recommendations of the hearing board that are at the printers. We are waiting until they are 
ready. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Minister, after these recommendations from your hearing board reach your 
department and you make a number of final decisions, are you going to go out to the area as I indicated 
and seek more opinions from the people in that particular area? Before anything is actually done, are you 
going to go back to the public? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that is our intention. As a matter of fact, I think we have 
some plans to come into the area early and discuss some of this with the people of the area. So, very 
definitely, we will be coming into the area to discuss the recommendations of the board. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — One final question. What sort of a time frame are you operating under? When do 
you expect to complete your master plan for the Cypress Hills Provincial Park? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — My officials inform me that we expect to get back to the public some time this 
summer and, hopefully, following that, within a year we can see some action. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 - 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Minister by what means the department 
spent its $200,000 a year on fires. What means do you take to prevent fire in your timber stands, etc., or 
fight it when it does - $200,000 doesn’t seem like a very large amount of money to spend on fires. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, we set aside $200,000 not because we have a very good idea or 
have a close estimate of how much fire suppression for that particular year may cost. We do not know. I 
think it was the year before that we had a very good year since only a few small fires occurred. Last year 
was a little heavier year and this year we do not know. Nevertheless, we think that it may cost us 
approximately $200,000, maybe less, maybe more. 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2359 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — What do you do for financial resources if in fact as it appears now, there is some 
potential for serious fire hazards in northern Saskatchewan? What do you do if your funds are used up 
earlier on in the season; what sources do you draw on for reserve funds? In fighting fires, do you just 
quit throwing water on them when you run out of money? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well, the only thing we have left to do is, of course, to ask for a special warrant. 
 
Items 6 - 12 agreed. 
 
Item 13 
 
MR. WIPF: — Would the Minister outline some of the expansion or some of the projects they intend to 
expand on up there in the Prince Albert region this summer, in some of the campsites and what 
campsites? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Is this the capital projects, the large capital projects, because this isn’t included 
in the subvote. Any of the major developments would be in Government Services budget. 
 
Mr. Chairman, may I indicate to the Member that the capital expenditure vote, out of our department, is 
on page 91, vote 40. Would you wish to wait until then and I could outline the projects that we are 
planning to undertake in the Prince Albert region? For that matter I had indicated to one of the Members 
that I would be supplying the Member with information regarding capital project developments and I 
could do this for all of the other Members. Is that fair enough? 
 
Item 13 agreed. 
 
Items 14 and 15 agreed. 
 
Item 16 
 
MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Chairman, a fairly substantial increase in expenditure, yet no 
increase in staff. Could you explain that please? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Are you referring to any particular item in that subvote? 
 
MR. HAM: — Mainly the total. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Most of that increase takes in the salary increases and the salary increments. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — It is in the “other personal services” and “other expenses” that the 
really big increase is, not in the permanent positions. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The majority of the increased funds in that subvote are 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2360 
 

for the purpose of offsetting increase in administrative expenses including wages and salaries, 
particularly under the Commercial Advance Account. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Last summer there were severe cutbacks in the number of part-time people, the 
summer employees, working in the provincial parks. This year, are you going to try and operate the 
provincial parks with roughly the same summer staff that you had last year, or do you intend to increase 
the number of summer employees at the provincial parks? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I think that I replied to a similar question the other day. There is 
going to be a slight increase in staff. I don’t know what percentage - about a three per cent increase in 
staff. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, to what do you attribute the number of only eight employees in that area? 
Why so low? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I am informed that the Swift Current region is a region that is smaller in size 
than some of the other regions that we do have. I would also like to point out that the staff number really 
hasn’t changed over the last number of years. There hasn’t been a cut in staff. The staff that we have in 
place right now is the regional director, resource technician II, conservation officer II at Maple Creek, 
conservation officer I at Swift Current and conservation officer I at Kindersley. There is a park 
superintendent IV at Cypress Hills, a park superintendent I at Saskatchewan Landing and park 
maintenance foreman II at Cypress Hills. 
 
MR. HAM: — Just one further comment, Mr. Chairman. I know from discussions that I have had with 
some of the employees in that area that there is a deep concern respecting the lack of available help 
during hunting season. I am wondering if the Minister can make a comment on that. Are there any plans 
to increase the policing staff during hunting season? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, during the hunting season what we do is redirect staff from other 
areas to assist wherever there might be a problem. I think that this is one of the areas that we do bring in 
additional staff and particularly during the antelope season. 
 
MR. WIPF: — You have a $26,000 increase in your permanent positions due to staff increases and 
increments. You have a $93,000 increase in the other personal services and other expenses an increase 
of $144,000, about a $237,000 increase there. Can you explain that to me? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, to explain that further, we require an amount of $127,000 to 
cover the increased administrative expenses which I mentioned earlier, under the Commercial Advance 
Account. This is in accordance with Section 23 of the Tourism Renewal Resources Act; salary increases 
$87,910; upkeep in the Cypress Lake Recreation area $11,490; tourist information centre at Maple 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2361 
 

Creek $7,050; an additional thirty-two man months under the time certificate labour $28,920. This 
should add up to the total increase. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — In “other personal services” it is approximately a $93,000 increase. I am asking if 
that is for part-time help, an enlargement of your part-time help for this year. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Is it the $93,000 that you are referring to, or the $87,000? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The personal services, which is up $93,000. Is that mostly wages for part time 
help? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, that is mostly for wages as well as travel and sustenance, all in one 
package. 
 
Item 16 agreed. 
 
Item 17 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder what item maps and brochures expenses are incurred 
under. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, it wouldn’t be under this subvote, it would be under Extension Services. 
That would be Item 4 that we have gone by. 
 
Return to Item 4 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister would permit a question. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Return to Item 4. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I think that something that is very important right now in the Province of 
Saskatchewan is the availability of Saskatchewan road maps. I understand that the Department of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources put these road maps out to the various parks. I think that the Minister 
may advise the Minister of Highways, as well, that it is a very important area inasmuch as the cost of 
fuel now has increased another four cents a gallon and people who are touring our province are surely 
going to want to take the shortest routes. I am wondering what costs does your department incur in 
making the maps available? Do you have any figures as to how many maps you make available 
annually? At what cost? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The road maps, Mr. Chairman, are printed by the Department of Highways and 
we obtain our supply from them. At the moment I just couldn’t say how many maps we obtain from 
them, but I am quite certain that it is a fairly large supply. 
 
I believe the Hon. Member has a good point because I have 



 
April 20, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

2362 
 

run across it, too, that some of the areas have gone short of maps. I will take this up with the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Return to Item 17 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, one question on this. Is this the item that the Saskatchewan River 
Heritage Project comes under? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the Heritage Program that we had in our department has been 
transferred to the Department of Culture and Youth as of December 1, 1976. So, therefore, it is handled 
under that department now. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The total program, there is nothing from Tourism and Renewable Resources in there? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The only part of that program which you might say we operate is in connection 
with recreation sites and information centres. 
 
Item 17 agreed. 
 
Item 18 agreed. 
 
Item 19 agreed. 
 
Item 20 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister could tell me how much land has been 
purchased through the Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the Hon. Member’s question, there were 137 
individual purchases from 65 to 4,678 acres in size. Total acreage purchased is 47,893 and the total cost 
is $1,312,774. It is an average cost per acre of $27.41. 
 
Item 20 agreed. 
 
Items 21 and 22 agreed. 
 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE - VOTE 40 
 
Items 1 - 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Could you define the airfield’s portion of that please? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I think there is an error in that title to that item. Really our 
department doesn’t have anything to do with any airfields any more. The entire expenditure is for road 
purposes. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 



 
Committee of Finance  April 20, 1977 
 

2363 
 

Items 5 and 6 agreed. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Is the Minister going to make available the capital projects, the entire list, did I 
hear that earlier? Will you give us a copy of that? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, it will be on your desk tomorrow morning. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARIES 
 
Item 27 agreed. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, page 92, we have forgotten that item there, or do you do that 
later? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I might just inform the Member that he is certainly within his right to ask 
questions on it, but there is no voting for this item. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — If I could have the air weapons range agreement, some information on that 
please. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I will send that to him. 
 
Vote 39 agreed. 
 
Supplementary Estimates agreed. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:11 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


