


























































Hansard: November 24, 1977


233 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 
November 24, 1977 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
CONSENT GIVEN TO DEFER THRONE SPEECH DEBATE WITHOUT ADJOURNMENT 

 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — I would request a moment of the 
Assembly's time to just present to you a brief problem. Due to the (I suppose) greenness of some of the 
whips that were involved today because the regular whips were away, due to our own misunderstanding and 
because of the fact that the House sits tonight, I am afraid that we have come to a position in which, in order 
to co-operate and get on with the Throne Speech, it was our understanding throughout, by the whips and 
everyone else, that I could call it 5:00 o'clock tonight and then they could go on with the Throne Speech 
tonight and tomorrow I would be able to pick it up with 20 minutes of radio time left. Unfortunately, if I had 
adjourned debate at 5:00 o'clock or asked for leave to adjourn debate at 5:00, that meant that we couldn't go 
on with the Throne Speech tonight. 
 
I wonder, because of the unique circumstances of this particular Address-in-Reply and because of the unique 
circumstances of what occurred today, would it be possible for you to request the House, on a one-time basis 
— on a unanimous basis, to allow me to speak tomorrow and not adjourn debate so we could proceed with 
the Throne Speech tonight without me doing it — by leave? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I realize the predicament that the member is in and I will ask the House for consent. 
But, however, before I ask the House for consent I must caution the House about the situation we are in, 
namely, that the speaker that was on his feet at 5:00 o'clock must continue to speak at this time or will have 
lost his right to speak and if, in fact, he adjourns the debate at any time between now and 10:00 o'clock that 
will conclude the discussion of the Throne Speech for today, and he would be precluded from getting back 
into the discussion tomorrow. 
 
What we are doing if we give consent to the member to do this, unanimous consent of the House, is that we 
are saying in effect that a member can ask to debate and then get out of the debate and then get back into the 
debate at a later time. This gives the member an advantage, although the member may not be seeking that 
advantage in this case. It does give the member an opportunity to make some remarks, step out of the debate, 
come back in later and rebut remarks which had been made between his first appearance in the debate and 
his second appearance in the debate. Having drawn your attention to these items I will now ask the Assembly 
if there is unanimous consent to allow the member of the debate to continue with other members interceding 
and the member for Nipawin going tomorrow, as I understand it, on the last 20 minutes of air time. Consent 
agreed to. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — I am pleased to have this opportunity to participate in this, what I think, 
important Throne Speech debate, and at the outset allow me to add my personal congratulations to the mover 
and the seconder. Their individual perception of this Throne Speech has indeed, I think, been positive, and I 
congratulate them both on a job well done. 
 
I was, Mr. Speaker, however, disappointed with the evaluation of members opposite in 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

234 

terms of their participation in this debate, because I always think that Throne Speeches have traditionally 
provided a general assessment of the economic and social realities of the province, and at the same time 
provided in most general terms an indication of future initiatives which the government will present during 
the course of the legislative session. 
 
Members opposite appear to have difficulty in understanding this fact of life. I would have to say that the 
member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) was critical because there weren't enough specifics; there wasn't 
sufficient detail. Judging from past performance, the member for Nipawin and the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan, I would say, should be the last people to complain about lack of specifics, because I believe 
that that if ever there was a party unwilling to attach itself to specific policies in relationship to any area of 
government responsibilities, that is the position of the Conservative Party. 
 
They say that they would do away with Land Bank. We have heard that quite frequently. They would 
eliminate the Potash Corporation. They would radically cut out government involvement in many ongoing 
programs. They would stop this and they would end that. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I believe it is well enough to tell the people what you are against, but I think 
that what the people want to know and what we want to know and what the public demands is 'what are you 
proposing to do as an alternative? Where are your policies and your programs?' The public is asking them to 
hold them up for public examination. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that the Conservatives in this Legislature 
soon come to grips with the real issues that are facing this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, permit me to offer this Assembly a few thoughts in relationship to this Throne Speech. 
 
On the issue of national unity, the Throne Speech articulates what I feel is a very, very important assessment 
of our province in terms of the confederation framework. And I quote, and I'm quoting from the Throne 
Speech: 
 

The efforts of my government are directed towards finding new ways of defining confederation so 
that Canadians from all regions will feel a renewed sense of commitment and loyalty to their 
nation. 

 
"A renewed sense of commitment" — the key phrase, Mr. Speaker. The vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people I feel are committed Canadians, yet they feel, and with justification, that our role in confederation and 
the contribution we are able to make has been effectively diminished. No one questions the loyalty we all 
share in terms of a united Canada. Yet, several reservations we share with other western Canadians have 
prevented the solidification of commitment, which many feel is necessary if we are to become equal partners 
in a united and unified Canada. Issues such as tariff protection, transportation, resource policy, 
multi-culturalism, are, Mr. Speaker, but some of the major issues which come to mind when we examine the 
concerns we have about the status quo relative to confederation. These concerns, however, do not prevent us 
from continuing to pursue a renewed commitment in terms of our nation. In fact, I feel the concerns of 
Quebec people and the questions they have raised will in the final analysis contribute to an over-all 
examination and an eventual new basis for the Canadian federation. 
 
The challenges before us are all indeed immense. It will take, I think, a collective effort, a by-partisan effort. 
I say to you that the stakes are high, too high, to allow the debate to 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

235 
 

be compromised by partisan politics. Granted, many of the serious policies, questions, are the result of 
political decision-making. Yet I am sure that we can attach ourselves to the collective ideals of all Canadians 
without being sidetracked by narrow, political ideology. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Canada is a great country. Its greatness did not just happen. Sacrifice and dedication were 
needed by many to ensure its growth and its development. The concerns of Quebec are well known. The 
great Quebec debate has perhaps had a positive side effect. The questions raised by that province have 
started a process involving all Canadians, in terms of their own personal evaluation of Canada as a nation. 
The Quebec debate has enabled us all to develop a better awareness in terms, Mr. Speaker, of our individual 
relationship to the federation, and as to what it means and what changes are needed. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, Canada will survive. I am confident that out of this present crisis will immerge a 
much stronger nation, a nation of greater commitment, a people with more understanding and governments 
with greater knowledge. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, allow me to say a few words about our economy. In many respects our province stands 
out as something unique and apart from the other provinces of Canada. As other provinces struggle to offset 
the tremendous pressure being imposed on their economy as a result of rampant inflation as a result of 
rampant inflation, high unemployment, declining gross national product and a rising trade deficit, 
Saskatchewan has been able to shield itself from this economic recession. Might I remind you, Mr. Speaker, 
our good fortune didn't just happen. Members opposite perhaps find it convenient to ignore the facts, yet the 
facts cannot be disputed. 
 
In many respects, our good fortune, can be attributed directly to the policies and the programs of this New 
Democratic Party government. Responsibility, and stability, are two fundamentally important factors in 
relationship to the economic growth of this province in the past six years. Our record in agriculture stands 
out as a model of commitment for prairie farmers. Our commitment to Saskatchewan agriculture is 
unyielding, which is something members opposite cannot state honestly. 
 
What was the record of the former Liberal government when Saskatchewan farmers were faced with 
economic pressures? Where were they, when support programs were needed to provide some stability to the 
agriculture industry? Where was the former Liberal government when the problems of land tenure started to 
intensify? Where were Saskatchewan Liberals when Saskatchewan farmers were pleading for support and 
marketing programs to assist them in the marketing of their produce? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the questions are many and members opposite still cannot figure out why they are 
sitting in the opposition. And what about the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. Where are their agricultural 
policies? What will they do? We know they will abolish the land bank and several of our other popular 
grants and support programs but I ask you what is their program in relationship to agriculture. I haven't heard 
it. Conservatives don't seem to have many planks in their platform but I suppose that I could assume Mr. 
Speaker that their federal leader speaks for them when he says he supports competition in the marketing of 
all prairie grains. So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

236 

that I challenge the Conservative members opposite to set the record straight. Is it their policy to allow the 
private market system to compete with the Wheat Board? Are they in favour of this direct assault of the 
marketing system of the Canadian Wheat Board and if they do not agree, why don't they tell the public? Mr. 
Speaker, the farmers of this province want to know where they stand on this fundamentally important issue? 
 
Another key factor relative to the economic stability we enjoy in Saskatchewan is the position of this 
government in terms of resource development. Members opposite can't, or won't accept our premise that the 
people of Saskatchewan should enjoy more control and receive a greater share of our natural resources. Let 
me remind you, the recent announcement by INCO that they are pulling the pin on thousands of Canadian 
workers in Sudbury and Thompson, Manitoba should reinforce our commitment in terms of resource policies 
of this government. The fact that this large multinational corporation should be able to just pull up stakes at a 
whim and take all their profits with them to explore resource potential elsewhere, is indicative of where 
Tories and Liberals stand in relationship to resource policy. 
 
Right now in the House of Commons the debate continues on taxation adjustment which will, if approved 
actually give INCO $70 million. Imagine, Mr. Speaker, $70 million as a reward for putting 4,500 Canadians 
on the unemployment roll. That's what's happening. And who is the only party opposing the legislation? I ask 
you, who is the only party? Are the Conservatives against it? Of course not. How could they oppose 
legislation which would help INCO, when we are told INCO contributes massive sums to the Conservative 
party election coffers, so why would they oppose it? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is only the New Democratic Party which has the determination and commitment to 
stand up against such inequitable legislation. The entire INCO issue brings up a very important question. I 
am sure members opposite might say — why bring that question up? That happened in Manitoba and in 
Ontario — we're interested in what has happened in Saskatchewan. I can hear them saying that. But I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, the question is important because if members opposite ever get the change to govern this 
province, multinational resource companies will be at the doorstep with the same deal for Saskatchewan and 
Tories and Liberals will say, 'go ahead'. That's what worries me. We say, Mr. Speaker, 'No', 'No', to this kind 
of development and our determination is already paying dividends; dividends members opposite would 
unilaterally turn over to the bank accounts of their corporate friends, if given the opportunity to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech succeeds in providing a positive assessment of the economic and 
social activities of Saskatchewan. I am proud to be associated with a government which has the 
determination to meet the challenges of Saskatchewan in a very positive and straight forward manner. We 
believe that progress has been recorded. We feel our initiatives have had a positive influence on our growth 
and development. I say to you, we do not pretend, however, to possess all the answers. The responsibilities 
to govern are indeed immense and no one knows that better than members of the Legislature. But we have 
been entrusted to build a better Saskatchewan and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that each member of this 
Assembly has been given that responsibility. Each member has the opportunity to contribute to that process 
and I say to you with that in mind. I sincerely wonder when some members opposite are going to begin to 
honor that commitment and fulfill that obligation. 
 
I am particularly concerned about members of the Conservative caucus. They have had more than two years 
now to fulfill that promise and I feel, Mr. Speaker, that unless they 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

237 
 

adopt a compete turn-about, that we won't be seeing many of them around after the next election. Time is 
limited for them. Saskatchewan has a tradition, and might I remind you, Saskatchewan has a tradition and 
history of progressive government. They demand sincerity and unqualified commitment from their 
government. I say to you that Saskatchewan will not tolerate anything less. It is my sincere hope and my 
challenge, Mr. Speaker, for members opposite to start thinking about that fact, and start thinking in the very 
near future because only then will their support and shaky credibility stabilize. 
 
I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that from my remarks that you will notice I will obviously support the main motion 
because the Speech from the Throne is, I think, consistent with our ongoing commitment, and that 
commitment is to build a better Saskatchewan and it is because the amendment is not consistent with the 
confidence we share with Saskatchewan and its people, that I will be voting against the amendment. 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in the Throne Speech 
debate of this 4th session of the 18th Legislature, I would first like to congratulate the member for Pelly on 
taking his seat in the Legislature. It appears we haven't held his attention long enough and he has already left 
the House. And it seems to me that the PCs are too much worried about where they sit in this Legislature and 
it seems to me that the government opposite are too worried about the PCs as well. Why the PCs worry 
about where they sit is because there are so few of them here most of the time, they could almost sit any 
place in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the agricultural industry were very fortunate this year in the 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency. Our crops were better than average and the majority of the high 
protein wheat was also in the top grades. The rain during the summer brought a good hay crop and the 
pastures produced rich grass for the many herds of very fine livestock of our area. 
 
The price of grain appears to be moving up slowly and the beef price was much better than it was a year ago. 
We get a little tired sometimes of the doom and gloom coming from that other side. We are looking forward 
to a brighter future for agriculture. 
 
I am pleased that the Premier was able to come to the constituency this summer to witness our very fine area. 
On his showcase tour it was not surprising that he reported the major concern appeared to be the deplorable 
condition of the provincial highways in our area. It is more surprising that nothing has been done to improve 
that situation. He should also have realized that his many aids detoured the worst highways and took him the 
long way around to get where he was going to ensure that the bus arrived with all the wheels on it. 
 
I was most disappointed when the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan hustled off the members of the 
media out of a controversial meeting in Coronach. There was disappointment because the Premier was not 
better informed on the problems of that district. Rather than bring answers the Premier left more unanswered 
questions. I was also very disappointed that the Premier didn't go up and take a good look at the Bishopric 
area and the sodium sulphate plant that this government shut down. 
 
Mr. Speaker at the risk of being repetitive I would like to tell the Premier and the minister in charge of SPC 
all is not well with the Poplar River Power project. I am sure the people appreciate the naming of the dam 
and the reservoir after two resident pioneers but they wonder why the government continues to harass and 
abuse the children and the 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

238 

grandchildren of other pioneers of that area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the farmers are still losing their farms through expropriation. 
Corridors for the power transmission lines are being expropriated without regard for the farmers. These 
transmission lines angle and turn through the best parts of fields when they could well have followed 
between fields for much more suitable routes. When the poles were being let off on these strips of 
expropriated land large machinery, semitrailer trucks and heavy equipment used the farmers' fields to make 
Uturns on to dump these poles. They ruined crops and packed down that land. Roadways were made through 
crops of lovely grain yet unthreshed when just a few 100 feet away vehicles could have driven on SPC 
expropriated property. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — A 300 foot corridor some six miles long between the coalfield and the power plant was 
also expropriated and where did it go? It curled and angled through the farmers' fields without any regard for 
individuals. And the minister knows right well without difficulty it could have followed the road allowance 
and caused much less hardship. 
 
I witnessed the arrogant procedure in the area myself when I saw heavy equipment bulldozing down a young 
farmer's 40 bushel crop when he was pulling on the other end of the field with his combine. Mr. Speaker, it 
is little wonder the Minister in charge of SPC keeps far away from Coronach. 
 
The Hart Butte municipal council were not surprised when this same corridor road was pushed across their 
road allowances without their permission and without any agreement for any safety devices on those 
crossings. After all this government has a power plant and a fence standing much of it on municipal road 
allowance property and they have no permission to be there with it. Arrogance has been very common to the 
local people when dealing with this government. 
 
I want to tell the minister the well water problem is not satisfactory and there are more problems down 
stream from the dam. Wells there aren't short of water, they are running over and a higher water level 
necessary in the reservoir will only increase this problem. The farms on both sides of the river downstream 
are already deteriorating. The land is turning white as the water pushes the alkali to the top of the soil. This 
will spread for miles on both sides of the river and many miles and even south into Montana. I would 
strongly recommend immediate attention be given to this urgent problem before the farms are completely 
worthless. I again urge the minister to reach agreements with local people and local governments before 
proceeding rather than the continual practice of pushing through his plans and then talking after. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — If his arrogance continues he may well be looking for another confrontation in the 
Coronach area in the very near future. The Minister in charge of SPC and the government of Saskatchewan 
are flirting with a very explosive problem with regard to the Poplar River power project. The non concern of 
the minister and the very light way he treats letters and requests from government in the United States could 
well cause an international incident for which he will be directly responsible. 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

239 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — The Premier as well must be held accountable when he allows the Minister of Highways 
of this province to visit Montana State capital on highway business and return saying all is well as far as 
problems in the Poplar River project is concerned. Did the Premier really send this Minister to quiet the 
pollution problems? I say that's a little like a farmer throwing a coyote in the chicken coop to quiet the 
chickens. Then the Premier has the audacity to blame Ottawa for poor communications. The Minister of the 
Environment in a letter of October 17, 1977, he assured there was no problems, all information requested 
was being forwarded to the United States government. 
 
The Minister in charge of SPC in a letter of October 24, 1977, appeared to believe all information was 
getting through to the US. I have spoken to many representatives of the Montana government on several 
occasions and their opinion is quite different. Their briefs to the International Joint Commission certainly 
maintains the fact they are not pleased with the communications with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
or the Saskatchewan government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from testimony given by the Hon. Ted Schwinden, Lieutenant-Governor 
of the state of Montana to the International Joint Commission public hearings on the Poplar River water 
quality in Scobey, Montana, November 2nd, 1977 and I quote: 
 

I am well aware of the water quality reference being considered here today and the earlier one on 
appropriation and they do not concern air quality control. However, with your permission, I would 
like to briefly tell you why we are seriously concerned of their quality. 

 
Saskatchewan Power has given no indication it will attempt to control the sulfur dioxide 
emissions. No industry in Montana would be allowed that luxury of this neglect. 

 
Montana encourages the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to use the best possible controls, both 
particulate and gaseous emissions. If the corporation uses the best possible controls on unit one, we 
believe that there will be no significant deterioration of the quality of Montana's air. On the other 
hand, if the best possible controls are not used, or if additional units are constructed there is a 
strong probability that there will be serious environmental impacts on human health, as well as 
vegetation growth and crop yield. 

 
MR. MESSER: — Tell us about the water quality in Montana? 
 
MR. NELSON: — You just sit there, Mr. Minister, and listen and pay attention. 
 
MR. MESSER: — I'll do that. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Mr. Speaker, does this sound like someone who agrees that all is well as the Minister of 
Highways professed? 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

240 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read from a telegram sent September 28th, 1977, to the chairman of the 
United States section of the International Joint Commission in Washington, D.C., from the Governor of 
Montana and I quote: 
 
I agree that critical information gaps presently exist including confusion regarding the conclusion of 
the burn test of the coal at the Boundary Dam station on December 18, 1975. Moreover, coal and 
leachate samples previously requested from Canadian officials have not been received as of this date. 
The lack of data makes the evaluation of potential transboundary effects, for all practical purposes, 
impossible at this point in time. 
 
We in Montana, feel that it would be irresponsible to consider additional units to the Coronach 
complex when information on Unit 1 is inconclusive. I am convinced that a more responsible 
position would be to declare a moratorium on the future plant construction until a more proper 
evaluation can be made on the effects of Plant 1. Sincerely, Thomas J. Judge, Governor of Montana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this sound like the government of Montana is satisfied with the information supplied by 
Saskatchewan, as our Minister of Natural Resources claims? 
 
I would like to quote from testimony presented to the IJC in Scobey, November 2, 1977 by representative, 
Dennis Nathe of the Montana State Government. 
 
Air quality agreements . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Now, some says this is Saskatchewan, well, mister, you better start worrying about our 
neighbors too. There aren't walls around this province, mister member from the north. 
 

Air quality agreements were supposed to have been reached about three months ago, prior to a test 
burn of coal and these agreements were based on a 40 per cent retention of sulphur dioxide in fly 
ash particles. There still exists, critical data gaps on the test burn analysis which has not been 
supplied by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. That percentage of sulphur dioxide retention in 
the fly ash has never been adequately proven. It is just supposition. Indications are that this 
retention will only be in the order of 8 to 10 per cent. This amount of sulphur dioxide will 
definitely cause violations on our side of the border. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people are not satisfied with the information supplied by the government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
More feelings were expressed in a letter to Jerry Sperling, CBC, from the Lieutenant-Governor of the State 
of Montana, and that was dated October 21, 1977, and I quote: 
 

In response to your telephone call earlier this week, we have prepared some information relative to 
the issues of data deficiency, delay and continuing concern. 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

241 
 

Although there has been a voluminous and continuing exchange of information between Canada 
and the United States concerning the SPC development on the east fork of the Poplar River, critical 
data gaps still remain. 

 
Since August, 1975, the State of Montana, the United States Environmental Protection Agency and 
the State Department have attempted to obtain specific technical data from the Sask Power 
Corporation. Specific substantial time delays have occurred in obtaining test burns, test burn 
procedures, fly ash distribution in the boiler system, delayed information of the physical plant 
layout, coal over-burn samples and trace elements analysis results on split coal samples. 

 
Again, this letter indicates the very little data that they have actually received. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier and his government must realize that there is no clear understanding in Saskatchewan let alone south 
of the 49th parallel. 
 
The government has the authority to proceed with one 300 megawatt plant only. Yet, when anyone visits the 
power plant at the site, and they ask, they are shown where each of the next three generators will be situated. 
While SPC is proceeding with haste, surely it would be wiser to get permission from the proper authorities 
before frightening the citizens of Saskatchewan, as well as the citizens of the United States. 
 
The story of the Poplar River project has always been the same. Rush headlong into a situation and worry 
about the consequences later. Expropriate, never negotiate. That, Mr. Speaker, is a wrong attitude in a 
democratic society. 
 
This government is not prepared to put the best pollution equipment on the smokestacks at Coronach. They 
know they will be dumping sulphur dioxide into the air. They believe the first stack will stay under 
reasonable standards. This government knows the best equipment available would stay well within that 
standard. They are not prepared to use it. They also know the second stack will be questionable whether or 
not it will stay within that standard for air quality. 
 
The sulphur dioxide will be dumped into the atmosphere. It will be picked up by the moisture in the air and 
it will come down on the people, the crops and the cattle as a weak form of sulphuric acid. If it comes down 
on the grain in the flower stage, the yield will be affected. Damage to human health, to plants, to trees, to 
livestock will certainly happen. The people's concern over the possible damage is so great, Mr. Speaker, 
south of the border, that the federal government of the United States of America in Washington, D.C. has 
allocated $620,000 to that area just south of the Poplar River power project. This $620,000 was appropriated 
to gather baseline data and assess the environmental impacts of that project. This continual testing of the air, 
water and soil could well be the basis for damage against this province should any pollution or crop damage 
occur in the future. The price for the best safeguard equipment may look cheap at that time. 
 
Sadly enough, the answer this government gives to the Americans is, that they believe the prevailing winds 
are from the south, so that the people in the United States won't have too great a problem. The Americans are 
convinced, Mr. Speaker, that the wind generally blows from the north, and they believe the pollution will be 
dumped on their country. 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

242 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not in the least concerned what direction the wind blows. I want our clean air not polluted. I 
don't want pollution dumped on the citizens of the United States or on the citizens of Canada. If equipment is 
available to do a better job, let's install the best safeguards. Not only for the protection of the citizens living 
today, but let's keep our atmosphere clean for the future generations as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is time we asked the governments of both Canada and the United States to include 
air quality in a treaty similar to the 1909 Boundary Water Treaty which deals with water quality. Under such 
a treaty, the governments of both countries could honestly negotiate problems and questions such as we have 
in the Coronach area. Hopefully, then we could discuss concerns and resolve them in a mutually satisfactory 
way to the benefit of the environment of the peoples of both countries. 
 
Air is no less important to the wellbeing of our citizens than is water. In my opinion, a treaty on air quality 
between our two great nations is long overdue. It is my hope that some day our children and grandchildren 
will recognize our contribution to a better world because our citizens had the foresight to establish a treaty 
on air quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue that is most important to the entire province is that of reclamation of land. I can 
find nothing in the statute books of Saskatchewan suggesting that land that has been used for farming and 
producing grain and food for the world that has been disturbed for mining or whatever, should be brought 
back to a state where grain can again be grown on that land. 
 
We, in Saskatchewan, more than anywhere else, know the value of good farm land. Yet regulations under the 
Mines Regulation Act failed to mention the return of land to a state where grain can be produced. 
 
The area being torn up in the coal fields that will supply the lignite coal to the Poplar River power 
project is some of the richest, most productive land in south Saskatchewan. While there has been an 
attempt of this government to convince the people of Saskatchewan that this coal is being mined in 
waste land — that is not a fact. The pictures, and I will show Mr. Speaker the pictures on the annual 
report of the 1975 Sask Power report, is a picture of a rock formation from the Poplar River power 
development. That same picture is being distributed by SPC throughout Saskatchewan in literature to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. This, Mr. Speaker, was and is a snow job. . . a snow job by the minister and 
his department. That rock takes up a few hundred square feet on a hill that is approximately 25 acres, 
and is very lonely on the level farms above the level coal fields. 
 
I ask the government to give more than lip service to the reclamation of land in the Coronach area. This land 
must be returned to a condition as good as it is now so that grain will again flourish on the fields after that 
coal has been removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

243 
 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, let me first of all say that I welcome 
this opportunity to join in this Throne Speech Debate. I want to extend to the member from Pelly and the 
member from Meadow Lake who moved and seconded the Throne Speech my congratulations on a job very 
well done. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It clearly indicated, Mr. Speaker, why they are members of this Legislature 
representing their constituents. Their abilities and their dedication to their constituencies and to the needs of 
Saskatchewan people are in good hands and were well displayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to make a brief comment on something that has occurred in the last couple of 
days. The Supreme Court in Ottawa has overruled the Saskatchewan Courts in finding Bill 42 
unconstitutional. And this decision, it is said by some, could take over $500 million from the people of 
Saskatchewan and turn it over to the foreign owned oil companies who control 90 per cent of Canada's oil. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, clearly and without any hesitation that I will fight against this threat of 
taking this money from the people of Saskatchewan and giving it to the oil companies with all the energy 
that I have. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, the resources of this province, as the resources of any province, 
are the resources of the people. They belong to the people of Saskatchewan, and they should be able to 
benefit from those resources, Mr. Speaker. And as far as I'm concerned, if I may make my personal point of 
view, I don't think that those oil companies ought to get one single red cent of that money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear and the record will show that the Liberals and the 
Conservatives fought against Bill 42's claim to this money for the people of Saskatchewan in the first 
place. They took, Mr. Speaker, the side of the corporations. Today they still take the side of those 
corporations. And what do you hear from the Liberals over there, in the debate of yesterday? You hear 
that you should sit down and negotiate with those oil companies and give them some money back. That's 
the Liberal position, now, Mr. Speaker, what about . . . it's funny how sensitive they are about that one, 
Mr. Speaker. What about the Conservatives, over there? Well you know the member from Nipawin, the 
leader of that party, has now stated clearly, precisely and on record that we should give the oil companies 
any access over Alberta's taxation rates. I'm sure the members seated over there would agree. He would, 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to make this very clear, he would thereby be giving them over $250 million. 
The Conservative Party's position and the member for Nipawin's proposal would cost the average family 
of four over $1,000 now and over $200 a year from now on and forever. Do you think that oil companies 
need the money more than the people of Saskatchewan do? I don't think so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does anyone think that it is their right to take away the benefits of the 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

244 

nonrenewable resources and do what INCO did with their profits and their liberal tax concessions and 
their liberal tax deferments? I don't think so. But, as I said earlier, I intend to fight as a member of this 
Legislature with everything that I have to prevent . . . (Interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, what I was really 
trying to say is that I intend, as a member of this Legislature, to fight in every way that I can to prevent 
the Saskatchewan people whom I represent from losing what is rightfully theirs. 
 
Now, the Conservative members, do you know what they say, they say you should take your cap in hand 
and you should run to the federal government, the federal level of government . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The enemy. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Oh, I heard the member from Biggar say, "It's like putting a fox in the hen 
house." It's like putting a skunk in the hen house. Let me tell you why, because when CIGOL went to court 
to get this decision of the superior courts of Saskatchewan overturned, it was the federal government and it 
was the Attorney General's department of the federal government who joined CIGOL in the case against the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I forgot now but maybe somebody remember who the Attorney General of 
Canada might have been at that time. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who appointed him? That's what they said yesterday when I wasn't here. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — They didn't say a word about that. 
 
It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that the eight largest oil companies in this country, foreign owned, 
contributed an average of $546,000 to Liberal and Conservative campaign coffers in any non-election year, 
and they will go around and claim that they are the defenders of the Saskatchewan resources and they can 
best fight this battle that we are now facing. I say to them, knowing that, how can anybody possibly believe 
that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may say a few things in the area of health. Over the years the province of 
Saskatchewan has established a reputation and a tradition of providing leadership in the health care field for 
this country. That tradition and that leadership has been established in spite of the constant and continuous 
opposition and resistance by both of the parties who sit on the opposite side of this Legislature. From the 
very beginning, Mr. Speaker, until now — from the days of the introduction of the hospitalization plan to the 
present, with the introduction of a dental care program for children, prescription drug plan for all people, the 
decentralization of all kinds of services to communities — every step of the way Liberals and Conservatives 
have been bitter opponents of the introduction of these programs and the record will show that. They have 
opposed and they have criticized and attempted to discredit. 
 
In spite of this, Mr. Speaker, we have established this tradition in Saskatchewan, and I want to make it clear 
and put on the record of this Legislature at this time, that we intend to continue to maintain that tradition. We 
will maintain that tradition, Mr. Speaker, because the health of our people will always be a priority as it has 
always been. We will maintain that tradition because this government is not interested in playing politics 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

245 
 

with the health care of Saskatchewan people as members opposite choose to do. We are only interested in 
doing what must be done to provide the best possible program in health that we can with the resources that 
are available to us. 
 
In the four months that I have been the Minister of Health I have visited extensively the hospitals throughout 
this province, with representatives of the major health professions, with local community groups and with 
consumers of health care. One of my initial aims when I took up this office was to make time in my schedule 
to visit health agencies widely throughout Saskatchewan and to have frequent and frank talks with the 
providers and the consumers of health services. Over the past year or so, you know, Mr. Speaker, there has 
been much criticism of the health system reported in the press and on radio and television, attacks on 
hospitals and our health systems by Tories and Grits. And when I began my visits in the health system, I 
expected to find evidence to support this criticism that we have all been hearing. I can report to you here 
today, Mr. Speaker, that I have not found a floundering health system. I have not found widespread criticism 
of the health system among either the providers or the consumers. I have not been shown evidence of any 
falling standards of health care and I have not encountered demoralized health workers. 
 
Sometimes when I read the constant criticism that members opposite bring about to try to discredit the 
people who run our hospitals, I am convinced of what I once heard said by someone who spoke to the Health 
Care Association annual meeting that what we find in much of our press is a crisis of overdose. Indeed, I can 
tell you that I have been reassured by seeing the high performance standards in our health programs and by 
talking with a wide cross-section of clearly competent, committed, and reasonably satisfied health workers, 
administrators and professionals. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan I have seen some impressive hospital facilities and I have heard repeatedly of the 
enormous pride which rural residents have in their local hospitals. I have also observed the commitment that 
these people have to the support and the development of their local hospitals and other health services. 
 
Our government is equally committed to the improvement of rural health services and to the continued 
support of rural hospitals. 
 
Now the results of a recent Gallup Poll reported in the Regina Leader Post reflects the kind of impression 
that I am receiving from my visits. The Gallup pollsters surveyed Canada to find that people thought that 
they were getting good value for a number of public services. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What did they find out? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Just listen and you will find out what they found out. The public services 
included medicare, they included garbage collection, fire protection, police services, postal services and 
education. To our credit, Mr. Speaker, in the prairie region 93 per cent of the people stated they were getting 
good value for their medicare dollars. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The kind of difficulties in the health care system that I have been told about 
during my visits are usually unique in a single community or institution. They are generally matters that can 
be solved with a little more effort and co-operation 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

246 

between the groups involved, whether they be the hospital boards, the administration, employee groups or 
the Department of Health. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this government is making a renewed effort to 
assist our health facilities in every reasonable way to solve their problems. 
 
During my conversations with community groups and others, I have learned that some areas of the health 
system do need to receive closer attention. The hon. member for Nipawin and others and the hon. member 
for Eastview in the last session, they state that our health programs are in trouble, they are underfunded they 
state, and I want to underline that they are frills and are not meeting the needs of our people. They are trying 
to convince the people of Saskatchewan that our government has taken money from the health programs and 
other needed social programs and is spending this money on buying potash mines. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is 
simply not true and they know it. Now the hon. member for Nipawin who seldom attends, except for the odd 
question period, contends that (maybe) the "Health care in Saskatchewan (and I'm quoting him now), has 
slipped in the past few years." Like so many other conclusions reached by the member for Nipawin, the 
Leader of the Conservative Party, this one on our health care system is a mystery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts don't support the Leader of the Conservative Party and neither do the observations 
which I have made as I have toured facilities throughout this province. CCF and NDP governments have 
always considered health programs to be of paramount importance and by any index of the quality and 
availability of health services, Saskatchewan stands in the forefront in North America. Prior to forming the 
government in 1971, our health care system in Saskatchewan had been neglected, utterly neglected for seven 
years and deterrent fees had been imposed and small hospitals had been closed, and the large city hospitals 
required major renovations which were going to cost well over a hundred million dollars. The chronically ill, 
the elderly, the handicapped children in many rural communities were crying out for needed services, which 
had not been provided by the former Liberal government. We have had to rebuild our health programs since 
1971 to bring them in line with the real needs of people. 
 
In 1977-78, our gross expenditures as a government for provincial health care will be in the neighborhood of 
$420 million, an increase of 196 per cent since 1971. Over this same period, hospital and related 
expenditures have increased from $94 million to $280 million. You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that we 
also removed the deterrent fees in 1971 and then removed medicare premiums, first for senior citizens and 
then for all citizens in 1974. The elimination of these consumer charges alone saved the Saskatchewan 
people over $25 million per year and increased their buying power by that amount. Since 1971, we have had 
to spend in excess of $55 million to improve hospital facilities. New hospitals have been built in rural areas 
and we are in the process of major expansion and regeneration of the University Hospital in Saskatoon, 
which I know the member for Eastview will welcome and all of the Regina hospitals. The cost of the 
improvements in Regina and Saskatoon will be well over $100 million. Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, such 
additional expenditures and improvements cannot imply an erosion or a slip of the quality of health care 
provided by our provincial health institutions. To meet more of the health needs of the elderly, the 
handicapped, the disabled and the chronically ill, we developed such programs as our Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living, our Hearing Aid Plan, the Prescription Drug Plan and the Children's Dental Plan. We 
expanded alcoholism treatment facilities. We developed the first Awareness Program for the responsible use 
of alcohol and the list of other important but less dramatic improvements in the health system is so long, that 
I can't 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

247 
 

spend the time today reading them out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite call these programs frills and they say that these programs are 
programs which are not meeting the real needs of Saskatchewan residents. They accuse us of developing 
programs without a defined objective in mind. They claim that we think up the objectives after the programs 
are started. Do they believe that providing dental care for children is not filling a real need in Saskatchewan? 
Can anyone believe that providing information on the abuse of alcohol is not really necessary in our 
province? Can anyone believe that the elderly, the chronically ill and handicapped do not need wheelchairs, 
or walkers, or hearing aids of prescription drugs and so on? Are these government programs really frills? Mr. 
Speaker, that's what they say. They say that they would abolish them. Mr. Speaker, I think any critic who 
calls these programs frills is really insulting the people who need to use these programs. If you need a 
wheelchair to get out of bed, it is most certainly not a frill. If you need a hearing aid, it is not a frill. If you 
have children who need their teeth fixed and you have little money to pay for the service and no dentist in 
the area, our dental plan is not a frill. 
 
These are the kind of encouraging comments I have heard while visiting with the people of this province. 
Mr. Speaker, our health services are basically in good shape and there are some specific complaints about 
our health services which seem valid and we are working on improvements. Mr. Speaker, I have concluded 
that our health system would benefit by having more opinions and comments heard from the professional 
associations and from the hospital community and from health consumers. There is no single way that this 
additional opinion can be heard by me or my department. 
 
One vehicle for additional discussion and consultation and exchange of information will be a new advisory 
committee on hospital services to be established in the very near future. I have also directed my department 
to make a much greater effort to seek the opinions of the health professional groups and the organized 
hospital sector on a large range of policy questions which are being considered by the department and 
myself. While I realize that contact between the department and the health professional community has 
always been very extensive, more contact will exist in the future on many important issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, recently we have been hearing a number of erroneous statements made by the hon. 
member for Nipawin about the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan. I wish he was here because he made 
some comment after the Premier spoke and offered a challenge and I am prepared to take up that challenge. 
You know, he seems to have a habit of making statements and allegations that cannot be supported. That 
member for Nipawin apparently feels that we should copy the plan introduced in Manitoba. The 
Conservative Party passed a resolution committing itself to that and perhaps maybe it would be useful if we 
were to take a few minutes to provide the member for Nipawin with some of the facts. 
 
I can tell you that before we implemented the drug plan we knew that the relatively small number of people 
were bearing the cost of prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. We also knew that the drug industry was 
charging prices for drugs which were far too high and by essentially bulk purchasing the drugs for 
Saskatchewan people we now have the lowest cost of drugs in Canada. Now that we can actually prove who 
is using the drug plan we know that the elderly citizens who constitute 11 per cent of our population, use 30 
percent of the drug plan's expenditure, support expenditure. That percentage supports people over 65 years of 
age. Now one must keep in mind that the drug plan 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

248 

was set up to significantly reduce the cost of prescription drugs. If no plan had been in place in 1976-77, 
families who were beneficiaries of the plan would have paid an average of $66 for their prescription drug 
requirements. The fact is they paid an average of $21, a saving of 68 per cent. These figures indicate that the 
drug plan is doing what it was set up to do — reduce the cost of drugs. The member for Rosetown should 
listen because obviously his leader needs a little bit of information that you should take to him. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Nipawin's suggestion that a prescription drug plan similar to that 
introduced in Manitoba be implemented in Saskatchewan would cut out over 250,000 families from the plan; 
it would dramatically increase the cost to Saskatchewan families and it would impose an unnecessary burden 
of red tape on the elderly, the chronically ill and families. The Tory leader a little while ago protested the fact 
that the Premier had indicated that two-thirds of the people who are benefiting from the Saskatchewan plan 
would be cut off by the Conservative commitment. The Conservative Leader has a tendency to not use the 
facts when he makes these generalized statements which seem to make headlines from time to time. For 
example, he said that it costs the government of Manitoba and I say clearly, for the same number of people, 
less than $5 million a year: that's a quote. Now let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the Prescription Drug Plan costs 
$16.5 million in 1976-77. In Manitoba it cost almost $10 million, not $5 million. Mr. Speaker, it even costs 
more than that because in that almost $10 million figure that I used is not included the costs of programs for 
diabetics and paraplegics and cystic fibrosis patients and others of that kind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1976 about 70,000 families benefited from Manitoba's Pharmacare Plan. In 1976-77 over 
330,000 families benefited from the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan, not the same number as the 
Leader of the Conservative Party tries to pretend to the people of Saskatchewan. Had the plan as proposed by 
the Conservative leader been in effect in Saskatchewan (and if they ever get elected it will be) less than 30 
per cent of the eligible families in Saskatchewan would be beneficiaries. That fact is, 81 per cent of 
Saskatchewan's families were beneficiaries of the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan. He and 
Conservatives are committed to cutting out over 250,000 people from those benefits. Mr. Speaker, under Mr. 
Collver's plan, consumers would not benefit from their drug until they had accumulated over $50 in 
prescription drug bills. For amounts in excess of $50 the Conservative plan would pay 80 per cent of the 
prescription drug cost, and this means that not only would the consumer pay the first $50, but he would 
continue to pay 20 per cent of the prescription costs about the $50. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That's almost worse than suggesting the people ought to pay $10 a day for hospitals 
. . . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We'll get around to that in a minute, member for Buena Vista. 
 
Not only will the implementation of such a plan in Saskatchewan put a monetary burden on individuals and 
large families and elderly people and chronically ill, but they would have to save and submit each and every 
prescription drug receipt. This in itself, Mr. Speaker, would be a deterrent and a burden on those needing 
help the most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the terms of the Conservative plan, the average cost per family in 1976-77 for their 
prescription drug needs would have been over 150 per cent more 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

249 
 

than it actually was. 
 
Saskatchewan also maintains a formulary system which encourages the use of therapeutically effective drugs 
of high quality. The Tories object to that because they want to do everything in their power to help the 
pharmaceutical companies. They don't care about the quality of the drug plan. And the Leader of the Liberal 
Party groans. They don't care about the quality of the drug that's used, they don't care about the therapeutic 
value of the drug that is used. They just say, load it on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Drug Plan is a superior plan. It has dramatically reduced the cost of drugs in 
general, and also to those who need to use them. This proposal that the Tory leader talks about is a pretty 
clear example of what Saskatchewan people could expect from a Tory government. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
they will promise to keep the good and the popular NDP programs, but let me say that if ever elected, the 
Tory Party would establish every conceivable deterrent to persuade or force the people who need the services 
the most, not to use them, as the Liberals did when they were in power. It should be known, and I think this 
is important, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first contacts made by the new Conservative government in 
Manitoba with our department of Health, was to ask about the deterrent fees that were imposed on 
Saskatchewan people by the former Liberal government. You see, Mr. Speaker, already they are searching 
for ways to tax their sick and their old. 
 
Every Conservative province in this country has deterrent fees and there should be no doubt in anyone's 
mind that the Saskatchewan Conservative Party even though they pretend otherwise, believe in them as well. 
They cannot deny that the member for Swift Current and Yorkton in 1974 spoke and gave his personal 
support to introduce deterrent fees. They cannot deny that the member for Rosetown in this House said, 
"People would gladly pay $10 a day to get into a hospital." I quote the right words, and they're right here, in 
Hansard. The member for Nipawin asked if the Premier would restate that. I just did. It's right here. I've got a 
photocopy of Hansard and the member should read it. They cannot deny that the member for Thunder Creek 
said in this House, "It is fair to say that the universal concept of medicare where there are no user charges 
involved for using that system has failed." He believes in deterrent fees, Mr. Speaker. If some of those other 
Conservative members would ever say anything, they no doubt would make the same claim favoring 
deterrent fees. The unstated policy, except by some individuals, is clearly one of being in favor of deterrent 
fees in various places. They may call them by different names. The member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) 
would make people pay the first $50 for drugs and deter them with red tape. The member for Thunder Creek 
(Mr. Thatcher) would call them 'user charges'. The Conservatives would say, make sick people pay for being 
sick, as Liberals used to do. The sicker you are, the older you are and the longer you are off the job because 
of sickness, the more you pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has always opposed deterrent fees. We removed them. We oppose them now and we 
will continue to oppose them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it is likely that Tory members will rise in this debate and 
deny that they favor these fees. The question then, Mr. Speaker is: who can believe them? The Tories in 
Manitoba said that they would not but they are looking at how to do it. The Collver Conservative record of 
unsubstantiated allegations made for sheer cynical political opportunism is one that shows that they cannot 
be believed and they cannot be trusted. The behavior of those members in this Assembly is the first 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

250 

evidence of this. They first broke a written agreement on the introduction of the Budget, I believe, in 1976. 
They have constantly shown a complete disregard for the traditions and the procedures of this Legislature. 
They accuse you, Mr. Speaker, of being unfair and biased, knowing it not to be true. 
 
When a member of this House says he will withdraw a letter that was clearly a breach of privilege, then steps 
outside to restate what he said in that letter, neither he nor his colleagues can be trusted. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, even the Leader Post in an editorial says it very well. I don't want to take too much 
time of the House, so I will quote bits and pieces. In today's Leader Post it is stated, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote, "For a group that only recently seemed to set great store for decorum and deportment and 
parliamentary propriety in the Saskatchewan Legislature, the Conservative caucus surely has some 
explaining to do over the Berntson letter affair." It goes on to say that the letter has been branded and quite 
rightly as a breach of parliamentary privilege. It says that the affair is being regarded as an act impugning the 
integrity of the Legislature and its speakers as it should be. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That can't be the Leader Post! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It is, surprise, but it is! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It must be the Commonwealth! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I quote further, Mr. Speaker — we would even accept this in the 
Commonwealth — I quote further, "Berntson even compounded the matter by reiterating the charge on a 
radio newscast, seeming to cancel out any chance that the affair might be handled by the letter's withdrawal 
and apology." It concludes by saying, "Decorum deportment, parliamentary propriety, Conservative leader 
Dick Collver's prescription for his caucus House behavior indeed has a hollow ring to it now." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Further to that, Mr. Speaker, there was the allegation that Saskatchewan 
hospitals are filthy. The member for Sutherland said, and I quote, "We could bring documentation to this 
House showing that hospitals, which are supposed to be the holy sanctum of cleanliness are filthy. "You 
wait," he said, "It's coming. There will be lots more." 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still waiting. An allegation made, a headline in a newspaper but no evidence to this very 
day. The allegation by the Conservatives had cast a cloud over 130 hospitals in the province. I have visited 
many of them Mr. Speaker, and they have not forgotten. 
 
This summer, the Leader of the Conservative Party attempted to interfere with the judicial inquiry into the 
correctional institutions. Again, he made accusations but when confronted by the Attorney General, could 
not provide any evidence at all. An allegation made, Mr. Speaker, a headline in the press and no substance to 
the statement or support. He runs and he hides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the most glaring example to show how that group of members in the Tory caucus 
would go to any extreme and to any length to achieve their end is an incident during the Pelly by-election. 
An article in the Leader Post said it well when it 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

251 
 

stated, and I quote: 
 

The Progressive Conservative may have gone too far in the Pelly by-election when they ran a radio 
advertisement in Yorkton about an NDP promise — alleged. 

 
And this statement, Mr. Speaker, was a reference to an advertisement read by none other than the 
Progressive Conservative leader, and he doubted that the government would keep certain alleged (and I 
underline alleged) promises and then proceeded to attempt to create resentment between Indian people and 
white people in the area. And the member for Nipawin was clearly trying to create racial tension in the hope 
that he and his colleagues would somehow gain some votes from it. How can such a leader and how can 
such a party be trusted, Mr. Speaker? How can anyone believe anything that they say when they would even 
go so far as to ignore basic human rights and try to set people against each other all for the sake of cynical 
political opportunism? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the tactics of some members opposite in the last two years can only be defined as tactics 
which are deceitful and completely unacceptable in an open, free, and democratic system of government 
such as we are fortunate enough to have in this country. 
 
Surely it is not difficult to understand that there would have to be great fear and hesitation if a Tory 
government in this province were ever elected. One has to seriously consider what would be the implications 
on liberty and freedom and human rights if a government were to be elected that uses those kinds of tactics 
that the Conservative members of this House use as members of an opposition. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the closest parallel that I can think of would be the arrogance and the 
heavyhandedness of the former Thatcher Liberal government in this province prior to 1971. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as an MLA for a rural constituency, I was pleased with the references made in the Throne 
Speech to the issues that are of concern to farmers and rural people in general. 
 
While both Conservative and Liberal parties show no concern about the purchase and ownership of farm 
land by foreigners, this government is going to bring in amendments to The Farm Ownership Act to maintain 
the ownership of Saskatchewan farm land by Saskatchewan residents. 
 
My constituents, and other Saskatchewan people, have often stated the need for such legislation. They will 
not accept the position of those parties that farm land should be owned by people and corporations who do 
not live in this province and its communities, and who make no contribution to those communities, but reap 
all the benefits from the products that are produced here. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan has been strengthened by policies of this government. It can remain strong only with the 
existence of the family farm and if the family farm goes, so do many rural communities. 
 
Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, in some of the comments made in this debate, have complained 
about the references made to this government's defence of the Wheat Board, and the crowrates and the Hall 
Commission, in the Throne Speech. 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

252 

Why do they protest so much? Why are they so sensitive every time these important issues are raised? I can 
tell you why, Mr. Speaker, because both of them, both Tories and Liberals, have attacked these institutions 
from time to time. And the federal minister who represents this province has quietly been implementing the 
Federal Task Force Report of 1968 piece by piece, fully supported by his provincial Liberal counterparts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The Task Force on Agriculture said that the crowrates must go. It said that 
two-thirds of our farms must go and it said that the private grain trades, the Winnipeg Grain Exchange 
should have more control. This control, Mr. Speaker, is clearly meant to undermine and eventually destroy 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And the federal government, supported by provincial Liberals, has been inching 
its way towards that objective. 
 
The NDP and this government will fight with every effort that we can to protect and indeed strengthen the 
Canadian Wheat Board. We will fight to have the crowrates retained and we have and we will continue to do 
all we can to strengthen the family farm. We will fight Liberals and Conservatives both of which at this time, 
as ever before, would allow all of these things to go down the drain. 
 
From time to time, Mr. Speaker, they protest across the way about someone saying these things, and once 
again I ask, why do they protest so much? They protest because they know that what they pretend and what 
they really believe are not the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader of Canada, Mr. Clark, has come out in opposition to orderly 
marketing. His party, to a man, is on record in the House of Commons as having opposed orderly marketing 
and that means the Canadian Wheat Board, because that's orderly marketing. The Liberal record itself, shows 
its own sell out to those who would destroy the Wheat Board, the crowrates, the branch lines and the family 
farm. 
 
(Interjection of laughter by some members.) 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, members laugh. The members laugh, Mr. Speaker, but they 
should listen because there is some evidence to support that. First of all there is some evidence of support for 
the Tory position against the Wheat Board. If they were not helping and supporting those people who would 
destroy the Canadian Wheat Board, why was there a director of the Grain Exchange actively involved and 
working hard for them in the Pelly by-election? He must have had something at stake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the Liberals? At the recent Liberal convention in Saskatoon they passed a 
resolution, as I read in the newspaper, not to oppose Cargill Grain. I am sure that is correct. You know they 
are great believers in some kind of (along with the Tories) an unrestrained free market place. Mr. Speaker, 
they advise that the free and unrestrained play of the market place should prevail. They ignore the fact that 
the unrestrained play of these very forces would lead, as they have in the past, to a loss of freedom of the 
individual farmer, because of his enslavement by the multinational corporations over which he could not 
even have a small influence. 
 
(Interjection of laughter by Mr. Cameron.) 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

253 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member laughs again, and I ask, what influence would he have or could he 
possibly have on Cargill Grain? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party has spoken on many occasions in support of 
this free market place. And he is on record as supporting Cargill Grain. By doing that, Mr. Speaker, he is in 
clear opposition to farmer-owned wheat pools. You cannot support an international grain company like 
Cargill which has sales in the order of $9 billion annually, in which you cannot buy shares, which you cannot 
influence in any way the manner in which it operates; no one can support such a powerful giant and at the 
same time support the Wheat Board and orderly marketing or the Wheat Pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the so-called open market place does not exist. It has been replaced by a market manipulated by 
expanding multinational companies which represent a major threat to our land, our resources and our 
personal freedoms. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member for Nipawin would have that system imposed on Saskatchewan 
farmers. And his opposition to the Cargill Grain (or his non opposition to the Cargill Grain) and support of 
the open market system sounds superficially attractive to some people, but that 'open market' I dare say is a 
myth. He knows it, but he still persists in being the mouthpiece for concerns like Cargill. 
 
Advocating an unrestrained open market place in this day and age is tantamount to running up a white flag of 
surrender to the multinationals which thrive under these conditions, to the detriment of individuals — 
individual farmers and individual small businessmen. 
 
In Saskatchewan, I believe a family farm, owned and operated farm is the most common symbol of freedom 
for rural residents. Preservation of the family farm is a cornerstone of this government's policy and we have 
implemented measures designed to achieve that result. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The Land Bank, Farm Start, subsidies to livestock farmers, a hog price 
stabilization plan, a comprehensive crop insurance program and many other initiatives have been taken. The 
New Democratic Party has battled for equitable freight rates and an equitable rail transportation network. 
You know, it is said in the Throne Speech that powerful voices — more powerful voices than the member 
across — still call for rail line abandonment and an end to the Crow's Nest Pass freight rates. They have 
allies, Mr. Speaker, in Conservative and Liberal politicians — Conservative and Liberal politicians who are 
so committed to their corporate friends that they won't even listen to their constituents, the farmers, the small 
businessmen and workers and others. When the old line parties defend Cargill Grain, what is it that they are 
defending? Or, if they are not opposing Cargill Grain, what is it that they are not opposing? They are 
defending a huge international grain company which has been involved in a number of United States 
investigations, including class actions over alleged price fixing, a company which has been investigated by 
Interpol, the international police agency, for: forged weight certificates, forged grade certificates, tampering 
with scales and 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

254 

fraudulent account sheets. They are supporting an outfit that admitted illegally shipping American 
buckwheat into Manitoba on trucking back-hauls, a company guilty of being part of an illegal squeeze that 
pushed Chicago wheat futures up to an artificial high and which pressured the United States Interstate 
Commerce Commission to restructure railway rates so that they would be more economical for the 
corporation but not the farmers. Mr. Speaker, when Conservative or Liberal members of this province say 
that they will not oppose the establishment of inland terminals by Cargill Grain, they say that they are in 
favor of these kinds of actions. All for the sake of some thousands of dollars that might be contributed to 
their party coffers. Mr. Speaker, those members opposite would sell out the freedom of our farmers and the 
existence of the family farm for the sake of getting corporate money to try and get elected. 
 
Now the Conservative Leader, Mr. Collver, the member for Nipawin, he's going to go around the province 
and deny that this is so. Well, the record shows, Mr. Speaker, that when an amendment was introduced this 
year to a resolution in parliament in support of orderly marketing, both Liberals and Conservatives voted 
against it to a man. That was an NDP amendment, Mr. Speaker. Liberals and Tories voted against it. And 
why? Because they are prepared to do everything possible to help people like Cargill Grain and the Grain 
Exchange to take over. The record shows, Mr. Speaker, to the horror of even people who used to support the 
Conservative Party, that the national Tory leader, was reported to have said in August in Manitoba and I 
quote: 
 

Expansion of the Wheat Board's selling efforts, but permission given to private organizations to 
sell grain competition with the Wheat Board. 

 
Mr. Clark said: 
 

Private organizations working alongside the Wheat Board would stimulate the board's efforts. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because Conservative politicians, nationally and provincially, want to do everything 
possible to help Cargill Grain and the commodity exchange and other corporate grain traders chip away until 
they finally take over. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about Peter Lougheed? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We'll get around to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the records shows that several months ago Dr. Hugh Horner, the Deputy Premier speaking for 
Peter Lougheed, of Conservative Alberta, said to the Hall Commission, and I quote: 
 

The Alberta government supports the concept of inland terminals on the basis of increased 
competition, improved handling and further rationalization of an outdated elevator system. 

 
They were saying that the Wheat Pools were outdated. Now, Mr. Speaker, that's plain English. The 
Conservatives stand for inland terminals, Alberta Conservatives, national Conservatives and Collver 
Conservatives. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Saskatchewan Conservatives continually talk about local 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

255 
 

control. Why don't they stand up and defend our locally owned and locally controlled elevators and the 
branch lines that serve them? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Instead, Mr. Speaker, the member for Nipawin has stated in a news release, 
once again it's in print, "It is our opinion," he said, " that the Crow Rates are not to be tampered with" — but 
here is the punch line, "until an assessment of freight structure is completed." Now what does that mean? 
What does that mean — that clearly means that the Conservatives have in no way any commitment to the 
crowrates and that they are just couching that in language which is confusing. They want to only have the 
crowrates until an assessment of the freight rate structure is completed, and we can only assume from that 
that once that's done the crowrates go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1930s and the 1940s, prairie farmers saw the need for orderly marketing, for the 
Canadian Wheat Board. The New Democratic Party and the government of Saskatchewan stands four square 
behind the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Canadian Wheat Board. We believe in the family farm as 
being the heart of rural Saskatchewan, and we will continue to make these institutions a major priority and 
defend them against those who would tear them down. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the high priority given to business and industry in the 
Throne Speech, and when one looks across Canada, it is readily evident that the Saskatchewan business 
community is doing far better than in most other provinces. Our economy is healthy, we have seen 
manufacturing shipments in Saskatchewan more than double in five years, total investment tripled, and new 
manufacturing investment increased four times. Employment in manufacturing increased by 35 per cent. 
 
Our government's commitment to provide additional help to smaller communities to revitalize their 
commercial areas, and to identify promising business opportunities, is based on the support by our 
government for the small businessman. We appreciate the very important contribution made by small 
businessmen in the development of our province. Many of them feel frustrated, as the Throne Speech has 
indicated, in the face of government regulation at all levels; whether it is federal or provincial or municipal. 
And I have always believed that there was a need to take a hard look at this situation and so the 
establishment of a minister's advisory committee on small business in Saskatchewan to advise on ways to 
improve opportunities for small businesses in Saskatchewan is a very welcome to me, as I know it will be to 
the small business people of Saskatchewan, and I congratulate the Minister of Industry and Commerce for 
taking this initiative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has always supported the interests of small business. The 
initiatives taken to improve rural communities in the past years since 1971 have made a major contribution 
to keeping them strong, and in so doing keeping the small business community thriving and strong. 
 
Nowhere in Canada in recent years has the climate for small businesses been as good as in Saskatchewan. 
Assistance from SEDCO and the Department of Industry and 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

256 

Commerce has been very significant in starting new businesses and improving and expanding existing ones. 
 
An NDP government is the only type of government in Canada that can truly be considered a government in 
the best interest of the small businessman. This is because it is the only government that is prepared to stand 
up to the large corporations who are a constant threat to that small businessman. 
 
In this area, just as in the farming industry, the marriage of the Conservative and the Liberal Parties to the 
large corporations makes them cast aside the interests of the small businessman. There is a mood fostered by 
Tories, especially, about so-called big government, about individual freedom, and individual rights, and on 
and on. What are they talking about? Well, essentially they are saying it is everyone for himself, no 
regulation, no protection for the small businessman against the large corporation, no protection of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and the Wheat Pool against the Cargill Grains of this world. This is the Conservative 
model of free enterprise. 
 
But for whom is this freedom? Let me tell you for whom it is freedom, Mr. Speaker. It's freedom for the big, 
wealthy and powerful to do what they want at the expense of most other people. A recent report put together 
by the Canadian Press showed rather vividly who controls those old line parties, and the report stated, and I 
quote the report: 
 

For Liberals and Conservatives, the big money comes from banks and corporations. 
 
In the 17 months ending in January 1, 1977 Conservatives gathered $1.1 million from corporations. In that 
same period the Liberals got $1.8 million from private companies. More than twice as many individuals 
contributed to the NDP than to the old line parties. 
 
The old saying, Mr. Speaker, "he who pays the piper plays the tune" is still pertinent. Is it any wonder that 
day in and day out the member for Nipawin, the Conservative Leader, gets up in this House and attacks in 
this House and attacks our policies on agriculture and on resources. Not at all — he is unequivocally the 
spokesman for the multinational grain companies, resource companies, and the banks. They pay his party 
well for his services, and maybe they even have Swiss bank accounts. 
 
What is the Conservative plan for business, for industry and for the economy? How would they provide jobs 
and people to live in our communities? Well, there is a very prominent spokesman of the Conservative Party 
in Ottawa. His name is James Gillies, and he is a Toronto economist and he sits for the constituency of Don 
Valley. Mr. James Gillies, the Tory member for Don Valley is quoted in a newspaper as saying, and the 
headline reads: 
 

Canadians seen hewing wood. 
 

It says: one of Opposition leader Joe Clark's top financial advisers said Wednesday that Canadians 
should be content to be hewers of wood and drawers of water in the current economic climate. 
There's nothing disgraceful about being a hewer of wood and a drawer of water if that's where you 
have your comparative advantage. He said Canada should concentrate on developing and selling its 
natural resources. 

 
Obviously he supports the kind of approach that has caused INCO to lay off something 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

257 
 

like 4,000 people in Sudbury and Thompson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tory Leader got up in this House after the Premier spoke and he defended the International 
Nickel Company. He blamed the lay-offs that they have caused on international markets. Well I want to say 
that he is dead wrong. Those lay-offs were planned, they were part of a long-range plan by INCO, with the 
help of millions of dollars in tax concessions from the federal Liberal Government, and supported by the 
Ontario Conservative government. Once again you have to ask, Mr. Speaker, why do they get so defensive, 
why do they defend INCO? Could it be that in 1976, $30,885 was donated to the Progressive Conservative 
Party by INCO? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I just want to say this, the political battle in Saskatchewan today and in the next 
election campaign is going to be the issue of whether the destiny of this province would be guided and 
determined by the people through the government as is happening and can continue to happen through an 
NDP government, or whether the destiny of this province and the future of its people will be determined by 
the multinational corporations as would happen under a Conservative or a Liberal government. 
 
Every direction of policy ever stated by the Leader of the Conservative Party for example, when he talks of 
his kind of free enterprise, would mean that more and more power and control would be vested in the hands 
of the strongest, and that as the strongest corporations, do not even have any head offices in the province of 
Saskatchewan and could not and do not in any way care about the future of the province, except to the extent 
that it may enhance their capacity to continue making profits out of the resources that we have here. There 
may very well be side issues, and there will no doubt be local issues, but the whole overriding issue will be 
this one: an economy and resource development controlled by corporations is typified and exemplified by the 
recent actions taken by the International Nickel Company, or INCO Sudbury and Thompson, Manitoba. The 
president of INCO himself has admitted that the reason that they could do what they did in this country was 
because they knew that the government of this country and the Conservative government of Ontario, and 
now Manitoba, and the federal government in Ottawa would not in any way interfere. That is wrong. It's 
immoral. It's a complete abrogation of responsibility by elected people to look after the interests of the 
people who elect them. It is the kind of direction that we have always known that we could expect from 
Conservative and Liberal governments. Once again there is absolute and undeniable proof in this example 
that we can continue to expect that this is something that this province of Saskatchewan does not need, and 
were it to get, would suffer dramatically with massive unemployment as we once did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that I will indeed oppose the amendment and support the main 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to address a few remarks to 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

258 

the Speech from the Throne. First I would like — he's not here — to welcome the new member for Pelly 
(Mr. Lusney) to the Legislative Assembly. I would like to say, I'm sorry to see the old member go. I didn't 
know Mr. Larson very long — we had some fiery exchanges — but I learned to like him quite well. I am 
sorry to see he is not here. 
 
This Throne Speech is more to be condemned for what it doesn't contain than for what it does contain, for it 
contains very little. It shows, I suppose, a government that is burnt out and who have a dearth of ideas, with 
which to face the problems facing this province. 
 
Agriculture, the backbone of our provincial economy is facing very hard times, with rising costs and falling 
prices. This government ignores these problems and mentions it will amend The Farm Ownership Act and 
give us a new Animal Identification Act. Not one mention is given that there will be any attempts to aid 
farmers in reducing costs in the face of falling prices for their products. This government should consider a 
lower price for fuel for agriculture production. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Fuel costs for machinery operation and for the hog barn dryers and all the specialized 
equipment which enables our farmers to compete on world markets is essential. 
 
We in the southwest are still facing extreme drought conditions. The water table has dropped. The lakes and 
dugouts are dry. A study by completed the PFRA shows that initial water storage could be constructed on the 
Frenchman River, storage that would create jobs in the construction of it, would increase recreational 
facilities and would draw tourist dollars into a depressed area. More important, it would put many more 
acres into irrigation production and provide an ample supply of forage into an area that always suffers from 
such a shortage. We hoped some mention of such a project would be in the Throne Speech. We would urge 
this government to start considering and asking the federal government for the construction of a dam on the 
Frenchman River as soon as possible. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I am sure the government across knows the need is there. They also know that no 
dam construction can be given without permission from the department of the Environment of the province. 
That's the way the law reads. 
 
We also notice that there is no mention of highway construction in this Throne Speech. The provincial 
government seems to be quite interested in rail line upgrading where it has to put in no dollars, but where it 
can have some leadership, namely, the building and upgrading of our highway system, it has nothing to say. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — The No. 1 Highway becomes quite congested in the tourist season, and is dangerous 
from Swift Current west to the border. No. 13 Highway that crosses the southern part of the province is an 
alternative link that would relieve the pressure on the No. 1 Highway. No. 13 Highway is the shortest route 
between Winnipeg, Lethbridge and the West Coast — it is lacking a 60 mile stretch that prevents No. 13 
Highway from being a hard surfaced road from Winnipeg to the West Coast, 35 miles of that missing portion 



 
November 24, 1977 

 

259 
 

is in Saskatchewan from Consul west. There is a portion of this road in Saskatchewan from Govenlock to 
Alberta that doesn't even exist. The highway dead ends, and that's it. The building of this 12 miles to the 
Alberta border from Govenlock, and oiling the 35 miles from Consul to Govenlock to Alberta would 
complete this link. Highway No. 13 travels through some of the most scenic and historic parts of this 
province; it travels a bit north of Roche Percee near Estevan. It goes by the historic Big Muddy Badlands, the 
Fir Mountains and the new proposed National Grassland Park at Killdeer and Val Marie, just north of 
Coronach. As it goes further west, it travels to Cypress Hills, passing just south of both the Cypress Hills 
Provincial Park, in the Fort Walsh National Historic site. When it enters Alberta, it travels through the Milk 
River Badlands, the Writing on Stone Provincial Park and on to Lethbridge and the Waterton Lakes National 
Park. This is one of the most scenic highways that crosses the province, it's the shortest route between the 
point of Winnipeg and Vancouver, yet for the lack of building 35 miles of road, 12 miles to be taken into the 
highway system, we would have connected. 
 
The towns along No. 13 Highway have in the past two years petitioned the Minister of Highways to 
complete the missing 12 miles of this second Trans Canada Highway. Every town and every municipality 
has sent a petition to the Minister of Highways asking to meet with them. He has refused to discuss it. He 
had the audacity to come down to Maple Creek and Eastend and say he had never heard of it, telling the 
same people that wrote the petitions and got the answers back, that he wouldn't discuss it. I join these towns 
and communities, urging this government to give assurance they will connect this 12 miles. 
 
We are interested in seeing mentioned in the Throne Speech that there will be a new regional parks act 
enacted. We hope it will allow assistance to small recreational areas that provide fishing and camping 
facilities but because they are near the provincial park or other regional parks they cannot receive assistance 
at this time. 
 
There have been again this summer, many complaints regarding vandalism and harassment of our tourists in 
our provincial parks. We hope that the provincial government will increase policing of campsites in these 
areas. 
 
In our health care little that will be of any help to our rural areas is mentioned. Many of our small hospitals 
have had beds closed in the last two years. The beds and rooms are there and not being used for medical 
patients. At the same time these beds are vacant we have a large number of senior citizens in these areas 
requiring Level IV nursing care. There is no place for these pioneers in their own community. They are 
shipped off to geriatric centres in Swift Current, Moose Jaw and Regina. This removes them from friends 
and family and they spend their last years alone and among strangers. Surely the Department of Health and 
the Department of Social Services can make some agreement whereby these beds can be used for the care of 
these people who require Level IV care. Our pioneers who have grown old building the farms and small 
towns in this province deserve a chance to spend their last years in the areas where they have friends and 
families. 
 
This government seems to have little concern for the businessman in the small towns of rural Saskatchewan. 
They have allowed farmers both as incorporated farms and individual farmers to deal in everything from 
tires, to television sets, to cultivator shovels, welders, grain augers, repair shops, body shops, etc. without 
any restrictions. It would seem to me that this is unfair competition to a small town businessman who must 
pay business tax and who is forced to supply parts and services to his customers. If the businessman in a 
small town is going to stay in business he cannot be forced to 



 
November 24, 1977 
 

260 

compete on this unfair basis. 
 
The Throne Speech reflects a government so concerned with nationalizing resources and building up an 
empire of civil service bureaucracy that it has lost touch with the real needs of the people of this province. I 
therefore cannot support the motion but will support the amendment. 
 
MR. MESSER: — In the absence, Mr. Speaker, of a member or two, I have been persuaded to 
undertake to take part in this . . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . to adjourn the debate . . . 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, perhaps I should undertake to ask — I would like to address my remarks while the 
radio time is on, and seeing that it is not now the time, Mr. Speaker, I am asking leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:51 o'clock p.m. 


