


























































Hansard: November 16, 1977


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 
November 16, 1977 

 
This being the day appointed by Proclamation of his Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated October 
25, 1977 for meeting of the Fourth Session of the Eighteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province of 
Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 
 
Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary of 
His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 
p.m. today, Wednesday, the Sixteenth day of November, 1977. 
 
3:03 o’clock p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne 
was pleased to open the session with the following Speech: MR. SPEAKER, 
 
MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the Fourth Session of the Eighteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 

CANADA 
 
My Government believes that Canada will remain as a strong and united nation. 
 
The efforts of my Government are directed toward finding new ways of defining Confederation so that 
Canadians from all regions will feel a renewed sense of commitment and loyalty to their nation. 
 
This is not an easy task. 
 
Resentment against the federal government is not confined to Quebec. Saskatchewan, in common with 
the other western provinces, has reservations about the status quo. We have paid a high price for the 
tariff protection of Central Canadian manufacturers. We are the victims of a national transportation 
policy which makes it difficult to establish job-creating local industries. We must share the revenues of 
our natural resources with the rest of Canada, but we do not benefit from a similar sharing of the 
revenues of other commodities. We are a multicultural society, yet we see Canada increasingly defined 
as a land of only two cultural traditions. 
 
Nevertheless, no one can question the loyalty of Saskatchewan people to the idea of Confederation. We 
are proud to be Canadians, and we want a Canada which commands the loyalty of all its citizens. 
 
My Government believes that a majority of Quebecers have not rejected Canada. To keep Canada strong 
and united, we must be prepared to encourage negotiations which will produce a new basis for the 
Canadian federation. My Government is committed to this course of action. 



 
November 16, 1977 
 

2 
 

 
THE ECONOMY 

 
Saskatchewan continues to enjoy remarkable prosperity. During 1976 our Gross Domestic Product 
increased to $7.4 billion, personal income rose to $6.3 billion, and the construction industry recorded 
sizable increases. Throughout the year 14,000 additional jobs were created and our unemployment rate 
remained among the lowest in Canada. 
 
In contrast, the Canadian economy as a whole continues to weaken. Real Gross National Product is 
declining, spending on consumer goods and services is faltering. Canada’s trade deficit is reaching new 
records, and unemployment is growing at an alarming rate. 
 
Under the strong leadership of my Government, Saskatchewan has been largely shielded from this 
economic recession in the rest of Canada. My Government will continue its efforts to keep our economy 
strong and to make sure our citizens keep those benefits and services they have come to expect. 
 
As an immediate practical step to maintain spending by consumers and to assist those living on low 
incomes, the minimum wage will increase to $3.15 per hour effective January 31, 1978, and to $3.25 per 
hour effective June 30, 1978. In addition, my Government will introduce measures to supplement public 
service pensions. 
 

AGRICULTURE 
 
My Government is committed to strengthening rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The rich soil of Saskatchewan has sustained the economy of our province throughout its history. In 
recent months, many Saskatchewan citizens have become alarmed about the loss of farm land to 
non-resident absentee landlords. You will be asked to approve amendments to The Farm Ownership Act 
to maintain the ownership of Saskatchewan farm land by Saskatchewan residents. 
 
The Farm Security Act will be extended to provide continued protection for lessees and purchasers of 
farm land in cases of serious crop losses. 
 
For the last three years, the price of beef cattle has been below the cost of production. In the absence of 
positive action by the federal government, Saskatchewan introduced a program of cash advances and 
grants to cattle producers to help maintain herds through this period of depressed prices. Although prices 
have stabilized slightly. My Government recently announced more favourable terms for the repayment 
of these cash advances and loans. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board, an agency vital to Saskatchewan farmers, has been subject to increasing 
attacks. My Government will work actively to defend the Wheat Board and the principle of orderly 
marketing. 
 
In order to provide greater protection against rustling you will be asked to approve a new Animal 
Identification Act. 
 

RESOURCES 
 
The results of my Government’s resource policy are well known. Saskatchewan 



 
November 16, 1977 

 

3 
 

people now control a greater share of their natural resources. Provincial revenues from these resources 
have increased significantly. A substantial part of these revenues, accumulated in the Energy and 
Resource Development Fund, have been invested to provide benefits for our people, not only in this 
generation, but in generations to come. 
 
In order to deal more effectively with these investments for the future, you will be asked to approve 
legislation establishing a resource revenue trust fund. 
 
In other areas, my Government will continue to promote the development of Saskatchewan’s resources. 
 
The exploration and development of Saskatchewan heavy oil reserves is expanding. Already in 1977 an 
estimated $11 million has been spent in drilling activities. My Government is actively encouraging the 
construction of a heavy oil upgrading plant to process Saskatchewan heavy oil. 
 
Saskatchewan has large amounts of high-quality uranium. My Government set up the Cluff Lake Board 
of Inquiry to investigate the economic, social and environmental effects of a proposed uranium mine in 
northwest Saskatchewan, and the broader implications of uranium development. Extensive public 
hearings have been held throughout the Province and many groups have been granted funds to develop 
presentations for the Board. My Government awaits the recommendations of the Board. 
 
My Government also awaits the recommendations of the Natural Gas Development and Conservation 
Board on prices and development schedules for producers of natural gas. 
 
Discussions are in progress with representatives of the coal industry and other interested groups on 
future policy for the development of Saskatchewan’s sizable lignite coal deposits. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan became a potash producer just over a year ago when it 
acquired the former Duval mine, now the Cory Division. Since then it has added mines at Rocanville 
and Lanigan. Today, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan owns more than 25 percent of the 
industry’s productive capacity. 
 
One of the objectives of my government in entering the potash industry was to guarantee orderly 
expansion of the mines. The Potash Corporation is already proceeding with plans to expand production 
at both the Cory mine and the Rocanville mine. This has already resulted in more jobs for Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
The Potash Corporation is now the largest single producer of potash in Canada, the largest contributor to 
Canpotex, and the largest exporter of potash in the western world. 
 
My government believes that Saskatchewan people wish their government to take all appropriate steps 
to preserve and protect their right to develop mineral resources for their benefit and for the benefit of 
future generations of Saskatchewan people. 
 

BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
 
During the past five years, the value of manufacturing shipments in Saskatchewan 



 
November 16, 1977 
 

4 
 

more than doubled, total investment tripled and new manufacturing investment increased four times. In 
the same period, employment in manufacturing increased by 35 per cent. This is an impressive success 
story. 
 
My Government recognizes the importance of locally-based Saskatchewan industry. We share the 
confidence of Saskatchewan manufacturers in a developing and a diversified provincial economy. 
Programs aimed at encouraging and strengthening the initiatives of Saskatchewan manufacturers will be 
introduced in the near future. Additional help will also be provided to smaller communities to revitalize 
their commercial areas and to identify promising business opportunities. 
 
My Government believes that the construction of the Alaska natural gas pipeline will provide significant 
employment opportunities for Saskatchewan residents through construction activities and the 
manufacture of pipe by the IPSCO plant in Regina. 
 
My Government appreciates the role played by small businessmen in the development of jour province. 
It also recognizes the frustration of many small businessmen in the face of government regulation at the 
federal, provincial and municipal levels. A Minister’s Advisory Committee on Small Business in 
Saskatchewan will be established to advise the Minister on additional ways to improve opportunities for 
small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan is proud of the large place taken in its business community by co-operatives and credit 
unions. Since 1971, 340 co-operatives have been incorporated in the Province. The Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development continues to assist people interested in forming and 
knowing about co-operatives. 
 
My Government notes with pleasure that next March Federated Co-operatives Limited, will celebrate its 
50th anniversary. 
 
Amendments to The Credit Union Act will be placed before you. 
 

LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
 
My Government believes in strengthening local government. It has sought ways to broaden the base of 
municipal finance and has provided more flexibility and autonomy to municipal councils and school 
boards in setting local priorities. 
 
In 1971 provincial grants to urban municipalities were less than $1.3 million. These grants were all 
conditional. In 1977-78 grants to urban municipalities reached almost $46 million and of this amount 
nearly $26 million was in the form of unconditional grants. 
 
Representatives of urban and rural municipalities are now engaged in discussions to establish a new 
system of sharing provincial revenues with local governments. 
 
Local education authorities and other interested citizens have long recognized the need for strengthened 
local autonomy in education. The White Paper on school law, tabled at the last session of this 
Legislative Assembly, has now received extensive public discussion and study. You will be asked to 
approve legislation based on this Paper. 
 

SENIOR CITIZENS 



 
November 16, 1977 

 

5 
 

In the coming year my Government will continue to give special attention to the needs of senior citizens. 
 
In order to help senior citizens who wish to remain in their own homes and communities, my 
Government has proposed a universal home care program. This program is being discussed with senior 
citizens and other interested people. My Government expects that the first stages will begin in 1978. 
 
The Senior Citizens Home Repair grant program will be revised and strengthened. 
 
Many senior citizens living in nursing homes require extra nursing and medical care, often at high cost. 
My Government will announce plans to provide additional financial relief for these people. 
 

TRANSPORTATION 
 
The battle for equitable freight rates and an adequate rail transport network is not yet over. Influential 
voices still call for rail line abandonment and an end to the Crow’s Nest Pass freight rates. 
 
The Hall Commission report on grain handling and transportation is a landmark document for Western 
Canada. The manner in which the recommendations are acted upon will determine the future not only of 
western agriculture but of the western economy. Actions to date by the federal government in apparent 
opposition to the recommendations of the Hall report have caused widespread concern. 
 
In the interests of the West, my Government will continue to press for maintaining an adequate rail 
system and retaining the Crow’s Nest rates. 
 
In the coming year my Government will provide $10 million for urban transportation. This program 
includes assistance for building arterial streets and highway connectors, conducting transportation 
studies and acquiring buses and other vehicles. Assistance will also be provided for transportation for 
the handicapped. 
 
Work is almost complete on a new airport at Hudson Bay. My Government will share the cost of 
developing community airports in many other areas of the province. 
 
The Maidstone Bridge, built at a cost of more than $3 million is now complete. Work will begin in 1978 
on the Gronlid Bridge. 
 

NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
My Government will continue to place special emphasis on the needs of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1972 unprecedented strides have been made in all aspects of northern development. In housing, 
175 homes will be built in this next year under the Northern Housing Program, bringing to 800 the total 
constructed during this five-year program. 
 
In education, new schools will be built in such communities as Cole Bay, Turnor Lake, Michel Village 
and St. George’s Hill, as well as a vocational school, estimated to cost more than $4 million, in La 
Loche. The new gymnasium at Beauval is nearly complete and other facilities, such as the new Stanley 
Mission School, are well under way. 



 
November 16, 1977 
 

6 
 

 
Municipal services will be improved by a new water and sewer system at Beauval and extensions of the 
systems at La Loche and Buffalo Narrows. The systems at Ile a la Crosse, Green Lake and La Ronge 
have been upgraded. 
 
In addition, $7 million for recreation facilities in the north will be provided during the next four years. 
Major grants have already been approved for Weyakwin, Uranium City, and Creighton. 
 
Northern people have been given greater opportunities for self-government. Through the Northern 
Municipal Council, the Northern School Board and elected local school boards, local advisory councils, 
and local community authorities, northern people are making important decisions affecting their lives. 
 
Legislation will be proposed to grant additional responsibilities to local governments in the north. 
 

ENERGY 
 
In the coming year, my Government will create an Office of Energy Conservation under the Minister of 
Mineral Resources. The office will play an important role in co-ordinating and fostering energy research 
and development. 
 
To encourage conservation by home-owners, a loan program will be established for the purchase and 
installation of insulation. 
 

JUSTICE 
 
My Government continues to improve the administration of justice in this province. 
 
The list of accomplishments is long. The budget and the number of staff positions for the Magistrates’ 
Court have been significantly increased. A Chief Judge and an Administrative Director have been 
appointed and Judges’ salaries have been improved considerably. The Provincial Court Management 
Information System, one of the first of its kind in Canada, has been introduced to strengthen the 
administration of the courts. 
 
In a continued Effort to improve the court system in Saskatchewan, my Government will introduce The 
Provincial Court Act. The Act will: 
 

1. Establish the Provincial Court as a court of record; 

2. Provide for the creation of a Judicial Council; and 

3. Give greater independence to the Provincial Court. 
 
The Criminal Justice Co-ordinating Committee has recently reviewed the services available for juvenile 
offenders and disadvantaged youth and His Honour Judge Maher has completed his examination of the 
operation of wilderness camps in the province. My Government will be reassessing its policies in the 
light of these reports. 
 
Hearings on the corrections system in Saskatchewan have recently been conducted by His Honour Judge 
Moore. My Government awaits his report. 



 
November 16, 1977 

 

7 
 

FAMILY LAW 
 
For some time now, my Government has been considering the recommendations of the Saskatchewan 
Law Reform Commission relating to matrimonial property. 
 
In 1975, as an interim step, The Married Women’s Property Act was amended to give the courts 
additional powers to make a fair and equitable division of property between spouses. At this Session my 
Government intends to introduce a new Matrimonial Homes Act. 
 
You will be asked to approve legislation to establish a Unified Family Court. This new Court will deal 
exclusively with family law, thereby reducing the caseloads of other Saskatchewan Courts. The first 
Unified Family Court will be located in Saskatoon. 
 
My Government will place before you a new Extra-Provincial Custody Order Enforcement Act. 
 

SAFETY ’77 
 
Last year my Government announced a seven point Traffic Safety Program. 
 
The results to date have been impressive. 
 
New measures have been introduced to control impaired drivers. 
 
A Traffic Safety Court has been opened in Regina. 
 
A new traffic safety curriculum has been developed for use in our schools. 
 
Safety standards and regular inspections for school buses have been upgraded. 
 
Recent statistics confirm that the Safety ’77 campaign has resulted in many people being saved from 
injuries in traffic accidents. 
 
You will be asked to approve further amendments to The Vehicles Act. 
 

HEALTH 
 
In the coming year, my Government will make further improvements to our health care system. 
 
Additional funding will be provided for the College of Medicine to permit new initiatives in geriatric 
services and family medicine. 
 
The powers of the professional association regulating nurses will be strengthened and updated in 
proposed revisions to The Registered Nurses Act. 
 
A new Lifestyles Program will be designed to help Saskatchewan residents attain healthier lifestyles. 
 
Amendments to The Marriage Act relating to the minimum age at which a person may marry will be 
introduced. 



 
November 16, 1977 
 

8 
 

 
RECREATION 

 
My Government continues to take steps to provide protection and prudent management of our wildlife 
resources. A new Moose Management Program has been developed to ensure the protection of prime 
breeding animals while at the same time directing hunting pressure towards non-productive animals. 
 
Last summer, my Government inaugurated the Community and Regional Tourism Development 
Program to promote tourism in Saskatchewan. The program is designed to provide financial assistance 
for the establishment of tourism regions and the formation of regional travel associations. 
 
A new Regional Parks Act will be placed before you. 
 

SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
During 1977, the people of Saskatchewan have joined with people throughout the Commonwealth to 
commemorate the Silver Jubilee of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth. To honour this important anniversary, 
my Government has arranged for the distribution of portraits and pins to schools and other public places 
in the province. 
 
Looking ahead, my Government notes with pride several forthcoming events. 
 
On November 23, 1977, His Royal Highness Prince Philip arrives in Regina. His visit will coincide with 
the meeting in Saskatchewan of the Royal Agricultural Society of the Commonwealth for the first time 
in the history of our province and with the opening of Canadian Western Agribition, now Canada’s 
largest livestock show. 
 
This year, Saskatchewan 4H Clubs celebrate the 60th anniversary of their founding. 
 
Next year, Regina will celebrate the 75th anniversary of its incorporation as a city, and in August 1978, 
Saskatchewan will host the 19th Annual conference of Canadian Premiers. 
 
Looking further ahead, in 1980, Saskatchewan will celebrate its 75th anniversary as a Province of 
Canada. You will be asked to approve legislation to establish a body to co-ordinate the organization of 
festivities across the Province. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favourably 
discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGES 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly the pages who will be acting during this session. They are Natalie Biberdorf, Lorne Gulash, 
Connie McDougall, Gwen Orlowski, and Gail St. 



 
November 16, 1977 

 

9 
 

Onge. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

PRESENTATION OF MR. NORMAN LUSNEY 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 
received from the Chief Electoral Officer, a certificate of the following election and return of Norman 
Lusney, Esq., as member for the constituency of Pelly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have the honor to present to you, Mr. Norman 
Lusney, member for the constituency of Pelly who was taken outside the row and now claims the right 
to take his seat. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

SPEECH OF LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that: 
 

The Speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration on Monday next. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Messer (Minister of Mineral 
Resources) that: 
 

The Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr. 
Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 
presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

HOUSE SITTINGS 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by 
the Hon. Mr. Snyder: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, November 17, 1977, it do stand adjourned until 
Monday, November 21, 1977. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TIME OF HOUSE SITTINGS 



 
November 16, 1977 
 

10 
 

 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 
Bowerman: 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3, this Assembly shall on Thursday, November 17, 1977, meet at 10:00 
o’clock a.m. until 1:00 o’clock p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 o’clock p.m. 


	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	MOTIONS
	VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS
	HOUSE SITTINGS
	TIME OF HOUSE SITTINGS

