



















































Hansard: April 14, 1977


2049 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

38th Day 
 

Thursday, April 14, 1977. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce through you to the Members 

of this House a couple from Los Angeles, California, sitting to our rear, Mr. and Mrs. Doug Moody. 

Doug is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Dick Moody, Yellow Grass, and Dick was our contestant in the last 

election of Bengough-Milestone. 

 

It is also my pleasure to welcome from Torquay, the very lively town of Torquay, 48 members of the 4H 

Club and they are accompanied by Mrs. Lawrence Stone, Mrs. Pearl Groshong, Maurine Marcotte, 

Lorraine Marcotte, Mrs. Paula Zimmerman and their bus drivers, Rene Marcotte and Roger Marcotte. 

 

It is my hope that your visit here to the Assembly will be well worthwhile and it will be my pleasure to 

have a coke with you about 2:45. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome a group of Girl 

Guides in the Speaker’s Gallery, they are from Company 76 of the St. Mary’s Girl Guides in the city. 

They are accompanied by Captain Agnes Howard, and Lieutenant Medl. They are something like 12 to 

16 in number, some may be away during the Easter recess. I want to greet them this afternoon and hope 

that they will have a fruitful stay in our midst. It will be my pleasure to be with them a little later this 

afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

WESTERN DEVELOPMENT MUSEUM BOARD 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Attorney General. Under the provisions of The Western Development Museum Act, appointments to the 

board are made for one year. A few days ago you appointed and reappointed a number of people. In 

your reappointments you named George Dyck as chairman and reappointed one Alec B from North 

Battleford. My question to you is this: did you in fact name Alec Belish as vice-chairman of the board 

and if so, why? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2050 

 

may indulge upon yourself and upon the Attorney General in taking notice of the question, if he would 

take notice of another question which follows directly upon the one that I just asked. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If the question is a supplementary I will accept it. 

 

MR. PENNER: — The question would be this. In view of the provisions of Section 5 of The Western 

Development Museum Act which provides that the members of the board shall choose a chairman and a 

vice-chairman, I would ask you in looking at the first question that I asked if you wouldn’t also take a 

look at whether that Order in Council, dated April 6, 1977, is or is not an expressed breach of a 

mandatory provision of the Act that the chairman and the vice-chairman of the board are to be named by 

the board themselves, rather than by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of that. 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, just very briefly, I would like on this line 

of questioning again to ask the Premier whether he is prepared at this time to table for the Members of 

this Assembly a copy of the Richard Thomas Report? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have had an opportunity to look into this matter 

briefly and find that the Richard Thomas Report is a report not commissioned by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, nor tendered to the Government of Saskatchewan. While it may be that members of the 

staff of the Government of Saskatchewan have been provided with copies, they are provided with 

copies, not in the capacity as members of the Government of Saskatchewan, so far as I am aware, but as 

members of the board. I think our position is that unless the Board of Directors of the Western 

Development Museum wish us to publish the report we would not do so. If the Member suggests it, I 

would be happy to ask the board whether they want the Report published or not. 

 

UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL REPORT 

 

MR. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Minister, all Members of the House received 

yesterday a copy of the University Hospital Report. I am sure that the Minister has the same kind of 

genuine concern as I have and all Members, in which they describe the year 1976 in the most derogatory 

terms and also indicate that never before has there been recorded in the University Hospital the kind of 

actions that were taken. I wonder if the Minister would tell me, has the Premier’s investigation of the 

University Hospital, or personal inquiry into the University Hospital situation been completed? Could 

the Minister also tell me if he has had an opportunity to meet with the board to discuss the specific 

problems that are contained in the University Hospital Report? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I could answer a portion of that because I want to inform the House on the one 

point raised by the Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley about any investigation on my behalf 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2051 

 

or under my direction. There is none, there has been none and none is underway, of the University 

Hospital, nor has there been any of the medical school, in case there is a feeling that I am avoiding the 

question. So far as the office of the Premier, or me personally is concerned, there is no investigation that 

has been done. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I wonder if the Minister would tell me, has he had an opportunity to meet with 

the board of the University of Saskatchewan Hospital to discuss its annual report and could he tell me, if 

he has not had an opportunity to meet with the board, will he do so? And can he tell me if there is any 

remedial action being taken by the Department of Health or the Government to clear up this very serious 

situation? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, my deputy sits as a member of that 

board and I get reports from him regularly on the situations and any problems that arise are reported 

regularly to me. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to tell the Minister, 

apparently, that hasn’t been good enough. Would the Minister give me and to the other Members of the 

House the assurance that he will personally arrange with the faculty members of the University Medical 

School to meet with them to discuss this problem that is so disruptive to their morale and which 

threatens the very existence of the University Hospital in Saskatoon? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, we have a communication from the Dean of Medicine and I have met 

with him on a number of occasions; we have a communication from him saying that he is well satisfied 

with the situation at the present time. 

 

WAGE AND PRICE CONTROLS 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Your 

Government has indicated that you intend to remove the wage and price controls in this province. At the 

present time there is a great deal of uncertainty in the labor community and the business community 

about it. Could the Premier tell this Assembly the date that his Government will propose the 

abandonment of these controls? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I thought that the statement by the Minister of 

Finance (Mr. Smishek) in the Budget was particularly clear and I can only repeat it. Firstly, if the federal 

control program is terminated earlier than September 30, we will terminate our program 

contemporaneously with the federal program. If the federal program is not terminated prior to 

September 30, as now appears to be the case, as was indicated in the Speech from the Throne, the 

Saskatchewan Public Prices and Compensation Board will not apply to negotiations carried on by the 

Government of Saskatchewan with its employees in respect of contracts which commence on or after 

September 30, 1977. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2052 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Supplementary question. Does that 

apply, Mr. Premier, to all controls introduced by the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will read again the statement, and I will clarify any points which 

appear to be obscure. 

 

I would expect that provincial public sector contracts, (that will mean contracts in the provincial 

public sector) which expire on or after the date the Federal Government begins to decontrol, will 

also be decontrolled. In any case I do not foresee the possibility that we would maintain controls 

on contracts which expire on or after September 30, 1977. 

 

It is our understanding that not only would the contracts not be controlled after September 30, 1977, 

please understand we’re talking about contracts which commence on or after that date, but also other 

matters which are now under control by the Public Sector Prices and Compensation Board. 

 

I want to make one thing clear. Suppose a contract was a one-year contract, commencing in June of 

1977. It would be our assumption that the contract would continue until its expiration date in May or 

June of 1978 and would not be open for renegotiation on September 30. That is not the proposal. I am 

referring to contracts whose term commences on or after September 30, 1977. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I think the Premier misinterpreted my supplementary question. When I was 

referring to all controls introduced by the Government of Saskatchewan I included in that, rent controls 

and other controls introduced by the Government of Saskatchewan as a result of the anti-inflation 

program. Since the Wage and Price Compensation Board was introduced as a result of that program and 

the Premier is backing out of that one, is he talking about backing out of them all? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think I attempted again to be as clear as I could. I was talking 

about the activities of the Public Sector Prices and Compensation Board and the controls which are 

exercised by them. I was not referring to controls which may be administered by the Rentalsman or the 

Milk Control Board or the Local Government Board or anybody else who has a statutory power to set a 

rate or charge. I was talking about those which are administered by the Public Sector Prices and 

Compensation Board. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Supplementary, Mr. Premier, in your remarks to 

the question that the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) just asked, you indicated that if the contract was 

completed before September 30 and would expire after September 30, that that contract would be 

subject to the board’s rulings. Would this not bring about the situation then, where many unions or 

negotiating units would simply delay and wait until after September 30, before coming to some final 

determination of their contract for the next year, making it retroactive to the 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2053 

 

period of time when their earlier contract expired? Is there not a danger in that people will just wait until 

September 30 before getting into any meaningful negotiation with the Government? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The proposal is that whether or not the Public Sector Prices and Compensation 

Board would have jurisdiction, would not depend upon when the contract was finalized, but rather the 

commencement of the term of the contract. Thus, if the contract had a term commencing on August 1, 

even though negotiations were completed on January 1, it would still be subject to the provisions of the 

Public Sector Prices and Compensation Board. If unions and management follow their normal practice 

of making the contract effective from the first day after the expiry of the previous contract, then the 

situation which the Hon. Member, the Leader of the Opposition, states, will not arise. It is possible for 

management and unions to decide that they would enter into three-month contracts or four-month 

contracts or something like that, to take them beyond the September date. We think that rather unlikely, 

but I think that is the only situation which would produce the result or, in part, the result alluded to by 

the Member for Lakeview. 

 

DROUGHT SITUATION IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — A question to the Minister of the Environment. I 

talked to the Hon. Minister yesterday briefly about this, but I understand now that the situation is much 

worse than I first thought. Several parts of southern Saskatchewan are experiencing a shallow well 

failure. Many farmers are now hauling water. Some towns and villages are on the verge of water 

rationing. Will your department or a department of your Government provide assistance to the people 

affected by a shortage of water, by providing geological surveys to locate deep water? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, we have made a very extensive 

examination and prepared an inventory of those communities that could experience water shortages if 

the current droughts were to continue into 1978. We are also considering ways and means wherein it is 

within the capability of the Government to assist communities that may experience a water shortage. 

The Hon. Member will be aware that the Department of Agriculture has both equipment and a program 

to assist farmers and to assist communities that are experiencing a water shortage, where these supplies 

can be augmented by pumping or diversions or by whatever means. The full resources of the province 

will be available insofar as the problem can be coped with by those measures. On the other hand, we are 

prepared to provide all the assistance possible to assist communities in locating an alternate water 

source, whatever that may be. We will spare no effort in that regard. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister would tell us what towns, 

communities or areas in his survey are so affected and I wonder if the Minister wouldn’t agree that the 

farmers who are now out of water can’t wait until 1978 for surveys? Cattle can’t wait, they get thirsty 

from 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2054 

 

time to time. Would the Minister not agree that in southeastern Saskatchewan we are on the verge of an 

emergency situation and we have to act now to prevent an emergency situation? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I lived in southeastern Saskatchewan through the 1930s under a 

Conservative Government. I don’t remember them taking any action whatever to get one drop of water 

to one farm. It wasn’t until the Tories were kicked out of office. Federally, the Liberals were . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Member for Regina South. 

 

MR. S. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of the Environment. I 

hope the answer isn’t dry because on the second question he gave one that was all wet. 

 

May I ask the Minister of the Environment seriously, you indicated yesterday and again today that your 

department has done an inventory and has identified the communities that are likely to be affected if the 

drought continues. I would be interested in knowing the potential seriousness of the situation for the city 

of Regina, firstly. And secondly, are you prepared to table the studies that your department has done 

with respect to the potential difficulty faced by the city of Regina if the drought conditions continue? 

 

MR. BYERS: — With respect to the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the Members from 

Regina and all Members of this House that for the upcoming year, the city of Regina should not 

experience a water shortage for its domestic, industrial and commercial needs. The Buffalo Pound Lake, 

the source of water for Regina and Moose Jaw, is presently at its full supply level. It is full now and has 

been full all winter. We have been bringing in water from Lake Diefenbaker to Buffalo Pound Lake. 

Yesterday the rate of flow was 50 cubic feet per second, in an effort to keep the Buffalo Pound 

Reservoir full. I have checked this very closely with my officials. They assure me that the supply will be 

sufficient and that the quality of the water will also be safe. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Does the Member have a supplementary? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Yes indeed, in fact I have one or two. I have to waste one because I asked the 

Minister if he was prepared to table his report earlier. Is he prepared to table this report? 

 

MR. BYERS: — With all deference, an analysis made in one month will not be valid if any area 

experiences a rain that will change the supply situation. I assure the Hon. Members of the House that the 

situation is being watched very, very closely and that the Environment staff is identifying those 

communities where possible water shortages could occur, shortages that will result, not from the acts of 

this Government, but from the acts of nature. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2055 

 

We are, in all of these cases, ascertaining what remedial action can be taken by way of developing 

alternate water sources, by way of pumping or diverting water. We will make this information that we 

have, available to communities. We are prepared to work with communities and with individual farmers 

where necessary. We are on top of the problem but the situation can change from one day to the next, 

from one month to the next, depending on changes in climatic conditions. I think that is all the 

information and that should be satisfactory. I will give you the assurance that we are doing it. 

 

CONTINGENCY PLANS RE ISSUING OF LICENCES 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I should like to direct a question to the Attorney General, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A phone call in the last couple of days to the licence issuers in Regina indicates there is no way that they 

can get the licence plates out to people, should the people apply in say the last week prior to the end of 

April. Under the law of Saskatchewan of course, should a person not have a new registration after 

midnight April 30, they have committed an offence under The Vehicles Act. Has the Attorney General 

any contingency plans for those people who apply prior to April 30 and do not receive their registration 

and do not have certificates, to ensure that they are not charged under The Vehicles Act? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, today I believe is the 14th of April. We 

have at least two full weeks for this matter to proceed. As far as the information that I have before me — 

while there are some difficulties, these are easing and I think it is just too premature for me to make any 

kind of comment or decision in that regard. 

 

MR. LANE: — By way of supplementary. I am prepared to give names of people who have waited up 

to a month, to date, for licences after submitting a mailed-in application. Would the Attorney General 

not agree that should the present situation continue that making contingency plans would be in order and 

would be, in fact, a wise move on the part of the Government? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will take the next question. 

 

HEADQUARTERS IN ST. VICTOR 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 

Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar) I should like to ask a question of the Premier. In view of the recent 

legislation to assist small businesses and small towns in rural Saskatchewan, would the Premier look 

into the possibility of saving an entire village by moving the headquarters and the operations of the 

SEDCO plant to St. Victor, Saskatchewan, where there are offices available and most of the village is 

for sale? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — An interesting proposal which I will ask the Hon. Minister of Industry and 

Commerce to consider. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2056 

 

GROWING UNEMPLOYMENT IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Premier. The trends over the past five months would indicate that there is a continuous growth in the 

number of unemployed in Saskatchewan. In fact, we have slipped from the lowest in Canada to second 

place. Does your Government have any plans at the present time to alleviate the number of unemployed 

that we see growing in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that unemployment in Canada is rising and rising 

fairly sharply and no province can be totally isolated from it. The Provinces of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan have managed, over a period of a couple of years now, to be substantially isolated from 

the high rates of unemployment which have prevailed elsewhere, to a lesser extent in Manitoba and 

Ontario and to a very considerable extent in British Columbia, Quebec and the four Atlantic provinces. 

We are going to be affected, Alberta and ourselves, as time goes on. We hope that the impact will be 

minimal as it has been to date. 

 

I think that the particular figures which were issued recently are at least questionable in the calculation 

of the unemployment rate. The rate is arrived at on the basis of a conclusion that the work force in 

Saskatchewan in March of 1977 is 24,000 more than the work force in Saskatchewan in March of 1976. 

If that calculation, and it’s an extrapolation from a very small number of figures, is wrong, then the 

unemployment rate will be significantly less. I think, myself, it is somewhat improbable that there are 

24,000 more people in the work force in Saskatchewan in March of 1977 than of March of 1976, since 

the population of the province did not go up anything resembling 24,000. It is not clear where all of 

these vigorous workers came from. Indeed, the figures indicate that 16,000 or 17,000 more people have 

jobs. 

 

I rather think that the figure is on the high side. I have said on many occasions that a single monthly 

figure is not necessarily accurate. If the trend continues as indicated by the March figures then there 

would be cause for concern. I am not here to say that it will not continue, I hope it will not, but there are 

prospects that it might because there are prospects that both Alberta and ourselves are no longer able to 

isolate ourselves from the generally high rates of unemployment prevailing across Canada. 

 

STATEMENTS 

 

CORRECTIONAL CENTRE — PRINCE ALBERT 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I have a brief statement to make 

in regard to the inquiry concerning the Correctional Centre in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Logan has now filed his report with me with respect to the Prince Albert Correctional Centre 

disturbance of March 26 and 27. While the report will require close study by my department, I do wish 

to take this opportunity to inform you of Mr. Logan’s major findings. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2057 

 

After having interviewed all of the staff who were on duty at the time of the disturbance, the director of 

the Centre and other staff, members of the RCMP and a considerable number of inmates, Mr. Logan 

concluded that the incident was not a planned disturbance nor an attempt to escape. Rather it was a 

window-smashing, noise-producing disturbance within the dormitory area which was brought under 

control without injury to either staff or inmates after approximately $3,150 worth of property damage 

had been inflicted. 

 

The overcrowded condition of the Correctional Centre, particularly the dormitories, lack of program 

activities for inmates, combined with certain inappropriate actions by a staff member, were precipitating 

causes. Mr. Logan indicated that the staff took appropriate action in containing the disturbance and 

commended staff for their relatively prompt and non-violent method utilized in restoring control. 

 

In suggesting how future incidents may be avoided Mr. Logan recommended that: (1) the number of 

inmates being held at the Centre be reduced; (2) the number of inmates housed in the dormitories be 

reduced; (3) work activity be provided to all inmates; (4) training of new correctional officers be 

upgraded; and (5) emergency lighting be purchased. 

 

In concluding his report Mr. Logan stated and I quote: 

 

I think that the fact that there were no great number of major complaints from inmates indicates the 

general satisfaction with the manner in which the institution is operated. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Just a few comments, if I might, on the Minister’s report. First of all Hon. 

Minister there is one thing that is really important in the whole question of the jail disturbance in Prince 

Albert and that is that the disturbances in penal institutions, both of a federal and provincial nature, have 

been on the increase across Canada. We have just had a very disturbing one in the federal institution in 

the city of Prince Albert and, Mr. Minister, I would like to suggest that it is now time that governments, 

which have responsibilities for federal and provincial penal institutions, immediately take some firm 

action of pressing charges against all those who are responsible for destruction of provincial property. I 

would hope the Minister and the Government would immediately ascertain which inmates are 

responsible and lay charges immediately of a criminal nature so that there will be an example set not 

only in the Prince Albert Correctional Institute but institutions of its kind right across Canada. I should 

also like to suggest that something should be done, and the Government has also a responsibility to the 

overcrowding and lack of program. This has been brought to the Minister’s attention for years in this 

province and very little has been done. I know at one time I had the responsibility for the jails and a 

great deal was done as far as programs and as far as improving the institutions were concerned. Plans 

were actually made for a remand centre, but nothing has been done to alleviate these two problems in 

the last six years. I would hope that this would bring to the Minister’s attention the urgency of this 

problem to eliminate the overcrowding and to expand the program so that this type of 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2058 

 

 

incident will not occur as often in the future. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Minister’s statement, we note that the 

report, as indicated by the Minister, did not take into account injuries to inmates which were reported 

and which were public knowledge in the city of Prince Albert, We are somewhat concerned by the 

implication in the report, the implication that perhaps the guards were at fault, the implication when we 

talk about changes in the future — fewer prisoners, lighting improved, upgrading of the correctional 

staff. The fact is what the correctional staff needs is some backing from the Government, not upgrading. 

Give it some support. The morale of the staff is down as the Minister well knows. We are going to ask 

the Minister to table the particular report so that we can review it in detail. The indications from the 

Minister would indicate that perhaps the report is a whitewash, a whitewash in trying to cover up some 

very, very serious morale problems in the guard situation at Prince Albert. It is always upgrading the 

guards, always teaching, always suspending, but never giving them the support that they need. If they 

had had that support from the Government the incident wouldn’t have taken place in the first place. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE: ALLOCATION OF FUNDS TO HOSPITALS 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Before the Orders of the Day, I filed this morning 

with the Clerk and have acknowledgement of filing that under Rule 17 of the Rules and Procedures of 

the Legislative Assembly being a definite matter of urgent public importance and the statement of the 

matter is as follows: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan’s allocation of funds to hospitals in Saskatchewan is insufficient 

and has resulted in a deterioration in the standard of health care to the point where not only our 

lengthy waiting list for needed hospital beds and lengthy waiting lists for required elective surgery, but 

that the standard of cleanliness of the hospitals, most especially the older buildings has declined to the 

point where unless immediate action is taken, serious health problems could result. 

 

I refer you to the attached letter, Mr. Speaker, under Rule 17, we would propose and I would move — 

do I get your ruling now whether it is accepted or not, or do I move it first? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I will give the ruling. 

 

I have a statement to make with regard to the proposal put forward by the Member for Souris-

Cannington. The matter proposed for priority of debate is one of a continuing nature that has had 

considerable debate over the last few weeks. Opportunity still exists for the Hon. Member to debate this 

matter in the usual manner in this Assembly without invoking Rule 17. I, therefore, rule that the matter 

does not qualify under rule 17, Sub 6, and I further refer all Hon. Members to Sir Erskine May’s 

Parliamentary Practice, Seventeenth Edition, Page 365, and previous rulings of the Chair on February 

23, 1971, March 23, 1976 and April 13, 1977. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2059 

 

POINT OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. I am not entirely sure what Mr. Speaker can do 

about it, but let me raise it with you. You have often indicated that the Question Period should have a 

sort of quick parry and thrust flavor to it, that is a quick exchange of information that Members seek and 

Ministers give. In the last several days I have asked three questions, one of the Minister in charge of 

SEDCO as to the details of the financing of a Moose Jaw Corporation. He took notice of it. I asked the 

Premier, I think it was two days ago, a question about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Cory 

Limited changing its name. I asked the Attorney General and the Premier, both of you, why the head 

office still is in Regina, which was a conundrum. That one was taken notice of. I asked a question 

yesterday of the Attorney General about a study which I know was conducted. That one also was taken 

notice of. My point is, Mr. Speaker, that this practice of taking notice of questions and not responding to 

them for such lengthy periods is extracting from the Question Period the very kind of flavor which Mr. 

Speaker has so often said it should have. So I raise the point, Mr. Speaker, in the hope that Mr. Speaker 

may be able to do something with it and if not, at least we begin to impress upon the Government the 

need to provide the information quickly when the questions are asked and notice is taken. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak to the Point of Order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that to be a valid Point of Order because as the Hon. Member knows, and as 

I am sure all Members of the House know, Ministers on this side of the House have a number of options 

that are available to them with respect to the questions that are put in Oral Question Period. 

 

I want to say in defence of myself I suppose and of my colleagues, I believe that the number of detailed 

questions and detailed answers that are given in this Legislature is really quite remarkable. There will be 

a number of questions to which Members cannot give answers. The question that the Member asked me 

the other day respecting the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which is 48 hours outstanding, was a 

question which is a result of an Order in Council, which may have been passed some days earlier, 

involving a legal interpretation. I think that is a fairly detailed question. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is correct and proper for Ministers to make sure that when they are not 

certain in this matter to get the facts and then present them to the House. Nothing denies the Member 

thereafter to continue in the pursuit of his questions and the pursuit of his line of attack once the 

information is tabled. I say, Mr. Speaker, that while I am certainly not a member of any other House, but 

I have talked to other colleagues of mine who have been, that the record of this Government and the 

Ministers in answering questions with no notice is very, very good indeed. 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order. I just want to point 

out that one of the questions referred to by the Hon. Member for Regina South was the question with 

respect to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2060 

 

I note from the Blues today that this is the 38th day of sitting of this particular House. I may be mistaken 

by one day or so with respect to my attendance, but I believe I have been in the House for the question 

Period, 33 of those 37 days. One other day I was in the House but was somewhat late in arriving here, 

which I think is a reasonably good record, approximately 90 per cent attendance. I do indeed try to be in 

the House for the question Period. 

 

With respect to the question that the Member raised with respect to the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, I think that the information on which he based his question with respect to the change in 

head office and the change in name was gazetted, had been gazetted some three or four sitting days prior 

to his asking the question in the House. And in all of those days I was present in the House and prepared 

to answer that particular question. It is not surprising that the Members opposite very deliberately, Mr. 

Speaker, wait until the Minister is away and then ask the particular question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If it is the same Point of Order in a non-debatable fashion, I will take a final 

comment on the Point of Order. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation may well recall 

that I asked him a question three or four days ago about the substance of the agreement with the Sylvite 

Mine and I am still waiting for the answer and you have been in the House on a couple of occasions. 

But, Mr. Speaker, may I suggest that perhaps one of the difficulties in having these questions answered 

by the Ministers of the Crown is that when the Question Period starts flowing as rapidly as it does, often 

they are unable to rise to their feet to give answers that they may well be ready to give. I don’t know 

whether they have them or not. I suspect that sometimes they do and sometimes they don’t. 

 

I am wondering, Mr. Speaker, if it would not be of assistance to the conduct of the House if the Rules 

Committee consider a short period of time before the Question Period, whereby Ministers could reply to 

questions that were asked the day before or two days before by Opposition Members, so that there 

would be an opportunity during the day to have these things brought up by Ministers of the Crown. They 

could not rely on the excuse that they were unable to catch your eye during the Question Period. I make 

that hopefully as a positive suggestion. There should be some time limit set on the period of time the 

Ministers have to respond to the questions we ask. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I want to deal with the Point of Order that was raised in the positive fashion if that 

is possible. I think it is. 

 

The Point of Order raised is a good one, especially with regard to the type of Question Period that we 

attempted to design. I think in general it works; we have a quick question 



 

April 14, 1977. 

 

2061 

 

and answer period. However, it does bog down occasionally. I would accept the suggestion made by the 

Leader of the Opposition. In the interim I will make a deliberate attempt to survey the Government 

benches to see if there are any Ministers wishing to rise with answers about two-thirds of the way 

through the Question Period, that is not initiated by a question that day. That way we will not take the 

Ministers at the start of the Question Period but will take them about two-thirds of the way through, if 

there are some Ministers who haven’t caught my attention by then. 

 

I think there is something to be said about the type of questions asked. They should not be of a nature 

requiring a lengthy and detailed answer. I think that some of the questions that have been put forward 

are of the type that require lengthy, detailed and sometimes complicated answers. I don’t think the 

Minister can be faulted for taking some time, and I don’t think anybody is particularly doing that at this 

time. But by the same token, the Minister has the right to double check his information in the case of a 

long or detailed answer that might be required. I think there can be no marks scored against the Minister 

because he took notice of a question. I don’t think anybody in particular is doing that. I would admit that 

I have probably cut off or ignored, unintentionally, some Ministers who wanted to rise to their feet 

because of other matters brought to my attention and I attempted to resolve that. All Members should 

rededicate themselves towards the form of their question because I think there is room for some 

improvement and I can’t say how the Ministers should answer their questions. Some of them will have 

to delay them, obviously. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (cont’d) — VOTE 32 

 

ITEM 1 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. On April 13, 

1977 the Star-Phoenix in Saskatoon had an item: 

 

The Government backbencher from Saskatoon Centre told the PCs to lay down their nasty little 

cudgels and help the Government maintain the best medicare program in the world. 

 

We’ve been trying to do that. We have taken to positive criticism. You know there’s just no question, 

but the Government refuses to respond. The next step, of course, is to try and get them to respond 

through embarrassment. If that doesn’t work, I guess the people of Saskatchewan have to make them 

respond and hopefully they will in 1979, if not sooner. 

 

The people in Saskatchewan find it unbelievable that a government can afford to waste hundreds of 

millions of dollars to buy existing industries and millions more to build elaborate office buildings, but 

can’t afford to maintain a high standard of health care. I commend this Government for its work and I 

hope continued success in the area of preventive medicine, but preventive medicine is too late for sick 

people. Sick people have to be cured, or treated, or they stay sick, or die. 

 

I agree with the action of the Government on preventive medicine, but let’s talk about the treatment of 

active illness. What can be done to better serve the needs of the sick? The  

 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2062 

 

 

health care professionals must have qualifications and the desire to serve the ill. There must be ease of 

access to the system by the individual. We must have high quality of equipment used in health care. We 

must have the use of modern techniques and drugs. Are we having access to the system? The access that 

we have to drugs is not to the drugs at all, but to a list. I agree that an individual can buy outside the 

scope of the plan, but there is no easy access to the best possible drugs. 

 

High demands for services of professionals, coupled with high costs of providing services, means that 

there are long waiting lists for needed hospital service. You might think about this particular change that 

has recently been made in bookkeeping techniques in which people who used to be placed on hospital 

waiting lists are now told you can have a date four, five or six months down the road and you will be 

taken off the waiting list. So some hospitals have reported that waiting lists have shrunk. But in fact, 

they haven’t. It’s a change in the bookkeeping technique and, in fact, books are clogged up for months. 

 

Many rural communities are not even served by dentists. Many rural communities have less than 

adequate services by a doctor. Many have no health professionals at all. We have far less than adequate 

ambulance services in some communities. They are very expensive, therefore, those people in those 

communities have no easy access to the system. We also have health care professionals’ time taken up 

because of the new drug plan and because of many policies in the Department of Health, taken up with a 

ridiculous amount of paper work and bookkeeping and during this time they are not providing the 

services for which they were trained or for which they are best qualified. 

 

The Government tried to blame Ottawa for this deterioration. The fact remains that health services are a 

provincial responsibility and the Government must completely set its priorities in this field. The Health 

Minister says there is no deterioration; there is no concern. You won’t find anyone in Saskatchewan who 

will suggest that hospitals are totally meeting the needs of our citizens today, except perhaps the 

Members opposite. We have heard Government Members, including the Minister of Health, talk about 

national averages and returning to the national average. We don’t care about national averages. It’s time 

to recognize the real statistics. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the facts indicate that there is a greater need for health services in our province than in 

any other region of Canada. Almost 16 per cent of our population is over the age of 60. That is higher 

than the national average. It is a higher percentage than every other province in Canada. The ratio of our 

citizens over 60 is about 25 per cent higher than the national average and has been steadily rising. Most 

would agree that many of our citizens, many of our senior citizens, will have a greater demand for health 

care. There is greater need for hospital services in Saskatchewan and it’s long been apparent. 

 

Here are some interesting statistics the Minister hasn’t mentioned. In 1961 before medicare, hospital 

utilization in Saskatchewan was 42.8 per cent higher than the national average. In 1971, it was 34 per 

cent higher than the national average. And in 1975 it was 28.5 per cent higher than the national average, 

approximately the same percentage in 1975 as the number of citizens over the age of 60 in excess of the 

national average, 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2063 

 

seemingly, an approximation that would say 1975’s expenditures in health were reasonable. Yet drastic 

cuts in our hospital system were made in 1976. By the Minister’s own statistics, and by the evidence of 

the population figures in Saskatchewan, we need approximately 25 per cent more hospital care, and that 

costs. If you are wasting it in other areas, then you should re-examine your priorities. 

 

Those are the facts, Mr. Chairman, that reject our health priorities being based on the national average. 

About a year ago we were told two studies were undertaken on health and social services in one of our 

cities. One was an assessment of the need for community health services among the elderly. The other 

was a community health and social service study. These studies, we understand, were undertaken only 

after heavy pressure by local people on the Government and we haven’t heard anything about them 

since. 

 

The Government isn’t interested in the communities becoming involved in the planning of local health 

and social services programs. You removed some of their power, then dictate to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The Government would discover that its health and social service programs are not 

meeting the needs of our elderly. It is not meeting the needs of our youth. It is not meeting the needs of 

our disadvantaged. This Government would rather talk about averages, statistics, expand the 

bureaucracy, control the citizens, impose more regulations. 

 

One further point I would like to make is the denial of representation on hospital boards of people from 

an RM or village whose assessment is less than a half a million dollars. But as I understand it, there’s 

another department of your Government that’s going to take care of that. With the current reassessment 

there will hardly be an individual’s assessment that low. 

 

Mr. Minister, I commend your Government for its increased expenditures in the health field. I could 

have even supported the Resolution from the Member for Saskatoon Centre had he taken it in a serious 

note and kept the comedy out of the House. But I cannot support your spending priorities, either within 

the health field itself or within the whole spectrum of Saskatchewan. But you don’t have to convince me 

whether they’re right or wrong. You have to convince the hospital workers at St. Joe’s in Estevan. 

They’re not convinced that your spending priorities are right and we have a letter to that effect that has 

been read into the record here before. For those of you who haven’t heard it: 

 

Hospital workers are concerned by the cutbacks of hospital staff which has been the policy of this 

Provincial Government and we feel this is discriminatory against the hospital worker and is unfair to 

both employees and patients. We, the undersigned employees of St. Joseph’s Hospital, do protest all of 

the hospital staff cutbacks and furthermore that all past hospital staff cutbacks be reinstated and no 

further cutbacks be made. 

 

You don’t have to convince me that hospital care has not deteriorated. You have to convince the lady in 

Carlyle, who is 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2064 

 

currently on an eight to twelve month waiting list for elective surgery, not a life and death situation, but 

terribly uncomfortable. The problem is a prolapsed uterus and she constantly has to wear an 

uncomfortable pad to prevent the constant drip of urine. You don’t have to convince me. You have to 

convince the family of an old gentleman, in one of our northern communities, who were told: “Take him 

home, let him die. We don’t have the staff here to look after him.” You don’t have to convince me. You 

have to convince the young man from southeastern Saskatchewan, who was referred to a neurologist by 

his family doctor. The neurologist says: “You could have a brain tumor, we’ll have to run more tests, but 

I can’t get a hospital bed right now.” You don’t have to convince me. You have to convince the people 

from the Regina Hospital Employees’ Union. I have here a letter — Local 176, Canadian Union of 

Public Employees — and I’ll get one that I can read. It says in part: 

 

Here are some of my concerns or some of the concerns of our union in regard to the cutbacks in 

hospital in the past two years. There has been a considerable reduction in staff over this period of time, 

it seems to be in the lower paid classifications, such as housekeeping and cleaning staff. Last summer 

the housekeeping staff could not keep up with the workload and finally management was forced to 

hire an extra crew to wash the walls and give the building a complete washdown. The crunch came 

after October 14, 1976 when Regina experienced a bad dust storm and left the building in a pretty 

dusty state. There has been no relief help hired during the past two years. If someone is sick or on 

worker’s compensation, or employees are on holidays, the staff just has to work shorthanded. It seems 

to us that, although there is less staff, the same work is expected to be done. One of the things that is 

happening is employees with several years experience are leaving. 

 

I have here a list of the names of the employees, housekeeping aides, presently employed at the hospital. 

They number 61. I have here a list of the employees who have left the hospital in the last two years. 

They number 97. 

 

This compounds the problem, these employees leaving compounds the problem because these are the 

employees who are fully trained and require little or no supervision. I have talked to some of them and 

they tell me there’s just too large a workload and they are not prepared to accept it. 

 

One example I can give is the housekeeping department. There has been a turnover since January 1975 

of twofold. There is approximately 61 housekeeping aides and since January 1975 there has been 

almost 100 leave. 

 

One of the areas that concerns me is the fact that the hospital board announced a surplus for 1976. I 

consider this nothing less than blood money, extracted from the labor of all the employees of the 

Regina General Hospital. 

 

As I understand it, and I am no accountant, but the surplus in fact is not a real surplus. In fact, it’s money 

coming back to the Government. 

 

In summing up, it would be safe to say that the employees 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2065 

 

are of the opinion that they are not able to keep up with the workload and cannot do the kind of job 

required to keep the building as clean as it should be. These are just some of our concerns. But there 

are more. I trust this is the information you require. 

 

Yours truly, 

(I cannot read his signature) — President, Local 176 CUPE 

 

You don’t have to convince me that health care in Saskatchewan is deteriorating. My hometown 

hospital, 24-bed hospital, is given 8.3 bed status. It has two nurses on the day shift, one on the evening 

shift, one on the night shift. The community has dug into its pocket and hired an extra nurse for the 

evening shift and an extra nurse for the night shift. You don’t have to convince me, you have to 

convince the elderly gentleman from Storthoaks, who had suffered a heart attack himself, was caring for 

an invalid wife, deemed to be level IV, who made application in May of 1976 to have her taken into the 

Souris Valley Extended Care Home. It was finally granted March 9, 1977. You don’t have to convince 

me, you have to convince the people of Saskatchewan. If you can’t or if you won’t, then I suggest that 

you start counting your days in office because the people of Saskatchewan are not going to put up with 

deteriorating health services in this province. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might add a word or two. I read some of the 

remarks of the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland yesterday and I heard some of the remarks of the 

Member for Souris-Cannington today. He opened his remarks by indicating that the Government was 

not prepared to listen, that the available course of action open to the Conservative Opposition was 

embarrassment. The inference, indeed more than an inference, was that the embarrassment would be the 

citing of details which indicated the failure in the health system. We, on our side, wish to pursue any 

indicated failures of the health system as much as do Members on the opposite side. I accept the 

statement made by them that they wish to equip us with the information which will enable us to pursue 

these perceived failures. And, accordingly, I am going to ask the Hon. Member to give us the names 

involved in each of the instances which he outlined. If there is a neurologist, I hope he will give us the 

name of the neurologist, so we will be able to follow up the matter. If there is a patient, we hope we will 

be able to get the name of the patient. It is, of course, entirely possible that an individual patient will not 

be able to get into an individual hospital. And we would want to know for example whether there were 

other alternative hospital beds available. So what we are asking the Hon. Member to do, and I know that 

there will be no problem here, is for him to supply us with the names in each case of the patients where 

he mentioned patients, of the doctors where he mentioned doctors. I would be surprised if there was a 

difficulty. I do wish to get the information so that our people can follow up each case to see whether, in 

fact, there is a failure of the system or some other explanation. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to supply the Government with that information 

as soon as I have the permission of the authors of the letters. I just don’t think I can do it before that. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2066 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the authors of the letters, it is obviously open to the Hon. 

Member to quote the letters and he doesn’t have to disclose the names of the writers, but I would ask 

him particularly to urge each of the persons that they permit their name to be disclosed and the name of 

the doctor to be disclosed. I would further ask him to indicate, as soon as he reasonably could, the name 

so that we can pursue the case he raises. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I should like to respond a bit to what the Premier has just suggested. 

 

What the Member for Souris-Cannington has attempted to point out today, is that there are many 

instances of serious weaknesses in the health care delivery system in the Province of Saskatchewan. But 

let’s go a little bit further. 

 

Today we attempted to table, and then rejected in terms of Priority of Debate, a letter from the president 

of a local union in the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Longworth, who is the president of the Local 176 

at the Regina General Hospital. He has stated in no uncertain terms that he is concerned about the 

cleanliness of the Regina General Hospital. He is concerned that the cleanliness of that hospital is 

deteriorating. The Government’s suggestion by the Minister of Health, and on several occasions, 

certainly the Premier’s own suggestion in relation to the Victoria Union Hospital at Prince Albert during 

the recent by-election, is that somehow the Victoria Union Hospital had a surplus and, therefore, could 

have hired more staff to do the jobs that were needed to be done. 

 

Now it is our information, and this comes from the Board of the Regina General Hospital, that because 

of the way the present global budgeting system operates, the board does not have the power to utilize its 

surplus money to hire new staff. They are required under another section of the global budget to pay the 

money back which means that the surplus is meaningless. The Government of Saskatchewan dictates to 

the hospital board what professionals, housekeeping aides, and groups of people they will have on staff. 

If they hire more, for that particular duty, they will have to find the money some other way because they 

can’t take it out of the allocation for another group of employees that they have made. That means that 

there is no surplus from which to take the money to hire more housekeeping staff. 

 

We are faced with a situation in the Province of Saskatchewan today where both Opposition Parties and 

many Members of the Government are receiving reports on an almost daily basis of patients 

complaining about having to wait lengthy periods of time for hospital beds. We are told by doctors in 

Saskatoon that there are lengthy waiting lists. I read into the record the name of a doctor and am waiting 

for the Minister of Health to respond to that particular name, of an orthopaedic surgeon in the city of 

Saskatoon, who was reporting to his patients about the situation pertaining to orthopaedic surgery. Then 

you asked us to name every name. We are suggesting to him it is not individual examples, Mr. Premier, 

it is an example of the overall system. The cleanliness is falling apart, the waiting lists are increasing and 

people can’t get into the 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2067 

 

hospital. We are suggesting that you need to allocate more resources, when the hospitals get to the point 

where they are dirty enough, but we are not suggesting that they are there yet. We are also informed that 

at the Regina General Hospital, for example, where they used to clean that hospital three times a day, 

they are now only able to clean it once a day. They haven’t, in fact, replaced or substituted employees 

for sick leave or vacation time because they don’t have the resources. Where do those resources come 

from? The Government of Saskatchewan. Who allocates them? The Department of Health. We are 

giving you example after example after example, of instances in which the whole system is not meeting 

the needs. We are reading in the records, names. We think it is irresponsible for the Premier to suggest, 

today, that because the Member mentions more names, mentions more instances, that those names are 

required so that the Government of Saskatchewan may go out and investigate individual examples. 

 

We are suggesting, Mr. Chairman, it is not the individual examples that need investigating. We are most 

happy when we have permission from a sick person to release the name of someone who has reported to 

us a problem with the health care system, and when we have that information or that permission we will 

release the name, and have done so. But until we get that permission from people it is irresponsible for 

us to release the names. But it is not irresponsible for us to bring to the attention of this Government that 

the health care system is deteriorating, is falling apart and unless there is immediate action taken, there 

could be serious consequences. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to reply. In essence what the Hon. Member says is 

that they are making blanket allegations, that there are failures of the health system. When asked for 

instances, they give instances and when asked for instances which could be checked out, they say, no. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — They ask us to check on these charges. I say that if you, Mr. Member for 

Nipawin (Mr. Collver), are saying that the Regina General Hospital is in a filthy state — and I want you 

to say that or not, since that is what the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) said — I say that 

is a base lie. I say it is a base lie. I want Members opposite to either stand up and say that the Regina 

General Hospital, which is in my city, is one of these which is filthy because of lack of money, or is not 

one of those. I think I have the right to know, as a Member for Regina, whether or not my constituents 

are going to a filthy hospital. Now if you have evidence of filth that I don’t have, I would like you to lay 

it on the table. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I have this letter and if the Member for Nipawin or the Member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland indicates that, in his judgment, it is support for these allegations of filth, then we know more 

about the judgment of the Member for Nipawin and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland than we 

know about the condition of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2068 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — There is not a shred of evidence of filth, not a shred. I point out to you, with 

care, that almost everything in this letter indicates that in the judgment of the union its members are 

working too hard. Now that is not an uncommon allegation in this world. I go down and sit in the 

cafeteria and I hear all the MLAs grumbling about their working too hard. I don’t have an awful lot of 

sympathy for the MLAs. I may have more sympathy for the members of the staff of the Regina General 

Hospital, but even though they may be working hard, it is no evidence of filth. 

 

I go on to point out that on the evidence in the letter, when the situation became intense, the hospital 

hired an extra crew to wash the walls and to give the building a complete washdown. Does that sound 

like a board who is running a filthy hospital? And, incidentally, that payment for that extra crew was out 

of the global budget, for which the Member says cannot be used for housekeeping purposes. I tell you it 

was, it came out of the global budget. 

 

If the Member doubts that, he should check his facts again because the facts are that that sort of activity 

can be paid out of the global budget and in my belief, or on my instructions, it was paid out of the global 

budget. So it is pretty clear that if there is evidence of filth then I want the Members to lay it on the 

table, because I am interested in my constituents. And if this is the evidence of filth, then I think the 

board and the administrator of the Regina General Hospital deserve an apology from Members 

opposite . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . who are alleging in a totally unfounded way that this hospital, which is 

operated and has operated in the proper way, is a filthy hospital. I say that is not true. 

 

I will be interested in knowing whether the Member for Nipawin is prepared to back up the junior 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) in his allegation, showing us that he has documentation 

for this House. That is what I am asking for, the documentation to this House showing the hospitals, 

which are supposed to be the holy sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy because of the lack of money being 

put in, to maintain proper care adequately. They said, “You wait, it is coming, there will be lots more.” 

What I am asking you is, let us have it, let us have it all and let us have it now. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Members will know that the obligation to check the cleanliness of the Regina 

General Hospital reposes with the Health Department of the city of Regina. 

 

I know Doctor Chiao. I have known him for many years and I don’t believe that he would permit a filthy 

hospital to operate. 

 

I know the Member for Nipawin is prepared to say that Doctor Chiao doesn’t know his business. I know 

the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland is prepared to say that Doctor Chiao doesn’t know his business; 

that he would permit a filthy 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2069 

 

hospital to operate without making any report or any allegations. I say that is false; I say that is a gross 

slur against Doctor Chiao and his staff. I say there is not a shred of justification for this; however, I may 

be doing the Members an injustice because they have promised us the documentation. They promised us 

the documentation and not only that, they said they would bring it to this house — “You wait, it is 

coming, there will be lots more.” 

 

What I am asking the Members, what I am asking the Member for Nipawin and the Member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland is to let us see this documentation which will tell us that the Regina General 

Hospital is filthy, or perhaps he has another hospital which he says is filthy. Let him tell us which 

hospital is filthy, which hospital board is operating a filthy hospital, which hospital administrator is 

operating a filthy hospital. Tell us, so that we can follow it up. 

 

I will now sit down in the hope that the Member for Nipawin and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

will not only stand up, and not only orate, but will give us the documentation which they promised us. 

“You wait, it is coming, there will be lots more” — I ask you to put it on the table now. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Yesterday, Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General was appalled, he was appalled at 

the way people were talking about this hospital and today I am appalled. The Premier is suggesting that 

there is no problem, no problem, and yet the president of Local 176 of CUPE at the Regina General 

Hospital says, and I quote: 

 

They are not able to keep up with the work load and cannot do the kind of job required to keep the 

building as clean as it should be. 

 

“As clean as it should be!” Is the Premier calling the president of Local 176 of CUPE a liar? Is he saying 

to the president of Local 176 of CUPE, you don’t know what you are talking about, you have no idea 

how clean a building should be? Is the Premier suggesting that there is no problem? Of course there is a 

problem. But instead, Mr. Chairman, the Premier wants to talk today about splitting hairs on words. Not 

as clean as it should be, this letter says. Our health care system is deteriorating, Mr. Chairman, our 

health care system is deteriorating. It is an unclean hospital, according to this man, not as clean as it 

should be. According to the president of Local 176, the hospital is not as clean as it should be. 

According to the chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, they are now able to clean the 

hospital only once a day rather than three times a day. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — More on that please. Chairman of the Board? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — That’s correct. Perhaps, you’ll be interviewed by the press. You’ll undoubtedly be 

interviewed. According to all information provided to us, the so-called surplus of the Regina General 

Hospital, cannot be used, cannot be used, to go between the lines. The global budget requires that the 

surplus be repaid on the one hand, if it’s used up on the other, Mr. Chairman. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2070 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Order please. I find it very difficult to follow any message, if 

there’s any message to be gathered at this time, because of the interference from many of the speakers 

who are wanting to speak. They will have a privilege to speak, if they so desire. I also find that one or 

two words, that many of you know are unparliamentary, have been used within the Chamber here within 

the last five minutes. I ask you to certainly control yourselves. I know it’s emotional. I’m going to do the 

very best to control you, but I ask a little co-operation on the part of all of you. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, the Premier is attempting to do what they always attempt to do on 

the other side of the House. What they are trying to do is to color the issue and say that somebody else is 

to blame, say that it’s the Federal Government or it’s the board or it’s someone else when, in fact, the 

Government knows full well that it has not allocated sufficient resources to the hospital system in 

Saskatchewan to ensure any kind of standard of health care in our province. They’ve not only heard 

from the Progressive Conservative Members of this Legislature, but they have also heard from the 

Liberal Members of the Legislature in the same vein. They also are getting messages, obviously from 

their constituents, that the health care system is not meeting the needs of the people. We’re getting 

reports from union representatives, from workers, from union presidents, from patients, from doctors, 

that they’re not able to meet the needs and yet the Premier wants . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Documents. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Documents. Documents. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — That’s what your man says he has. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well you have a document here. You have a document here. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Is that it? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Some of it, yes. You’ll get more in due course, Hon. Attorney General, in due 

course, at our convenience, at the convenience of the people of the province, Attorney General. We tried 

yesterday, Mr. Chairman, to come up with a positive way that the Government of Saskatchewan might 

perhaps, might perhaps be able to come to grips with the increasing costs of medical care in this 

province. We tried in a very positive way to suggest that it was possible that individuals could become 

involved in the system again and find out how much they were costing the system and as a result, curtail 

their own non-priority demands on the system. We made that suggestion. Mr. Premier is sitting there 

nodding his head. He wasn’t in the Chamber when his entire party ridiculed the suggestion, ridiculed the 

suggestion and everyone who was here yesterday will know that, the suggestion was ridiculed. It’ll cost 

too much, said the Minister of Health. It’s been tried before, said the Minister of Health. Ridiculed. A 

positive suggestion to try somehow to come to grips with the rising costs of health care, in order that 

these kinds of conditions are not allowed to develop further in our health care 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2071 

 

system. Unfortunately the debate, in our judgment and probably in the judgment of anyone who 

watched, deteriorated to be one of accusations rather than . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who made the accusations? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Is the Attorney General going to rise in this debate? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, I am. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I sincerely hope so. I sincerely hope he does rise. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we repeat again, the health care system is deteriorating. The Premier wants to talk about 

words, the Premier wants to talk about, and the Minister of Health wants to talk about statistics and the 

Attorney General wants to talk about accusations. We are presenting, Mr. Chairman, the problems with 

the system. We all know in this Chamber that the problems are there and we are making suggestions as 

to how they should improve. But right now, as a result of this (if you want) accusation by the president 

of Local 176 of CUPE, that it is not as clean as it should be, we suggest that the Government 

immediately instigate steps to increase the amount of allocation to the hospital system in Saskatchewan 

to put an end to this kind of situation in our province. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I am a Member for Regina. A great number of my 

constituents use the Regina General Hospital. We heard yesterday the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

say that a hospital was filthy and that he would provide the documentation, hospitals were filthy and he 

would provide the documentation. We heard the Member for Nipawin today give us the documentation 

and it makes it clear that he refers to the Regina General Hospital. I think it is not unreasonable for me to 

ask all of the Members, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, to give us any evidence that the 

Regina General Hospital is operated in a filthy way. That was the word. We already have established 

that the Member for Nipawin is supporting the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. If he isn’t, I’d be 

happy to have that fact. 

 

These are your words and they are your words in a public place, about the largest hospital in 

Saskatchewan, a hospital which heretofore has had a pretty good record. A hospital, which so far as I 

know, is well administered now. A hospital, which I believe has a good board. A hospital, which I 

believe has a good administrator. A hospital, which is inspected by the Health Department of the city of 

Regina, which I believe is well staffed and which has reported none of the circumstances that the 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland reports. A hospital, which is inspected by an infectious disease 

committee, which has not reported any of the circumstances or conditions reported by the Member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland. I think we’ve got a right to know. 

 

I repeat again, that the hospital operates on a global budget. The global budget concept is one which 

allows a hospital flexibility in the allocation of the approved operating budget. It is intended to 

encourage hospitals to use their resources in an efficient and effective way. They can move people from 

one 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2072 

 

department to another, they can understaff one area and overstaff another. That is up to them and if you 

are telling me that with that flexibility and having had a surplus, the Regina General Hospital board and 

the administrator are operating a filthy hospital, then I think you owe it to us to put a little more 

evidence on the table. Because without that evidence, I will select my words with care, Mr. Chairman, 

the statement is a clear falsehood. It’s a clearly false statement. And it’s a statement which ought not to 

be allowed to rest, ought not to be allowed to rest unless there is some other evidence. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — This is no small allegation, that the largest hospital in this province is operated 

in a filthy way. No small allegation. And the inference is that other hospitals fall under the same . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hospitals! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, because it’s plural. The same blush. I say that that is unacceptable. If there 

is evidence, let’s have it. If this is all the evidence then all we have is that, in the opinion of the 

employees, they would like more help. 

 

Now, I am not in any way denigrating the employees of the Local 176 of CUPE. I cannot imagine a 

group of employees who wouldn’t want more help and I can’t imagine a group of employees, who with 

more help, couldn’t do a better job at almost whatever job they do. There is no school in this province 

where the teachers would agree that there are as many teachers as there should be, if you will accept 

their impression of what there should be. There are no hotel employees in this province who believe 

there are as many employees in the hotel as there should be, or that the hotel is as clean as it should be. I 

think it is clear that this is a highly subjective judgment and I note and give credit to the president, when 

he says it is in the opinion of the employees, he doesn’t assert that it is a fact. He says, very frankly, that 

in the opinion of the employees they can’t do the job required to keep the building as clean as it should 

be. Now that is hardly surprising. I am sure that any group of employees would strive for higher goals 

than they now achieve. And that will be true of any hospital in Canada. But having said that, the 

Member offers absolutely no evidence from any impartial group. No evidence. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Bet he hasn’t . . . 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Perhaps he has. Perhaps he’s got some evidence from somebody who has been 

in that hospital, who has some stature of impartiality; not the management, who will obviously say that 

they have got plenty of staff; not the union, who will obviously say they could use more staff, but the 

medical health officer who has got no axe to grind and who would clearly indicate it, if he felt that that 

hospital was filthy. Why wouldn’t he? Indeed, why wouldn’t he, if he felt there was any doubt? He is 

not an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan. His inclination would be to play it safe and he has 

not reported that this hospital is filthy or dirty or that the housekeeping 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2073 

 

conditions are below standard. He has not done that, nor has anybody else whom I know, except the 

union who feels that they would like more employees. Good luck to them. I don’t blame them for that. 

But it is a far cry from that, to support any documentation which will support this allegation that they are 

filthy. Now that’s what I ask the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland and the Member for Nipawin to 

support, to give me all the documentation. They are my constituents. I think I ought to know. And if you 

have evidence which is going to come forward in due course, I ask you to put it forward now, so it can 

be considered by this whole House, at this time, when we are charged with the responsibility of 

considering the allocation of money to hospitals in Saskatchewan. 

 

May I make one other comment before I sit down. The Regina General Hospital is an accredited 

hospital, accredited by an accreditation body which operates outside this province, which is national in 

scope. It was surveyed again in 1976, in December of 1976, I’m told. Those people didn’t detect this 

filth, those people, who have no axe to grind or do not come from this province, apparently felt that this 

hospital adequately met their standards. Clearly they did not have some evidence available that is 

available to the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland and the Member for Nipawin. I ask them to put it on 

the table so it will be available to survey groups, to accreditation groups, to the Regina medical health 

officer, to the Government of Saskatchewan and I ask them to do it now. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, it is apparent from the debate that 

has been taking place this afternoon and the debate that took place last night, that very serious 

allegations have been made by the Member for Nipawin and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland as to 

the sanitary conditions at the Regina General Hospital. Indeed, the suggestion that conditions there are 

filthy is a very, very serious thing to say. Members will be well aware that there are many hundreds of 

people going through that hospital every day of the week. Members will be aware that if conditions are 

indeed filthy, as described by the Conservative Members to my left, that poses a definite health hazard 

to the people of Regina and indeed to the people of Saskatchewan. The Members opposite have been 

invited to table documents, to give figures, to give names; they have indicated their reluctance to do so. 

The Premier indeed has accused the Member for Nipawin of perhaps lying. I am surprised that the 

Member for Nipawin did not respond to that remark by the Premier. I can understand perhaps why he 

didn’t respond, if he doesn’t have the documentation that has been asked for. The Members opposite 

seem to be defending with a rather hollow voice; they have not really brought anything to the attention 

of the Legislature which would clear up the situation. 

 

Because of the seriousness of the allegations, Mr. Speaker, because of the difficulty we have trying to 

determine whether the allegations are true or not, I would like to move the following Motion. Moved by 

myself, seconded by my deskmate, Mr. MacDonald: 

 

That this Committee, pursuant to Section 25 of The Legislative Assembly Act, command and compel 

the 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2074 

 

attendance before this Committee, the Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, Mr. 

Hewitt Helmsing, to assist this Committee in determining whether the sanitary conditions of the said 

hospital are “filthy”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all Members support this Motion. I think that there is one person who will 

know the conditions of that hospital better than anybody else and that is Mr. Helmsing. I think, in order 

for us to properly come to some conclusion on these deliberations, that Mr. Helmsing’s assistance is 

required and accordingly I make this Motion and ask all Members to support it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I wonder if, while you are examining it, perhaps you would be kind enough to 

have the staff give us a couple of copies. That’s the first time we’ve seen the Motion. I know that it’s 

just handwritten, but I would like to have a couple of copies to study it. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — The same convenience might be placed on our caucus as well. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — We could perhaps recess for a minute. We have to study it as well and we have 

only the one copy here. We can get a Photostat of it and bring it back. 

 

Order please. I should like the Members to return to their places. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — We want to get any evidence we can. We would like to get any we could from 

the Members opposite. We would like to get any we could from Mr. Helmsing, perhaps to accept the 

Motion. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, we also would like to have Mr. Helmsing appear before this 

Committee. However, the way the Motion is worded, since in the Premier’s own words the word ‘filthy’ 

is a subjective phrase, we would like to change this. We would, therefore, like to amend the Motion: 

 

That the word ‘filthy’ be deleted from the Motion and the words ‘not as clean as it should be’ 

substituted therefor. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. What is before the Committee now is the Motion that I have just read and 

we now have an amendment to that Motion. The debate continues on the Motion as amended. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I have never found it a more difficult time to speak as I plan to 

speak now, but I think that most all Members of the House can see what is behind this and we laugh, 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2075 

 

and I think that rightly so, but in a sense I want to again say, Mr. Chairman, that this is a very serious 

matter with which we are dealing. 

 

I have before me and I want to reiterate again, the exact words of the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

(Mr. Lane), not retracted, not apologized for, but supported and repeated today by his Leader, in 

response to the questions and the statements made by the Premier. Those words are: 

 

We could bring documentation to this House showing that hospitals which are supposed to be the holy 

sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy. 

 

That is the accusation. The documentation was the Regina Hospital. They say that that hospital is filthy 

and that that document supports it. Mr. Chairman, nobody in this House could accept that kind of an 

amendment. That kind of an amendment could be no otherwise interpreted but as an attempt to cover up 

or to, in effect, weasel out of a very serious allegation that has been made. And I really want to stress the 

seriousness of the allegation. 

 

One might say that as a junior Member of the Legislature sometimes the choice of words is 

inappropriate and one can get into a difficult situation, but I hardly think that that can be said of the 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland who is a member of the legal profession and who has had some 

experience here now. I hardly think that that can be said when it is repeated and supported by the Leader 

of the Conservative Party. I think that the people of Regina and the Regina General Hospital and this 

Legislature, have the right to know whether or not that accusation, made by the Conservatives, is 

accurate. I am urging all Members of this House to defeat the amendment. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — The debate that is presently before us is one over the use of 

a word, a word which was used in this particular Assembly I want to tell the Members of this Assembly 

that upon occasions I, myself, in my profession or in my job, will get a complaint, generally from one 

who works in the school, that a particular school is just filthy. I will indicate to that person the next time 

that I am in that general area that I will take a look at the school. Now in the opinion of the person who 

lodged the complaint with me, his idea was that it was filthy. Upon investigating and taking a look at it 

myself, generally with the administration of the school, I would say that there were some grounds for 

complaint. In my estimation it was not filthy, but rather there was negligence on the part of the custodian 

of that particular school. It also reminds me, Mr. Chairman, of a couple of summers ago, when my wife 

returned to Norway to visit her ancestors and I was left with the care of the house. When she came back 

and took a look at the rather neat way that I was looking after her little domain, she said that she thought 

the house was filthy. I did not agree with her, but I may have agreed that perhaps it was not as clean as 

she would have kept it. 

 

What I am saying to the Assembly at this particular time is that what may be considered untidy to some 

is not untidy to some others, and what may be considered as being unclean to some is not unclean to 

others and certainly what is considered filthy by some would be considered slightly out of order to 

others. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2076 

 

I submit to the Assembly, I submit to both sides, that the problem which has been raised is a problem of 

concern. That concern is because of some very serious cutbacks that we have had. The general custodian 

care of the hospitals has not been maintained as it once was. 

 

I think the House is making a mistake to play upon words at this particular time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to make just one comment in response to the 

Member. 

 

I find, in many ways, some kind of sympathy with what the Member is trying to say, but it is a 

momentary thing, because the allegation is that a hospital is filthy — hospitals yesterday. This comes 

from an MLA, who I believe has a higher responsibility to the operation. You can’t get around that. 

 

The Regina General Hospital people, when they have that kind of an allegation against them, of being 

filthy, what can be the option? There can’t be any option, Mr. Chairman. I, for one, cannot accept those 

words and I simply say again, that we should defeat the amendment. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, if I might just address myself to the Attorney General’s comments. 

 

First of all, at no time in this Legislature or outside the Legislature have we referred to the Regina 

General Hospital as filthy. Neither did the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland yesterday, nor did I today 

refer to the Regina General Hospital as filthy. We did bring forward a letter, from the president of Local 

176 of CUPE, which states that the Regina General Hospital is not as clean as it should be. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I should like to suggest that this is a very positive step forward, the Motion presented by 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Malone). The Premier has asked for incidents, specific incidents, of 

the cutbacks in health care affecting health care in Saskatchewan. And who would be better to appear 

before this Committee than the Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital? No one that I 

can think of! The Premier wants to have the allegations, or the suggestion that the hospital care system 

in Saskatchewan is not deteriorating, laid to rest, and we agree. Let’s lay it to rest once and for all and 

let’s bring the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital Board before this Committee and let him testify 

on what the results are in the Regina General Hospital, as they relate to the conditions of the Regina 

General Hospital. 

 

But when you introduce the word ‘filthy’ which is a subjective word . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — . . . that is your word . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I did not introduce the word, Mr. Chairman, not did my Member introduce the 

word as it relates to the Regina General Hospital. We will stand on that particular situation and let 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2077 

 

the record speak for itself. We did not refer, Mr. Chairman, to the Regina General Hospital at any time, 

at any time, as filthy. 

 

We would like to see Mr. Helmsing appear before this Committee. Therefore, we suggest 

wholeheartedly to Members of this Assembly, that they remove the word ‘filthy’ from this Motion and 

replace it with the words that were brought forward on behalf of the Regina General Hospital, ‘not as 

clean as it should be’. Then let Mr. Helmsing respond to the questions of the Committee as they relate to 

what has been put before this Committee. To suggest that we can introduce a motion in which the 

administrator of a hospital appears before a committee, having had his own hospital called filthy, when 

at no time was he ever accused of having a filthy hospital . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — False . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — If the Attorney General would like to stand on his feet and say that word for the 

record, then perhaps we will have a little more to say on that. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to, chronologically, repeat again for the House and for 

everybody, what transpired. 

 

About 24 hours ago, a little longer than 24 hours ago, your colleague, the Member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland (Mr. Lane) said these words: Thirty-seventh day, page 91, Committee of Finance, quote . . . I 

am going to go back a bit to put it in context: 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that what has to happen over there, because that is the first 

alternative, either they listen and try some of the suggestions and comments or there is a second way 

— we could embarrass the Government. 

 

I think that is an interesting political tactic which has to be explained to the people of Saskatchewan as 

well, but I won’t go into that. 

 

We could bring documentation to this House showing that hospitals, which are supposed to be the 

holy sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy . . . 

 

‘Filthy’, that is the word used. 

 

. . . because of the lack of money being put in to maintain proper care adequately. You wait, it is 

coming, there will be lots more. 

 

The transcript will then show that the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland and myself were involved in a 

lengthy debate. You can read into the record if you want, where I was saying that I wanted to have the 

name, the documentation that he had. He said to me, in effect, you will get it, but you will get it in our 

good time. That is the bottom line of a definition. 

 

At no time did he ever say that the word ‘filthy’ was, as 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2078 

 

the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) uses, something that he should not have used. We are 

going to get it! I begged with him to table it. He still didn’t give us the information. This afternoon the 

House reconvened. Your health critic made some opening remarks. You entered into the debate. The 

Premier asked you what the documentation was. That was the subject of all of the argument today, the 

documentation. You recalled the controversy back and forth and you said that here is the documentation 

tabled. That is the one, the Regina General. Yes, you did, and it was after that, that the Premier and you 

got into a debate whether or not it was filthy. You tried to make out the case that the letter represented 

filth; the Premier tried to make out the case that there were complaints, not amounting to filth. That was 

the debate . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That was the issue. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — . . . of which then the Leader of the Opposition moved the Motion to resolve the 

issue on filth. Now that’s the record and I am saying to look at the allegation that you have made. Look 

at the allegation that you made. Hospitals are filthy. How in the world can anybody make that kind of an 

allegation, and then say, we’ll say something other than what we put in the letter of making a claim. I 

am saying, Mr. Chairman, that that can’t be done; politics just can’t be run that way. The people who are 

in Regina General Hospital have a right to know whether the hospital is filthy or not. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The people of Regina have got a right to know whether or not that hospital is 

filthy. I have a right, as a Member of the Legislative Assembly, to know whether or not the Regina 

General Hospital is filthy. And I am saying, Mr. Chairman, let’s get on with the vote of the amendment 

and let’s get to the facts of the Regina General situation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Chairman, perhaps at this point in time it behoves 

me to say a few words, since I seem to have stirred up this hornet’s nest. Mr. Chairman, I was making 

what I thought was a sincere effort to bring forward what I saw as the course of action open to me as an 

Opposition MLA, and I say that sincerely. You can reject it, you can accept it; do with it what you want. 

The point is this, and I don’t back off from what I said, it is there in black and white, and I stand by it. 

 

There were two ways to proceed. One of them was to try to cajole — I don’t remember my exact words 

— or to try through constructive criticism to get the Government to accept what we thought were 

legitimate concerns in relation to health care. Now I said, failing this, we could bring forth evidence of 

filthy hospitals and it was assumed in that statement, of course, that we could do all sorts of other 

matters. 

 

Now, at no time did I refer to the specific hospital in question, that has come up for debate today, as 

filthy. But let 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2079 

 

me put this to the House and to the Members of the Assembly. I can look at a dictionary and I can see 

under the word filthy — and this debate could be ended very quickly. This debate, Mr. Chairman, could 

be ended very quickly because if we were to come in here with a hundred letters from administrators in 

Saskatchewan saying that their hospitals were filthy, then the Attorney General would get up and say 

that filthy is a subjective word and we would agree and we would get on with the business at hand. 

 

Now, is that what we would have to do? Now, there is another course of action open. Look at the 

English dictionary — it says dirt; filthy means heavily soiled or very dirty. Now, presumably from the 

letter which was (now hold on for one minute) presumably from the letter which was tabled here today, 

which we brought forward — presumably from that letter and I took it from this that if it is not as clean 

as it should be, presumably it is dirty, it is heavily soiled . . . well certainly, filthy is a synonym. Now 

look, Mr. Attorney General and Members opposite, I have had a bloody nose before. I don’t imagine this 

will be the last one, if that is what is happening. But I am prepared, if it is necessary — and if this will 

allow the House to go ahead — to withdraw the word ‘filthy’ from that statement and to replace it with 

‘heavily soiled’. Now does that satisfy you? All right. Now, Mr. Chairman, let me put it this way. I stand 

behind the gentleman from CUPE until it is proven differently. I am as interested, of course, as everyone 

else is, in hearing what Mr. Helmsing has to say about his hospital. I am sure that that will enlighten the 

House, it will enlighten us. 

 

But, I am prepared, if this becomes a matter of such antagonism, I am prepared to do it right now, to 

withdraw the word ‘filthy’. I am prepared to withdraw it totally. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I served for some years as a member of the 

Board of Governors of the Regina General Hospital, and therefore, apart from my concern generally as a 

Member from the city of Regina, I have a particularly keen interest in this one, because I know the 

workings of the hospital, I know the Chairman of the hospital and I know him to be a man of integrity. 

 

The Member who just spoke indicated that he was prepared to withdraw the word ‘filthy’. What I 

suggest is wrong in what he said, Mr. Chairman, is that this is not an issue involving him personally. 

The question is not whether he draws a bloody nose out of these proceedings. It has gone far beyond 

that. He chose yesterday to characterize a hospital or hospitals as being filthy. He said that he would 

bring before the Assembly, if we wanted it, documentation to prove that there were filthy conditions in a 

hospital or hospitals. I immediately wondered, and said aloud to him — what hospitals? Does it include 

the Regina General or the Regina Pasqua hospitals? I drew no response to that question. Now, if the 

Member chooses to use words that indicate a hospital or hospitals are filthy, the Member has to stand 

behind what he said. Now, we got a lecture from the Leader of the Conservative Party a year and three-

quarters ago, about the need for a higher sense of responsibility in this Assembly. He summoned us all 

to a higher level of politics than, he said, had been the case in the past. Now one 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2080 

 

of his own Members came before the Assembly, as this Member has done, and said in the course of 

Estimates, that a hospital is filthy. He is asked by Members, all Members, including our Members, to 

name the hospital. Then he stands and says, well look, I am sorry I used the word filthy; I am prepared 

to withdraw it. It has gone far beyond that because he has concerned a community of 150,000 people, 

including some Members of the Assembly who come from the city of Regina, and others as well. Had he 

himself, yesterday, used the word ‘filthy’, and then having been challenged on it — withdrawn it, then at 

that stage it would have been a point that concerned him only, and his privilege and the privilege of all 

of us as Members — if he could have done it, we would have been happy to have it. 

 

But he didn’t choose to do that. He chose to continue on the allegation he made yesterday, joined today 

by the leader of his party who is not new to this Assembly, and one who I said earlier, challenged us two 

years ago to rise to a new level in politics in this province. Now, the Member is elected by 10,000 

people. What Members say is important; it is important that Members be careful of what they say. 

 

The fact of the matter is, and the record indicates the fact is, that he did describe a hospital or hospitals 

as being filthy. When he was challenged to provide the information to back up the allegation, he 

provided information about the Regina General Hospital, which makes it clear that that must have been 

the hospital that he had in mind when he made the allegation. So, it doesn’t now, doesn’t now, behove 

the Leader of the Conservative Party, or indeed the Member, to say that they didn’t somehow intend the 

reference to be the Regina General Hospital. It is the combination of the remark and the documents that 

have been tabled that make it clear that they did mean the Regina General Hospital. And, as I say, it is 

an issue which has now gone beyond that particular Member. It is an issue which has gone beyond that 

leader; it is an issue which affects, particularly, the Members for Regina. It is an issue that affects the 

entire population of the city of Regina. And, one of the ways, clearly, to get to the nub and substance 

and the accuracy of the allegation that was made is to have the chairman of the Hospital Board appear 

before us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The Member for Regina South indicated that I had apologized for the remark. I did not. 

I made no apology for the remark. I hereby withdraw the remark, because it has been a very unfortunate 

remark. I withdraw the remark ‘filthy’ from all of my comments in the House. At no time let the record 

show that I used the word ‘filthy’ in relation to the Regina General. And I would just simply point out to 

the Members, once again, the definition of ‘filthy’ in the dictionary. As surely as we are sitting here 

today, if there were letters tabled in the House from administrators indicating that hospitals were filthy, 

the Attorney General and his people over there would be the first to say it is a subjective matter. 

 

But, I am prepared and, in fact, do withdraw the remark ‘filthy’ from all of my comments. I am 

wondering whether the Premier and the Attorney General and their cohorts will be as willing to 

withdraw the kind of accusations they have flung 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2081 

 

across the floor, if in fact, Mr. Helmsing comes in here and talks about the hospital and indicates to us 

that there are some conditions that are not as clean as they should be or that there are conditions which 

are out of the ordinary. Now, I just wonder about that. We will see what kind of metal they are made of 

over there. But for the time being, and the record is very clear on this, I withdraw the word ‘filthy’ from 

all of my comments. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question is called. The Motion is on the amendment. The question is on the 

amendment. It is moved by Mr. Collver from Nipawin, seconded by Mr. Lane for Saskatoon Sutherland, 

that the word ‘filthy’ be deleted from the Motion and the words “not as clean as it should be” substituted 

therefore. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Now I shall call the Motion. It is moved by Mr. Malone for Regina Lakeview, and seconded by Mr. 

MacDonald for Indian Head-Wolseley: 

 

That this Committee pursuant to Section 25 of The Legislative Assembly Act, command and compel 

the attendance before the Committee, the Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, Mr. 

Hewitt Helmsing, to assist this Committee in determining whether the sanitary conditions of the said 

hospital are filthy. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

I believe I am quite within my rights, that the Chairman of the Committee now invites Mr. Helmsing, at 

the earliest possible time that can be arranged, for himself and the Committee, to meet. And might I 

suggest to the Committee and ask for their recommendation — is it the wish of the Committee that the 

Chairman should invite Mr. Helmsing this evening, if possible, and report on this Motion that is now 

before us? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I should like to make the suggestion that you, through the staff, contact Mr. 

Helmsing and see what his agenda is, what his timetable is, and report to us in due course. We are here, 

so presumably we can be a little bit flexible with respect to his timetable and schedule. It is obviously 

not convenient now before 5:00 o’clock. It may not even be convenient tonight to start. But, I would 

suggest that we leave this in your good hands, and for you to interrupt the proceedings when you have 

some information as to his availability and we will make ourselves available at that time. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, just speaking to the matter that you have raised and the matter the 

Attorney General raised; I think it is very important that Mr. Helmsing’s evidence be given to this 

Committee in a manner that will be untainted, that there will be no suggestion that any Member of this 

Legislature or anybody working for Members of this Legislature contacted Mr. Helmsing to tell him 

what has happened today and what has happened in the past debates. I think it is important that he comes 

here with an open mind, and is not in any way influenced by any Member sitting on either side of you. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2082 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Chairman, I would move, seconded by my deskmate, Mr. MacDonald that: 

 

Pending the appearance before this Committee of the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital and 

the completion of his evidence, that no Member of the Assembly, or anyone on behalf of any Member, 

contact, talk to, or in any way attempt to influence the evidence before being given. 

 

And I just suggest, Mr. Chairman, that as a result of that Motion and I ask Members to support it, that 

the attempts to get Mr. Helmsing here before this Assembly be done by the Clerk or somebody in the 

Clerk’s office, or somebody in the Department of Health, and that all Members refrain from talking to 

Mr. Helmsing until such time he is here, and he gives his evidence before this Committee. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I think that I basically agree with the Motion. Mr. 

Helmsing is the Chairman of the Hospital Board, and in the course of dealings between that Board and 

the Department of Health, there will need to be contact. Therefore, we should have Mr. Helmsing here 

soon, so that the embargo on contact is as short as possible and I think that’s an understandable point. 

The Department of Public Health people can decline to contact Mr. Helmsing for a day or two days but 

if we let it go on for weeks, it is obviously going to be a very, very inconvenient embargo. 

 

So, I agree with the Motion and will vote for it, and I do so on the assumption that we are going to have 

Mr. Helmsing here with all deliberate speed. And I make the other point that while there is no way we 

can dictate to the press whether or not they contact Mr. Helmsing, we could ask somebody, on behalf of 

this Committee, to suggest to Mr. Helmsing that he gives no press interviews until he appears here. Now 

I think that’s not too much to ask. We don’t need to include that in the Motion, if there is some general 

agreement. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Mr. Chairman, if I might speak to the Motion. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — . . . debate any further on the Motion. I would like to put the Motion, and I think 

it only proper that we do that, as moved by Mr. Malone for Regina Lakeview; seconded by Mr. 

MacDonald for Indian Head-Wolseley, which is: 

 

That pending the appearance before this Committee of the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital 

and the completion of his evidence, no Member of the Assembly nor anyone on behalf of any 

Member, contact, talk to, or in any way attempt to influence the evidence before being given. 

 

We find the Motion in order. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, may I just say a brief word about the Motion. All I wish to say, Mr. 

Chairman, in response to the Premier’s comments about the somewhat urgency of the matter of 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2083 

 

getting Mr. Helmsing here, is that if it proves impossible to get him here tonight or tomorrow, the 

Motion can be amended or rejected and so on, and other motions can be put in. I feel that there is a 

somewhat urgent situation, and I hope arrangements can be made to have Mr. Helmsing here tonight or 

at the very latest tomorrow. If that doesn’t prove to be possible, then another motion can be put forth. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the intent of the Motion, that is that the Members of 

this Legislative Assembly, and anyone on their behalf not contact Mr. Helmsing. But to suggest, as this 

Motion does, that a man of Mr. Helmsing’s calibre can be influenced by Members of this Legislature, 

and that the Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital can be influenced by a member of 

the staff of someone in this Assembly, is absolute nonsense. Mr. Chairman, it is not our intention to vote 

for this Motion. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Leader of the Conservative Party to 

please listen carefully. The intent of that Motion was not directed at Mr. Helmsing, it was directed at the 

Members of the Legislature and all people associated with them. It does not intend to impugn any kind 

of a motive or any kind of a lack of integrity on behalf of the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital 

Board. It is an expression of concern and of protection for all Members of this Assembly and all people 

who work for Members or are associated with Members of this Assembly, because the first question that 

I am going to ask Mr. Helmsing when he comes here is: with whom has he discussed this? I wouldn’t 

want him to say somebody who was associated with me or the Liberal Party or the Conservative Party, 

or anything else. The Motion is not directed at Mr. Helmsing. It is directed at us and our associates in 

order to have this above and beyond the suspicion of anybody, particularly the general public. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I must reply to that because since the Motion has just now been 

passed, I must tell you that I have, in fact, discussed this situation with Mr. Helmsing. There is no intent 

to go back and talk to Mr. Helmsing now. I want to make this clear to the Assembly. I did in fact, before 

discussing the priority debate which we submitted to this Assembly, naturally discuss the matter with the 

Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, prior to our submission of that particular priority 

of debate motion. Mr. Chairman, I am going to have to read the record tomorrow to know what I said 

that was so funny. 

 

However, in my judgment, this particular Motion does, in fact, impugn the integrity of Mr. Helmsing. 

And I ask the Chairman to read it once again for the Members of this Assembly, to read it once again 

and for them to ask themselves whether they would like that kind of a motion passed on their behalf in 

an Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, two comments. One is that, I think I said not ten minutes ago, it 

was clear from two facts — one, the 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2084 

 

allegations made yesterday by the Member, that a hospital was filthy; the second, that today he tabled a 

document relating to the Regina General Hospital — that it was clear from those two facts that he was 

referring to the Regina General Hospital in his allegation that one was filthy. Now the Member for 

Nipawin, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Collver) in his remarks has clearly confirmed that it was 

exactly the General Hospital they had in mind. He confirmed that in having said that he talked to the 

Chairman of the Hospital Board before introducing the Motion today. 

 

Now the question is, the question is, why? Why, as I said just a few moments ago, when it was clear 

from the two facts, that he had talked about a filthy hospital yesterday, and today he files a document 

relating to the General Hospital, why then did he rise and again, with the approval of his leader, indicate 

it wasn’t the Regina General Hospital he was referring to? He did this at a time when his leader was 

fixed with the knowledge that indeed it was the Regina General Hospital to which he was referring. It 

could be none other, in view of what the Member for Nipawin has just indicated. 

 

The second thing is clear. The Member for Nipawin wonders what it was that was so funny about what 

he said. It is that, the moment he said it, it occurred to all of us that he had in that breath confirmed that 

it was the Regina General Hospital they were referring to all the while. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — The second point is this. Just as inaccurate as the other points the Member has 

been making, is his suggestion that this Resolution, in any way, impinges upon the integrity of Mr. 

Helmsing. Well, I can tell you that it does not and it never will, despite what you say. As the Member 

for Indian Head-Wolseley indicates, the Resolution is clearly directed to the Members of the Legislature. 

It says to them — don’t go away from here and in any way attempt to put any pressure upon the 

Chairman of the Regina General Hospital Board. Don’t go away from here and try to influence any of 

the evidence that may come before us. That’s a fairly standard embargo, as the Premier has indicated. 

When a witness is to appear before a committee such as this, or a witness is to appear in almost any 

circumstance, there is generally a prohibition on people, who are interested in the matter, from talking to 

the witness. Why? Not because anybody is concerned about the integrity of the witness, but because 

they are concerned that Members may try to influence the witness and put the witness in a very difficult 

position. Now I want to make it very clear that this Resolution which comes from this side of the House 

in no way, in no way, suggests that the Chairman of the Hospital Board is anything but a man who is 

dedicated to his work and a man of integrity. And it is directed principally to Members in the 

Conservative Party who may, between now and the time we hear the evidence, try to influence it. 

 

So I say, Mr. Chairman, that in that second respect, and I want to make this abundantly clear, despite 

what the Member for Nipawin says, that the wording of the Resolution is clear, it is in no way directed 

at Mr. Helmsing. It is directed to prevent the Member for Nipawin and some of those Members from 

trying to 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2085 

 

go to him in advance and influencing him in some way. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to hear the Member for Regina South make these 

remarks about trying to influence witnesses and certainly, from our point of view, we will not contact 

Mr. Helmsing, nor will, I imagine, any Member of the Government or the Department of Health, or the 

Premier’s office, or will anyone else attempt to contact Mr. Helmsing between now and when he appears 

before the Committee, notwithstanding the Premier’s riders that he places on these remarks. 

 

Secondly, I would like to clarify for just a moment — well I heard riders over there. I would like to 

clarify for just a moment the suggestion of the Member for Regina South that I couldn’t see what was so 

funny. We received a letter from the president of the Local 176 of CUPE . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — As per your request . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — . . . it doesn’t say as per your telephone request, it says as per our telephone 

conversation, Attorney General. Well that’s funny too. I hope that the Member for Regina South jumps 

right in there with the Members opposite and continues this banter of words, while our hospital system is 

deteriorating. I hope he jumps right on board with them — right on board with them. Mr. Chairman, I 

want to clarify this once more to the Members of this Assembly. We received the letter from a president 

of a local union indicating unclean conditions. As a result of that letter, naturally I telephoned the 

Chairman of the board of that hospital to check the letter out and to ensure whether or not the letter had 

any basis in fact on both sides of the coin. That checking was done today. I passed that along to the 

Members of this Assembly. I did not state that the Regina General Hospital was filthy. The Member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland did not state that the Regina General Hospital is filthy. Nor have we implied today 

that the Regina General Hospital is filthy. The reason that the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

withdrew the word ‘filthy’ is very clear. We would like the Chairman of the Regina Hospital Board to 

come in to this Assembly and express, rationally, the views of what the cutbacks have done to the health 

care system of Saskatchewan, not lock into a word which you can’t possibly accept, but to discuss, in 

fact, what has happened to the hospital care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

I hope when the witness appears before this Assembly, that the Members will not be hung up on a word 

and that they will listen more to the facts as presented by the Chairman of the Hospital Board of the 

Regina General Hospital. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question is called. The Motion that you are voting on is: 

 

That pending the appearance before this Committee of the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital 

and the completion of his evidence, no Member of the Assembly nor anyone on behalf of any Member 

contact, talk to, or in any way attempt to influence the evidence before being given. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2086 

 

All those in favour of the Motion please say aye. Opposed, say no. The Motion is carried. I would like to 

add that I am in agreement with the wording of the Motion and that I, as Chairman, should be excluded. 

Therefore, I am going to ask the Clerk of the Assembly to make the arrangements. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if you could give us some indication whether the Clerk 

can do that now, or just what sort of time frame we are looking at. I, for one, and I think the Members on 

this side, the Liberal Party, would like to deal, if possible, with the matter this evening. I am not sure 

about Mr. Helmsing’s availability. I don’t know what other Members think, but perhaps we could make 

some determination right now as to whether Mr. Helmsing can be here at 7:00 o’clock. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I might say to the Assembly that we are now, and I say we, the Clerk’s staff, has 

already undertaken the business of trying to locate Mr. Helmsing, and we hope to report to you very 

quickly. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, we are still on Item 1, I think. Mr. Chairman, yesterday the 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland, speaking on the 37th day of the Committee of Finance, said quote: 

 

We could bring documentation to this House showing that hospitals, which are supposed to be the 

holy sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy because of the lack of money being put in, to maintain proper 

care adequately. You wait, it’s coming. There will be lots more. 

 

I have no right to ask the Leader of the Conservative Party a question and he can sit and not answer it, it 

is his right, but I would like to know if the Conservative Party Leader, through the Member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland, has any other documentation, as of this time and this date, respecting any other 

hospitals in Saskatchewan which are filthy because of lack of money being put in, to maintain proper 

care adequately? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to draw to the attention of the Members of the House, that speaking 

yesterday, the Member for Sutherland made these remarks which I don’t think I need to repeat. I would 

like to ask the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland whether or not there is any other documentation which 

he has not yet tabled in this House, which shows that there are other hospitals which are filthy because 

of the lack of money being put in, to maintain proper care adequately? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want the record to show that the Leader of the Conservative Party and the Member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland have no response to that request for information. I want the record clearly to show 

that, because only one of two reasons could be behind the failure to make any response. Either, one, 

there is no documentation respecting the filth of hospitals in Saskatchewan, therefore, they are silent. Or, 

two, there is documentation of filth which they have, but they do not seek to bring it forward to the 

people’s attention and to the attention of the Department of Public Health for immediate rectification. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2087 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, just in the eventuality that it could be the second alternative, namely, that they do 

have documentation of filth; I am asking them one more time, because I want to know as an MLA and 

as a Member of the Government, if there is documentation of filth, so that we can take the appropriate 

action. I want to know so that we can eliminate the shadow of doubt that has been put on approximately 

140 hospitals in Saskatchewan. I want to know where that documentation is, so that in case there is any 

potential health hazard we can act. And, I ask again, either the Leader of the Conservative Party or the 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland, the specific question — do they have any documentation which 

indicates that hospitals are filthy because of lack of money being put in, to maintain proper care 

adequately? I will take my chair in the hopes that one of the two Members will rise to give the public of 

Saskatchewan and the people that assurance. Mr. Chairman, may I ask that you call it 5:00 o’clock? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — It has been moved by the Attorney General, it now being 5:00 o’clock, I do now 

leave the Chair until 7:00 o’clock this evening. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, before you leave the Chair, do we have any word from the Clerk? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I am unable to get in touch with the Clerk yet, but I certainly will be making 

every effort over the supper hour to get in touch with him. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:00 o’clock to 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, please. I first want to introduce to the Committee, Mr. Hewitt 

Helmsing, Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital. I thank Mr. Helmsing for agreeing to 

meet with us on such short notice. 

 

For the clarification of the witness, and all Members of the Committee, I intend to outline several 

procedures which I believe we should follow. 

 

Firstly, all questions to the witness and all answers from the witness must be directed through the Chair. 

 

Secondly, no Member may debate with the witness. Mr. Helmsing has been invited here tonight to 

answer questions that Members may wish to ask, but it is not fair to the witness to involve him in the 

debate nor to be expected to debate with any Member. 

 

Thirdly, I refer to Section 29, (1) and (2) of the Legislative Assembly Act which states: 

 

(1) Any standing or special committee of the Assembly may require the facts, matters and things 

relating to the subject of any inquiry to be verified or otherwise ascertained by the oral examination of 

witnesses or otherwise and may examine such witnesses upon oath. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2088 

 

(2) The chairman or any other member of such committee may administer to any witness an oath or 

affirmation in form A or form B. 

 

Therefore, I interpret this section to mean that I may issue an oath to the witness but I intend to carry out 

the proceedings tonight without such an oath unless requested to do otherwise by any Member of the 

Committee. The question directed to the witness must pertain to the matter raised in the Resolution of 

Invitation which was agreed to by the Committee earlier today. 

 

Are there, then, any questions to be directed to the witness? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I am reluctant to make this suggestion, but I do believe, that 

since this matter is a fairly serious matter, that Mr. Helmsing should be sworn in. I believe that The 

Legislative Assembly Act has a form for the Oath of Witness. I am sure that he won’t object to this and 

it, of course, does not carry any special implication to the request, but I think to put everything beyond 

any doubt, he should be sworn in so I would ask that Mr. Helmsing be sworn in. Then I would like to 

start, with your permission, and just ask a very few questions. 

 

SWEARING IN OF MR. HEWITT HELMSING 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Place your hand on the Bible, please. 

 

Do you swear that the evidence you shall give on this examination shall be the truth, the whole truth, 

and nothing but the truth, so help you God? 

 

MR. HEWITT HELMSING: — I do. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, I am not rising to ask Mr. 

Helmsing any questions. I am rising merely to make a few comments to echo your remarks that you 

have made and to thank Mr. Helmsing for responding to the Command of the Legislature (that’s the way 

it’s worded of course in the Act), and to assure Mr. Helmsing that we have invited him to come here 

tonight and not in any way to embarrass him or to discredit the Board of Governors of the Regina 

General Hospital. We want to assure him that the reason for his presence here is as a result of certain 

allegations that have come about in the debate in this Committee and I certainly hope that Mr. Helmsing 

will be of assistance to us in our deliberations. I want to welcome him here and to assure him that we 

will not in any way be asking him questions that could be embarrassing or could put him in any difficult 

position. We are merely here tonight to determine the facts of the situation at the Regina General 

Hospital and I am sure that he will be of great assistance to us in coming to that conclusion. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I think that I must also concur in the remarks made by the Leader 

of the Opposition with respect to the purpose and the intent of the procedure today, a procedure which is 

a fairly unusual procedure as far as I know. I have been around now ten years in the Legislative 

Assembly and I think 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2089 

 

that it is certainly a first for me. So, Mr. Helmsing, whatever else comes out of this, you can rest assured 

that you will be part of a first in Saskatchewan history. I don’t know if that makes you feel any better or 

not. Mr. Chairman, I would like to perhaps just set the tone and ask a few brief questions. Forgive me if 

I direct them directly to Mr. Helmsing; I will try of course to go through you, but I don’t want to preface 

every question by going back to you, Mr. Chairman, unless you think it is out of order. 

 

First of all, Mr. Helmsing, you are the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital here in the city of 

Regina. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct sir. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And how long have you been the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the Hon. Member, I have been Chairman for a 

number of years; I am trying to recall and I think I became Chairman of the General Hospital Board 

around the year 1971. At that time the hospital was owned by the city of Regina, subsequent to the 

transfer of the hospital to the jurisdiction of the Government of Saskatchewan. I was appointed 

Chairman and I have been Chairman since that time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Helmsing, were you a member of the Board, apart from being chairman, 

prior to that time in 1971? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I was a member of the Board back in the years 1966-1968, inclusive. Two 

of those years I was vice-chairman. That was at a time when I served as a member of the Regina City 

Council. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Again, I appreciate that you may not have all of your information here because 

of the shortage of time that was available to you, but I wonder if you would be kind enough just to set 

the background for us and give the names of the other Board members of the Regina General, as of 

today’s date. Can you give us as many as you can if you don’t have them all handy? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I think I can detail for you the membership of the Board of Governors, 

which is dictated by statute of this House. Perhaps I should indicate to you how the representation is 

gained. The legislation provides for the appointment of the board to be representative of the community 

and tries to encompass all areas of our community life. Also, in the terms of the reference of the transfer 

of the hospital, the city of Regina has an opportunity to have input into the appointment of at least two 

of the members and this is done by a panel being submitted by the city of Regina to the Lieutenant-

Governor-in-Council, who then makes the final appointment of the board members. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2090 

 

The Board consists then of myself as Chairman, Mr. Sorrel Steinberg as the Vice-chairman . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You might just identify whether they are the two city nominees, or from the 

provincial . . . 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I believe that Mr. Steinberg fulfils the role of one of the city nominees. The other 

city nominee is Alderman Clive Rodham, who is a sitting member of Council at the city of Regina. 

Other members include Mr. Ian Rogers, who at the time of his appointment was the Deputy Minister of 

Government Services and is presently a staff member of the Department of Health. Mr. Lloyd Matheson 

is another member, as is Mr. Bill Leonard, former Executive Secretary of the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Association. Two others are, Mrs. Marion MacPherson and Mr. Mel Derrick, who is the 

Deputy Minister of Health, and a representative of the department. I think I have covered the members 

basically. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, fine. If another name comes to you, don’t hesitate to interject and throw it 

in. Mr. Helmsing, I feel I am obligated to ask this question as a result of some other Motions which were 

passed in the Legislature earlier today. Have you been contacted by any Member of the Legislative 

Assembly of this House with respect to this matter, the Resolution, which is the subject matter of the 

discussion today, since 4:00 p.m. of this afternoon? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — No, I have not. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And I would also ask you, whether or not you have been contacted by any other 

person or individual who is not a Member of the Legislative Assembly, but who represented to be 

calling on behalf of such a person of the Assembly? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — No, I have not sir. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Now, Mr. Helmsing, just one or two questions about the Provincial Department 

of Public Health. 

 

I take it in your years as a member of the Board of the Regina General Hospital and now as Chairman, it 

would be part of your duties to be in fairly frequent contact with many of the senior officials of the 

Department of Public Health of Saskatchewan. Am I correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct sir. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Quite obviously that’s the case because of the composition on the Board of 

Governors as you have indicated, Mr. Rogers and Mr. Derrick, as examples. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Absolutely, and I think it must be recognized that the Regina General Hospital is 

one of a number of Crown hospitals. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2091 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes. And would it also be safe to say you know the senior officials on a first 

name basis in the Department of Public Health? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, that is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And is it correct to say that apart from this present situation, leaving this out of 

consideration for the time being, you know them and you would be able to deal with them on a first 

name basis if any particular problem arose that affected them and concerned them as it related to the 

Regina General? You would be able to quickly get to them by way of a phone call or by way of 

correspondence, communication or something of that nature? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Absolutely. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And I assume that you have confidence in the administrative abilities and the 

administrative dealings of those senior officials of the Department of Public Health as they relate to you 

in your capacity as Chairman of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I have always found the officials to be of a high calibre and people with whom I 

have been able to discuss, quite frankly, the problems and the concerns which I have had, or the Board 

has had, over the years. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Now, Mr. Helmsing, again I am a Saskatoon MLA and I am not quite sure even 

how it is done in Saskatoon, let alone how it is done in Regina, and you will bear with me if I perhaps 

am uncertain in my terms or perhaps in some of my facts. 

 

But am I correct in saying that the city of Regina’s Health Department employs a medical health officer 

whose responsibility it is to periodically inspect and maintain health standards generally in the city of 

Regina and that also includes the Regina General Hospital? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I believe that to be the case. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Pardon me. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I believe that to be the case. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Putting it another way, it is the city of Regina’s responsibility to ensure the 

maintenance of good and safe health standards generally? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I believe those to be the terms of reference of the department. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes. In fact, I should have asked you this at the 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2092 

 

beginning, but you are Mr. Helmsing, or were I should say, an alderman of the city of Regina? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, that’s correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — How long were you an alderman of the city of Regina? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I was an alderman for a period of four years, upon which I retired. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Voluntarily or involuntarily retired? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Voluntarily, not retired by the taxpayer, quite voluntarily. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Very good. And quite obviously then, you have confidence in the capacity of the 

city of Regina’s Health Department to carry out its duties, these duties that we have talked about? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Well, that’s debatable, Mr. Chairman. You know I have not always agreed with 

the administration of the city of Regina, quite frankly. I have had some concerns, quite frankly, about 

the administration of the city of Regina generally, but you know I assume they are there to do a job, and 

the council of the day must have confidence in them. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, when you were a council member, I assume that you had confidence in the 

city of Regina’s Health Department? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, generally I had confidence in the department. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Otherwise you would have raised and made some objections if you didn’t. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Which I did on a number of occasions, with a number of departments. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — What form did these objections take? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — You are asking me to go back about ten years, Hon. Member, and I am not sure 

that I am able to recall, at the present time, the concerns I had at that time. I am not saying the concerns I 

may have had then would be the concerns I have today because I am not really aware of the functioning 

of the department. I think there are areas in all our departments which can be considerably improved. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, let me put it to you 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2093 

 

bluntly. Is it correct to say that you have confidence in, generally speaking, the ability of the city of 

Regina Health Department to do the job of maintenance of health standards today as you know it? I am 

not talking about improving it. We can improve the Department of the Attorney General; we can 

improve the Department of Health and the working of MLAs. The question is whether or not it generally 

fulfils its functions. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I suppose in the general term they do fulfil the basic purposes of their terms of 

reference. There are a number of times when I have had concerns that perhaps they don’t have the 

legislative authority to carry out work or concerns that I have raised, a number of matters, not 

particularly dealing with the hospital, but concerning the Regina Housing Authority and other areas in 

which matters haven’t been followed up as they might ought to have been followed up. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Do these people in the city of Regina contact, on a regular basis, the Regina 

General Hospital as part of their duties? Do they not review the health standards of the Regina General 

Hospital on a regular basis? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I would think they probably do, given their terms of reference and the number of 

personnel they have. I would assume that, and I understand that this has been carried out. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Are you not personally . . . 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, could we have the Attorney General go through the Chair, please? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I will mention again, as I did earlier, that I would appreciate if both men would 

address the Chair. I do realize that it is difficult when the witness is at the other end of the building. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the witness whether or not, in his capacity as 

Chairman of the Regina General Hospital, he is aware that on a more or less regular basis, the city of 

Regina Health Department carries out an inspection of the Regina General Hospital facilities? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — A question I can answer with a positive, Yes. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Who is the medical officer, Mr. Chairman, I would ask the witness, of the city of 

Regina Health Department? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Dr. John Chiao. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Is the witness able to tell us, Mr. Chairman, how long Dr. Chiao has been the 

medical health inspector? 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2094 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I can’t tell you precisely but I believe it has been for a good number of years. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Was, can the witness tell us, Dr. Chiao the medical health officer at all relevant 

times when the witness was an alderman for the city of Regina? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Can the witness tell us, to the best of his knowledge, if indeed Dr. Chiao is 

currently the medical health officer? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes he is, I believe, unless something has changed today. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Right, as of today. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the witness whether or not 

he is aware that on or about December 3, 1976, Dr. Chiao, in his capacity as medical health officer for 

the city of Regina Health Department, carried out and reported on an annual inspection of the Regina 

General Hospital pursuant to his duties? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Dr. Chiao himself, or a representative of Dr. Chiao? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Dr. Chiao or a representative of Dr. Chiao. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I believe the representatives of the city Department of Health carry out an 

inspection on their own. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, would not the witness agree, I don’t want to get into a 

word game, that when an annual inspection takes place the medical health officer (I realize the 

Conservatives think this is funny but I am very serious about this), whether it is the representative of Dr. 

Chiao or Dr. Chiao carries out through his officials an annual inspection of the Regina General Hospital 

and reports to the Regina General Hospital the results of such an investigation, is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Okay, so now we understand each other. Dr. Chiao, or his representatives, on or 

about the early part of December, 1976, to your admission, carried out such an annual inspection of 

Regina General Hospital. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And were you made aware of the contents of a letter which comprised the report 

of Dr. Chiao to the Executive Director of the Regina General Hospital dated December 3, 1976, which 

outlined the results of that annual inspection? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2095 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I am not aware of the contents of the letter other than to say that it was reported 

that the inspections had taken place. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And was it also reported to you that not only did the inspection take place but 

that there was nothing untoward or unsatisfactory, from a Regina Health Department Medical Health 

standards point of view, regarding the Regina General Hospital on that inspection? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to read this letter and then ask the witness if he 

knows about it. I have a letter, which I shall table, dated December 3, 1976, to Mr. Gilles. Who is Mr. 

Gilles? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — He is executive director. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Executive Director of the Regina General Hospital. Can you tell us how long he 

has been executive director? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Mr. Gilles has just completed one year with the Regina General Hospital. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Pardon me, for one year? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, he just completed one year. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The letter says, dated December 3, 1976: 

 

Re annual inspection of the Regina General Hospital 

 

Dear Mr. Gilles: 

 

As you are aware an inspection was made of the Regina General Hospital. The following items are for 

your information and consideration. 

 

1. Food and food service. Recommend replacing the worn seals of the reach-in coolers located in the 

main kitchen. Recommend that in the canned good storage area, the bottom shelves be raised above 

ground level. Recommend placing the stained ceiling tiles in the lounge and dining room kitchen. The 

general operation of main kitchen and ward kitchens were found to be excellent. 

 

2. Housekeeping. In general, the housekeeping procedures are satisfactory. 

 

3. Control of vermin. No apparent major problem. Contract work handled by Superior Disinfecting 

and Fumigating Limited. 

 

4. Waste disposal. General procedure satisfactory. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2096 

 

5. Plumbing and drainage. No major problems. 

 

6. Laundry. Handled in a satisfactory manner through Central Laundry Hospital Services. 

 

7. Heating, lighting and ventilation. No apparent major problems. 

 

The general operation of the hospital is found to be satisfactory considering the age of the building. 

Thanks to you and your staff for your co-operation during the inspection. 

 

Yours truly, 

P.Y. Chiao, MD and PH Medical Health Officer. 

 

I would ask the witness whether or not he has seen a copy of this letter which I have read? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I have not seen a copy of the letter, Mr. Chairman, but I have been advised of the 

contents of that. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The general contents of it? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Right. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And as you indicated, the conclusion which was reported to you as a result, and 

I realize as Chairman you rely on the advice that you get, from your point of view no problems arose as 

a result of that annual inspection. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is right. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Is it correct that a body or an organization called the Canadian Council on 

Hospital Accreditation carries out this something, which is called accreditation? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Am I correct in saying that such a survey is carried out by this body on a more 

or less regular basis of all hospitals, to the best of your knowledge? Or most hospitals? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — For most hospitals that have accreditation, a survey is carried out generally every 

two years. There are a number of hospitals, and I think this is common knowledge, that are not 

accredited in the smaller institutional settings. I should probably point out that accreditation is necessary 

if you are to have training programs within your institution and it is imperative that major hospitals that 

are involved in teaching programs have that accreditation. A hospital that does not have accreditation 

and wishes to seek accreditation will apply to the council and there will be an inspection. There are 

minimum standards which are required to meet accreditation. I have to say ‘minimum’ because that is 

the way in which the regulations of that body are phrased. When you receive accreditation you 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2097 

 

meet, at least, minimum standards. What those standards are, are determined, again, by that body of 

people. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Am I correct in saying this to the witness, Mr. Chairman, that accreditation is 

something which a major hospital generally seeks. It is something that is important, not only for the 

business of teaching, but in a sense, it is a form of approval, if you will. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Certainly, it is a mark of recognition, certainly it is. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It is correct to say that the Regina General Hospital would value that 

accreditation? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Absolutely, we wouldn’t want to be without it. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Do you have any quarrel, to your knowledge, with any of the officials below you 

as Chairman? Do they have any quarrel with the body which carries out the survey for the purpose of 

accreditation, in terms of the competence and the ability of the people carrying out the survey? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — No, we have never had any quarrel. There have been times when we questioned 

some of the recommendations, however, we usually reach a satisfactory understanding between our 

administration, our board and the officials of the accreditation council. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — My point is this, Mr. Chairman, to summarize it all, it is correct to say and I 

would ask you to agree or disagree, that the Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation is a respectable 

and prestigious body in the field of hospital surveying in terms of accreditation. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — How frequently are these accreditation surveys done in regard to the Regina 

General? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Generally it has been every two years. If the hospital is found to be deficient in 

areas, they may well give you provisional accreditation, which means that you are probably given a year 

to improve those areas which they deem necessary to be improved. 

 

There was a point, not too many years ago, where the hospital was given a provisional accreditation and 

this primarily centred around the facility, the old facility, that we had. We had provisional accreditation, 

however, we were able to obtain the funds to make the necessary adjustments so that we, again, were 

restored to full accreditation. We have, I think in the last year, been given full accreditation once again, 

full accreditation, Mr. Chairman, along with a good number 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2098 

 

of recommendations. These recommendations don’t concern just the physical plant, but concern the 

operation of the hospital from the administrative point of view, from the keeping of medical records to 

medical audit, to a number of areas that arise in the running of a medical care institution. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It is the overall operation as you say, of the institution. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That’s right. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — By the way, do you know a person by the name of A.L. Swanson, MD; FACHA 

(Fellow American College of Hospital Administration), Executive Director? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Mr. Swanson is the Executive Director unless something has changed today. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I think I have heard of this name as well; I think he is a Saskatchewan person. Is 

he not a Saskatchewan person? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I couldn’t tell you, I am not aware of that. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — In any event you know him; you have met him on a regular basis and you have 

confidence in his integrity? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I have never met Dr. Swanson. I have seen his name frequently on 

communications that have passed over my desk. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, would the witness tell the Legislature, if this is correct: 

that on or about the 22nd, 23rd and 24th days of September, 1976, a survey was conducted by the 

Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation of the Regina General Hospital? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, that is right. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, would the witness tell the House if it is correct that on or about 

December 13, 1976, a formal communication was received by the hospital people from one A.L. 

Swanson, MD, of the Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation, formally advising the Regina 

General that the council had awarded accreditation status to the hospital for a period of two years? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Are you familiar with that accreditation report? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I am. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Is it correct to say that the 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2099 

 

report, apart from having a few relatively minor, I am not saying important, but relatively minor 

comments or recommendations, is one which, on balance, speaks very highly of the Regina General 

Hospital in its totality as a hospital as you so described it? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I am pleased to report that that is the case and it gives the board a great deal 

of pleasure. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I don’t want to read out of context, but to support that kind of question and 

answer, a copy of the report that I have says, for example, on recommendations and comments, the 

board and all staff are commended for the dedication to quality patient care in the Regina General 

Hospital. The executive director and the supporting administrative staff are commended for recent 

significant improvements in this hospital; the hospital has continued to show progress in any areas in 

which there have been significant improvements lately, and so forth. Is it correct to say that the only 

recommendation that relates to the housekeeping department is one which says: 

 

It is recommended that the housekeeping department develop an in-service program in collaboration 

with in-service education and the personnel department. 

 

Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — It is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — There are all sorts of headings with respect to clinical, medical and dental care, 

nursing services, dietetic services and environmental services. Environmental services, that is just what 

the term means, as opposed to the dietetics area, if that is the correct word, the accounting area, the 

operating room area, that type of thing. They are the non-specialty areas — housekeeping and that type 

of thing, is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Is it also correct to say that under this heading of environmental services, in the 

other areas, there are only three comments that are made. 

 

No. 31, it is recommended that the disaster plan be exercised annually — that is a repeat 

recommendation. 

 

No, 32, it is recommended that the housekeeping department develop an in-service program in 

collaboration with in-service education in the personnel department. 

 

No, 33, it is recommended that consideration be given to the department of a part-time physician to the 

employee health service. 

 

That is the sum total of the environmental services comments. Is that correct? 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2100 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I believe so. You have to remember that that is a rather extensive report 

which I reviewed a number of months ago and I am sort of going by memory but I generally agree with 

that. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, could we have that report tabled? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the appropriate procedure would be to ask the 

Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, if he has any objections on behalf of the Regina General to table this report. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — No, I have no objections. The document is a public document now. It has been 

considered by the Board and certainly the media has had access to that report, if they so desired. So, it is 

a public document. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — If it was a bad report . . . it is generally a good report. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — We have tabled bad reports in the past. It is a measure of our improvement when 

we have a good report tabled. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Good, well we are going to have a good report tabled here then. 

 

I should like to ask just one or two other questions before I take my seat. 

 

There is something, as I understand it, called the Hospital Infection Control Committee in the Regina 

General Hospital. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And this has been an ongoing committee, at least for the last few years. Is that 

correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, it is imperative in a major institution and it is a procedure that is followed in 

other hospitals, too, to some extent. It is more extensive in the major institutions. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, and in your capacity as Chairman of the Board of the Regina General, is 

there anything as far as the Hospital Infection Control Committee is concerned, that would allow 

reasonable men or women to determine a serious potential medical problem as far as the Regina General 

Hospital is concerned? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — We have not been made aware of any potential major problem. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — So that as far as you are concerned, the answer is, No, to that. Is that right? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2101 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Right. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask Mr. Helmsing the last question I have for the 

time being. I should also like to say, as I take my seat, Mr. Helmsing has been very co-operative and has 

answered the questions fully and frankly, I am sure. 

 

In your opinion, as Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, is your hospital, or can your 

hospital be described as being filthy? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — As Chairman of the Hospital Board I cannot say that our hospital is filthy. 

Having said that, I should say that we do have concerns at times with the level of staffing, as far as the 

housekeeping is concerned. However, when you say, “is our hospital filthy”, I would have to say our 

hospital is not filthy. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Helmsing, I am not a Member of the Legislature for either of the cities. I know 

where the General Hospital is in Regina. I believe the last time I was there was in the capacity of a 

visitor, some five years ago. And not being a lawyer, perhaps my questions won’t be put before you in 

the legal fashion of some other Members of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Helmsing, I understand that you have a union which is in charge of the workers who look after the 

maintenance and the cleaning of the Regina Hospital, as an institution. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, our non-professional staff is covered by the Canadian Union of Public 

Employees, Local 176. I believe that is the designation of the Regina General Hospital workers. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, as Chairman of the Board, have you had any correspondence or any 

information from this particular union indicating that there was a degree of dissatisfaction in them 

carrying out their job properly and sufficiently? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Personally, from the union I have not been given any information. However, the 

administration has received a number of concerns from the union. I think I ought to point out that, in the 

interests of developing a proper communication system within our institution, we have regular meetings, 

not only of our department heads, but with the representatives of the union and those people who work 

in the areas, so that there is a complete flow of information and understanding, hopefully, between 

administration, middle-management and the workers, as well as the medical and professional workers of 

the institution. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, has it been brought to your attention at any time that 

there was dissatisfaction in view of the fact that the employees who belong to this particular union 

viewed that they were in a position not to keep the hospital as clean as it should be? 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2102 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I think they have expressed their concern to the members of the administration. 

Yes. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, it is not a question with which I wish to embarrass you 

at all, but with the union having expressed that concern, do you have any sympathy whatsoever with the 

concern they have expressed? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I should perhaps answer that by saying that the union has expressed concern at 

the level of staffing that has been approved by the Hospital Services Plan. I think Members of the 

Legislature, Mr. Chairman, will be aware that there was a cutback in 1976, one which we looked at and 

were successful in attempting to meet the requirements of the funding. You know in that reduction a 

number of positions were not funded. 

 

Previous to that cutback, however, I had instituted a policy of not filling positions in anticipation that 

there might well be a reduction with the spiralling health costs and with the inflation at the time and the 

indication that there would be a period of restraint. So, in order not to place my administration in a very 

difficult position when that eventuality might arise, we did proceed upon a program of not filling 

positions as they became vacant. We did, in the final analysis I think, lose somewhere in the 

neighborhood of 15 positions. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, in losing these 15 positions, is it possible then that 

some of the regular and normal housekeeping practices may not have been performed with a reduction 

of 15 in staff? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, there were some areas. In looking at the total budget and what the funding 

would be, we had to direct our attention to the high-priority areas and those high-priority areas certainly 

had to be the patient-care areas, which we have to be concerned with. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, so then it is possible with working under such stringent conditions, 

that the amount of care that was previously taken in the general housekeeping could have somewhat 

been neglected? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Certainly not in the patient-care areas, and I want to emphasize that in the 

patient-care areas where we are concerned with the treatment of critically ill people in our institution, 

that the level of housekeeping did not experience any problems. Perhaps in the administrative areas and 

in the common areas, public areas, the cleaning process or the employment of staff was considerably 

less. We also, in the staffing, then removed the night cleaning staff and concentrated our efforts during 

the day. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, when the Attorney General 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2103 

 

was asking you questions, he brought to the attention of this Assembly, the annual inspection by Dr. 

Chiao. What procedure is made, to your knowledge, of an inspection on a daily basis at the hospital in 

regard to the cleaning of the facilities, the rooms, and so on? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I am not sure that I quite understand your question. If you would like to just . . . 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, it was already pointed out to this Assembly that 

there was an annual inspection of the hospital and the Attorney General read a portion, if not all, of that 

report. My question is: is there a check on a daily basis, as to the cleaning procedures of the hospital? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Oh, yes, I think you have to understand that in the institution we have a position 

that is called a housekeeper who is, in fact, the director of the department, plus an assistant and I think 

four supervisory aids who function in that capacity. And, certainly it is their responsibility to see that the 

hospital is maintained in as clean a condition as possible. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, this inspection then, on a daily basis, is one which is 

carried out by the workers themselves, or the managerial people within those positions. Would that be 

true? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, that is correct. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — These people, even though they be in the managerial position, would be members of 

the Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 176, which you have just mentioned. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — The supervisory aids, I believe, are covered by the union agreement. The 

assistant supervisor and the housekeeper are not. They are out-of-scope personnel, as I understand. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — So then, in effect, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, the concerns that have been 

expressed by the union could be viewed by this Legislature as being legitimate concerns. The hospital, 

because of the reduced staff, cleaning staff, could well be not as clean as it should be. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I think we would have to appreciate that the union people whom we have in our 

hospital are people of a high calibre, and generally seek above-average standards, perhaps. And, in years 

past, at levels of funding and positions, they have carried out a very, very high degree of housekeeping 

service. That is not to say that at the present time that these people are not as concerned with the work 

that they have to perform. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing, 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2104 

 

I certainly would concur, but with reduction in staff, they have voiced their concern and I would not 

want the Assembly, or you sir, to take it from the questions that I have asked that it is a condemnation 

on the part of this particular union at all. 

 

I have just one other question for you, Mr. Helmsing, Mr. Chairman. This matter has been brought to the 

attention of this House. You have had questions brought to you by the Attorney General. Would you, as 

Chairman of the Board of the Regina General Hospital, not agree that the reduction of staff of 15, in this 

one particular category, poses a very serious threat to the administration of the hospital, and sir, would 

you not agree that this reduction of 15 in staff made it more likely that the general housekeeping duties, 

performed by the union, would not be as adequate as they were when they had the full complement of 

staff members? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I think I can perhaps best answer that question by saying that once you get used 

to a level of staffing, once the administration gets used to a level of staffing, and once the employees are 

used to a level of staffing, any cutback certainly has to have some effect. I think, in our particular case, 

that in the cutbacks, there is the feeling generally within the ranks of the union personnel that they are 

having to work a lot harder to achieve the results that they achieved with a larger staff. I think it is 

reasonable to suggest to you that this has had some effect of lowering the morale of the members of the 

union, and I think with the lowering of that morale, perhaps they have brought their concerns to the 

administration. We have made representation to the Hospital Services Plan, now on a number of 

occasions, to increase the funding of positions by another five. I think it has to be appreciated that the 

Regina General Hospital is in a very unique position in that we are dealing with very critically ill people, 

and the bulk of our admissions at the present time are emergency in nature. And, we have had to deploy 

the bulk of our cleaning people in those high-intensity areas to see that those areas are maintained, and 

because of this, there are other areas of the hospital, as I indicated to you earlier, the administrative areas 

and some of the public areas, that perhaps are left wanting to some appreciable degree. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Well, first of all Mr. Chairman, I have listened 

with a great deal of interest, as I presume all Members of the Committee have, to the comments and the 

questions and the forthcoming responses from the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

I think somewhere along the line we have omitted the crux of the question. And that, really, is that we 

are here to determine whether the sanitary conditions at the Regina General Hospital are a hazard to the 

health of patients within that hospital, and if there is a danger to the citizens of Regina because of the 

conditions of cleanliness within that hospital. I think that both sides of the argument have stick-handled 

this particular question. I, in all honesty, am not here to question the Chairman of the Board of the 

Regina General Hospital on exactly what his cleanliness procedures are, whether or not he sweeps the 

floor two times a day or three times a day, because I think there is a wide scope of debate as to whether 

that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2105 

 

includes cleanliness or not. 

 

What I am really here to determine is what is the position of the Board of which Mr. Helmsing is the 

Chairman? Has it had genuine concerns about the cleanliness of the hospital, to the degree that it 

considered that it was a health hazard? 

 

So, the first question that I want to ask, Mr. Chairman, through you to Mr. Helmsing, is: has the matter 

of the cleanliness of the Regina General Hospital and its consideration in relation to the patient care 

within that hospital been discussed at a Board meeting? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Has the cleanliness of the hospital been discussed at a Board meeting? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No, I don’t want you to misinterpret the question because I am sure that 

housekeeping and the maintenance of the housekeeping provisions within the Regina General Hospital 

would often be discussed by the Board. May I put it this way, Mr. Chairman, has the decline in the 

cleanliness or the sanitary conditions within the Regina General Hospital, as a danger to the patients, or 

as a danger related to filth, been discussed at the Regina General Hospital board meeting? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — We have not been concerned that the sanitary conditions of the hospital have 

been a hazard to health. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Number two, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask the Chairman, has the Regina 

Hospital Board ever communicated with the Government or the Department of Health about concerns 

for the sanitary conditions within the Regina General Hospital because of a reduction in budget, or 

because of a reduction in staff? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — To answer that question, Mr. Chairman, I would have to indicate to you that the 

administration of the Regina General Hospital, as other hospitals do, has a continuing dialogue with 

officials of the Hospital Services Plan who, together with us, determine the levels of funding. 

 

Those discussions have centered around the level of housekeeping staff. The administration, I do not 

believe, has at any time indicated to officials of the department that the level of housekeeping has, at this 

point in time, presented a health hazard as far as the operation of the hospital is concerned. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — A very brief question. The Chairman didn’t answer my question. Has the 

Board ever communicated with the Government or the Department of Health? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — You mean if the Board, in its entirety, has sat down with the officials of the 

department? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Communicated by writing, or by any other means 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2106 

 

communicated with the Department of Health, about the cleanliness standards within the Regina General 

Hospital. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — The Board, as such, has not written a communication to the Department of 

Health. What communications do transpire between the administration and the department are of an 

administrative nature. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Just a couple of questions, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Helmsing. I believe 

that prior to the recent cutback, to which you referred, that the hospital was cleaned, so to speak, three 

times a day, and that that process has now been reduced to once a day. Is that correct? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Well, that would be in certain areas, and I referred earlier to the administrative 

areas where the cleaning of waste containers and ashtrays may be done perhaps on a daily basis, but no 

dusting. But, let me again emphasize that in the patient-care areas the level of housekeeping has been 

maintained. There are a number of procedures that are done in hospitals, such as high-wall cleaning and 

ceiling cleaning, which generally in a full-staffed period would be done on a regular basis. Now when I 

say regular, let me identify what I mean by ‘regular’. In some areas this may mean once every six 

months, or it may mean once every six weeks, it depends. With the cutback, there are areas that we have 

not been able to do what is called high-wall cleaning and ceiling cleaning, and certainly the number of 

times that certain procedures are carried out has been cut back in some areas. 

 

MR. LANE: — Well prior to the cutback was it deemed good practice, sound practice, to clean the 

areas as often as they were? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes. 

 

MR. LANE: — So a reduction in that cleaning is, to say the least, not as good a practice as existed prior 

to the cutback? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes, I would assume that that is the case. 

 

MR. LANE: — Assuming the situation prior to the cutback was an adequate situation, or a necessary 

situation, are there any increased risks in say staff infection, or the possibility of staff infection, by 

reason of the reduction in staff or the reduction in cleaning, due to the reduction in staff? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — To this point we haven’t seen any evidence of that. That is not to suggest that we 

might not have some difficulties, but I would have to say that I would not want to see the level of 

funding of those positions cut any less than they are at the present time. I think that we would be in a 

position that we would not be able to live with that kind of a situation. I have indicated earlier that we 

have made representation and continue 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2107 

 

to make representation for the funding of another five positions. Recognizing that while we have an 

approved complement, I think in the neighbourhood of 75, that on any given day, with sick leave and 

with people off on holidays, we may be at a level of 70, so that perhaps on any given day we may be 10 

per cent below what our funded positions would be. 

 

MR. LANE: — But there is that possibility? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — He didn’t say that. 

 

MR. LANE: — I think he did if the Hon. Member was listening. 

 

There has been reference made to a surplus, that the hospital had a surplus in the past year; to what use 

did you put that surplus? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — To discuss surpluses is a very difficult and complicated procedure. The global 

budget system is one which takes a fair amount of time to understand and appreciate. 

 

I think I made reference a little earlier to the unique situation that the General Hospital finds itself in at 

the present time, in that about 68 per cent of our admissions at the present time are of an emergency 

nature. That means that the patients in our hospital are very, very ill; they are very critically ill people. 

Because of the very severe illnesses and the nature of the illnesses that are coming to the General 

Hospital, the General Hospital still continues to be the catchment area for those people who are critically 

ill. There has been over the years the trend of the medical profession and others to refer to the General 

Hospital because of the high standard of care that has been provided in that institution and because of 

the quality of our residency programs. We still continue to get a very, very high level of emergency 

admissions. 

 

At the present time our emergency admissions are running very, very high. Because of this and because 

of the positions that we have funded in the nursing area, we have used any surplus funds that we might 

have at our disposal to provide nursing care in those areas which we deem to be the critical areas. 

 

We have taken our budget and we have utilized that budget to cover those areas which we feel are 

critical to the care of the people who come to that institution. So that, generally, our surplus funds in 

some areas have been directed to that area. I think it is also important to recognize that costs continue to 

change from month to month and while having a surplus, we must at the same time be concerned that we 

don’t overspend so that we find ourselves in a deficit position at the end of the year. We must guard 

against that very carefully. This is what we have tried to implement in the General Hospital to a great 

deal of success. 

 

MR. LANE: — At the end of the year if you do have a surplus are you required then to return the 

surplus to the Government of Saskatchewan? 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2108 

 

MR. HELMSING: — At the end of the year the budget is reviewed by the administration and the 

officials of the Hospital Services Plan on a line-by-line basis. In areas that we may have overspent, for 

which we didn’t have authorization, that can be recovered by the Hospital Services Plan; that amount of 

money, I think, is in excess of anything over $100,000. I think we are able to retain, if my memory 

serves me correctly, in the neighbourhood of $100,000 of any surplus that we have. 

 

MR. LANE: — Any excess though would be returned? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is right, as it is in all the hospitals. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, I just have a couple of very brief 

questions to Mr. Helmsing. At this time are you under any apprehension, if that is the correct word, that 

the standard of cleanliness at the Regina General Hospital is such that a serious health problem could 

result? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Not at this point in time. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Indeed, Mr. Helmsing, if you did have that apprehension that I spoke about, I 

assume that you would immediately communicate that apprehension to the Department of Public Health 

and responsible officials. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That is correct. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I just have one further question. Mr. Helmsing, I appreciate again 

that you may not have all the material before you, but in your judgment, how much will the Regina 

General Hospital be allowed to retain of its 1976 surplus? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Of the 1976 surplus — if my memory serves me correctly, I believe that surplus 

is in the neighbourhood of $78,000 and we will retain that $78,000. I am not talking about building 

depreciation; the financial statements will show some areas where there is building depreciation. The 

actual surplus, I think, in 1976 amounted to at least $78,000. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The Regina General Hospital will retain that? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Yes. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — You mentioned, Mr. Helmsing that because of the reduction in the cleaning staff that 

there was a low morale among the workers of the hospital. Would you not agree, with the low morale 

among the workers, that it is more likely that the nature of the task would be more inefficiently 

performed than if the morale was high? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2109 

 

MR. HELMSING: — That, I think, is a hypothetical question. I have said the indication we have is that 

the morale is low at this particular time. We have been faced with restraints which I think other areas 

have been faced with and we have had to work within parameters and we feel that we have worked quite 

successfully within those parameters. That is not to say that we wouldn’t appreciate more money, 

anybody would. But we have been able to maintain a good standard as far as I am concerned. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, one or two final questions. 

 

Has the Board, or the hospital administration, requested any staff increase in the maintenance cleaning 

area and if so, what staff increase was requested? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Our administration, in a number of meetings with officials, has asked for further 

funding of five positions. 

 

MR. LANE: — Was that to bring it up to standard or improve the standard that exists? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — As I indicated earlier, we have an approved complement of 75, but as I have 

indicated, with sick time and holiday time, we are probably looking at a level of 70. There is no 

provision in the present funding for relief personnel or for the covering of people when they are on 

vacation. Any money that we can sort of save in our budget in the funded positions must be retained to 

cover those areas for relief. There are no funds over and above the funded positions for relief, for sick 

time or vacation time. That is one of the problems that we have experienced. 

 

MR. LANE: — Have the standards of cleanliness been reduced at all as a result of the hospital 

cutbacks? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — Would you repeat the question please? 

 

MR. LANE: — In your opinion, have the standards of cleanliness at the hospital lessened or been 

reduced as a result of the cutbacks? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I can probably answer that by saying the standards would be perhaps higher if 

we did have the other positions. Certainly when people are spread thinner there is bound to be less work 

that is carried out. Again, I want to emphasize that, at this point in time, there is certainly no health 

hazard as far as the General Hospital is concerned or any other institution that I am aware of and I have 

a lot of association with all the hospitals in this province. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I happen to have a list here of the number of housekeeping aids, 97 in 

total, who have terminated 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2110 

 

their employment at the hospitals, most of them in the past year, some of them in the past two years, but 

most in the past 18 months. Would you not think that this was a high number of people coming and 

going in the housekeeping field at the hospital? 

 

MR. HELMSING: — I think it has to be appreciated, Mr. Chairman, in answer to the Hon. Member’s 

question, that in the housekeeping category the rate of turnover is high under the best of conditions. 

People come into the hospital generally at the housekeeping level and then may well move to other areas 

of the hospital in the way of promotion, or may seek employment in other areas where the remuneration 

is better. It is recognized in the hospital field that the turnover of staff in any institution has always been 

high and continues to be high. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Any further questions? If not, then I would certainly like to thank Mr. Hewitt 

Helmsing for making himself available tonight under, I know, very difficult circumstances. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — And I say to Mr. Helmsing now, that with agreement of the House, he may be 

excused. 

 

MR. HELMSING: — May I just say, Mr. Chairman, that I came with a great deal of apprehension and 

with all respect to the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham), I felt something like the ham between the 

bread. However, I hope you recall that I am only a layman and I hope that my answers have been frank 

and forthright and they certainly reflect, in my view, the situation as it exists to date. Thank you for the 

courtesy of the Members in their questioning. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, maybe we should take a five minute recess, is that okay? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! We are on Item 1 of Health. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, before we agree to Item 1 on Health, and we may not agree after 

the words I have to say, but I feel that some comments have to be made as a result of what has transpired 

in the last two days in the course of deliberations of these Estimates, particularly as they have 

culminated in the testimony that Mr. Helmsing gave to the Members of the Legislature. Personally, I 

feel very badly about the necessity of asking Members of the Legislature to pass resolutions asking 

responsible and respected people like Mr. Helmsing, who had little forewarning, to come before the 

Legislative Assembly on short notice and in full public view, to answer questions in an obviously 

politically charged atmosphere. 

 

This has been quite an interesting couple of days for me 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2111 

 

and I have been in the Legislature for ten years. I believe that in the course of the consideration of 

Estimates some very strong statements have been made in the past. I have made my share of strong 

statements. One of the things I found disturbing about the statement which prompted all of this, is the 

continuing proclivity on the part of the Conservative Party to drag to the political deliberations that are 

before us, third parties. The statement made by the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane), which 

prompted all of this, was that: 

 

We could bring documentation to this House showing that hospitals, which are supposed to be the 

holy sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy because of the lack of money being put in, to maintain proper 

care adequately. You wait, it’s coming. There will be lots more. 

 

We have all, as politicians, made these kinds of statements but never the kind of statement like I have 

just read, which drags in third parties, like hospital boards, be it the Regina General Hospital Board or 

135 other hospital boards in the Province of Saskatchewan. I said yesterday I was in despair about that 

kind of political activity and I repeat again, I remain in despair about that kind of political activity and 

political conduct. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The Member is shouting ‘Ranch Ehrlo’, that we will deal with and discuss at 

another time. Again, it is the Conservatives who I think exhibit the highest degree of irresponsibility. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — But I also want to say that while I despair of the political process tonight, many 

of the answers were, I suppose as a government, not the kinds of answers that I would have wanted. I 

see some hope when I see the Legislative Chamber operating in a manner that it did, asking the 

questions that it did of whom I believe to be an impartial and fair witness, answering this major, serious 

allegation that hospitals in Saskatchewan are filthy. He at least answered the one question about the one 

hospital that directly relates to him. Now the issue that was before us and I submit, Mr. Chairman, still is 

before us in the narrow term, is whether or not the Regina General Hospital is filthy or was filthy as a 

result of a lack of money being put in to maintain proper care adequately, as the Member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland stated, and as supported by the Leader of the Conservative Party this afternoon which 

prompted the Leader of the Opposition to get this matter cleared up by having Mr. Helmsing asked to 

come to the Legislature. That is the narrow issue. I don’t know what we are going to do with the larger 

issue concerning the 134 or 144 hospital boards in the Province of Saskatchewan who have had their 

good names and their good reputations smeared by the Conservative Party in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Judging by the lack of documentation that the Conservatives failed to produce to us 

before adjournment time, we can take heart in the fact that there is absolutely not 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2112 

 

one scintilla of evidence to put this kind of a scare tactic, this kind of a position to the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I submit, Mr. Chairman, there is not one scintilla of truth to that kind of 

tactic, as supported basically by the testimony of the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital here 

tonight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, look at the position that the Conservatives were put in tonight by 

the questions and answers. Now my despair comes again. The Conservative Party was basically put in 

that position tonight by trying to prove that there was filth in the Regina General Hospital because that 

was the nature and the thrust of the questions. They were put in the position where they couldn’t 

withdraw the word earlier and even when they did withdraw it, they gave it a qualified withdrawal. No, 

they have got to support that their political statement, (that it was filthy or something seriously less than 

clean), was right and doggone it, they are going to prove it and keep on asking the questions. Now what 

kind of a state of affairs in Saskatchewan have we when elected officials of a responsible political party 

are in the position of trying to drag out of witnesses evidence which will allow that party to trumpet 

around the Province of Saskatchewan, if they were right, that the hospital was filthy or something akin 

to that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, indeed Saskatchewan politics have fallen into a sorry state of affairs, by that very same 

political party that came to this Legislature a year and a half ago and said that it was going to show us 

the new way. He was going to set the new standard for political conduct. He was not going to get 

involved in muckraking. He wasn’t going to get involved in name calling. And what, Mr. Chairman, is 

the evidence that I believe can be summarized? If you don’t agree you can interpret it yourself, and the 

record will show it when we review the record in the next day or so. I believe that the following are facts 

with respect to the Regina General. 

 

We have here, Mr. Chairman, a hospital which deals with the critically sick. It is a hospital which seeks 

and gets accreditation and approval, according to the testimony of Mr. Helmsing, from the Canadian 

Council on Hospital Accreditation, which is very prestigious in the area of hospital work and in hospital 

accreditation. I have the summary, which I tabled in this Legislature, with the consent of the Chairman. 

You look at that summary; I invite the press to look at that summary. This dated report is in December; 

the survey was taken in September of 1976. The only comments dealing with environmental services are 

those that I’ve read and the only comment, that even can be half-way zeroed in on, is the comment on 

the housekeeping department which says there has to be in-service education. There were not comments 

about filth or being less than clean by the experts of a Canadian-wide body, a Canadian-accepted body, 

who went through the hospital for a three-day period. There is no evidence to support that charge. 

 

Then we have the letter, which I have tabled, by the Medical Health Officer, Doctor Chiao. Mr. 

Chairman, this letter is dated December 3, 1976, after last summer, after October 14. And I draw those 

particular dates to the attention of the 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2113 

 

House. Run down the list. I read the letter — satisfactory, excellent, good, satisfactory — by a medical 

man who is primarily responsible for health standards. The witness may not have agreed with all of the 

practices and the procedures, but he agreed that Dr. Chiao was doing the job as best he could. Although 

he had some difficulties, the front line of defence was to maintain health standards. It’s an annual 

inspection. Only three or four months ago it gave the Regina General Hospital a clean bill of health. It 

didn’t even say that it’s less than clean, it didn’t even suggest that it’s filthy, or even use words to that 

effect. That’s a second piece of evidence, accreditation, health services. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, what other evidence came out? Evidence came out that there was a reduction of 15 

personnel, I believe. The Conservatives tried to make much out of this. I, personally, was concerned 

when I listened to the words of the Chairman about the fact that this has had some impact with respect to 

the operations of the hospital. And I think he did make a point with respect to morale. That’s a matter of 

concern for the Government, for me. That is a matter which I think we all have to take into account and 

consider. But the words used by the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland last night weren’t quite as 

expressly used. It was implied, and supported today by the Conservative Leader, that the reduction of 15 

personnel somehow posed a serious health hazard. That’s what they were aiming at. And the evidence 

was clear. I don’t know how many times Mr. Helmsing was asked, and he answered, that no health 

hazard was present, the level of patient care or the quality of patient care was not affected. So now they 

clean the stenographer’s desk in the waiting room once a day instead of three times a day. I suppose it 

would be best if it was cleaned three times a day, but it’s not. But in the patient care area there is no 

evidence, there is no communication to the Department of Health, there are no public statements to that 

effect, no filthy standards. That’s the evidence. 

 

I want to raise a fourth point, Mr. Chairman, morale. Morale is down according to Mr. Helmsing. I can 

understand that morale is down. One looks at the letter that was tabled. If I was a worker at the hospital 

and I had a reduction of that kind, there’s no doubt my morale would be suffering. No doubt they are 

working harder. But, Mr. Helmsing himself said that the hospital staff (he didn’t use this word adjusted) 

in effect is getting adjusted or used to the situation and that the hospital is functioning well. He said it 

always could be higher, but he didn’t say it was low. That’s the fact. There may be a morale problem but 

not to the point where one could say that the Regina Hospital is filthy or that the hospital area is coming 

to a grinding halt. That’s a fact. 

 

Mr. Chairman, a fifth point — Conservatives, today, before the Motion by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Malone), tried to retreat, like battling a trench war. They erect the barricades here and they fight 

like the blazes and then when they get destroyed, they come back and set up some more barricades and 

when they get destroyed, they fight some more and put up some more barricades further back, until there 

is nothing left except to fall off the edge of the cliff. That is where I think they are now, falling off the 

edge of the cliff, politically, on this issue. 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2114 

 

Oh no. But this afternoon they are in full flight. The Member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson), the 

health critic, got up today and dramatically flipped the pages of name after name of the high rate of 

turnover in the housekeeping area. The Premier tried to rebut that this afternoon. Again, before this 

Motion came up, necessitating Mr. Helmsing to come, they said there is a high rate of return in this area. 

And then, when the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) put the question specifically to the 

Chairman of the Regina General Hospital Board about the high rate of turnover, what did the Chairman 

say? He said, that the high rate of turnover was not unusual at the best of times. That’s the fact. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Now there is another fact, Mr. Chairman, which is important and that is this 

business of surpluses and all the surpluses that go back and how you can switch the funds from 

department to department. I wonder if the public could watch how the Leader of the Conservative Party 

was denying as vigorously as he could, earlier today, about the question of the retention of some of the 

surplus funds. In fact, it was the subject of a question or two tonight. The Conservatives endeavoured 

with all of their might on this issue and the Minister of Health tried over and over again last night and 

this afternoon to try and tell the facts. They said not to bother them with the facts. They said that he 

gives nothing but statistics. They want to be concerned about people because they say the surpluses 

aren’t retained — fact, Mr. Chairman. The Chairman of the Board says $78,000 in his 1976 estimate is 

to be retained by the Regina General. Mr. Chairman, that’s a fact. 

 

Finally, Mr. Chairman, is this question of whether or not the Regina General is filthy. I don’t think we 

need the last question that I asked Mr. Helmsing, whether it’s filthy or not, for us to make that 

conclusion. All of the questions together, I say, can lead to no other reasonable conclusion, by 

reasonable men and women playing fairly, even in a political world, that the accusation that the Regina 

General is filthy, is the most gross statement that this Legislature has ever heard. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, those are the facts — accreditation; Regina Health office; no 

health hazard because of the reduction; morale is low but is getting adjusted; the high rate of turnover is 

not unusual; surplus is retained; the budget is being used to maintain where necessary and above all, the 

hospital is not filthy. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I say that this matter has been one of the most serious allegations, unjustified and 

unsupported, that any so-called responsible political party could have made, in all of my years in this 

Legislature, and I have been ten years in this Legislature. The Dean of the House has been here, I don’t 

know how many years, maybe 25. We fought hard against deterrent fees, very hard, in Estimates and in 

Resolutions. We fought hard in the Opposition against hospital closures — really hard. A lot of people 

have fought very hard against us, on our hospital 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2115 

 

 

policies. And there have been some statements that I don’t agree with in terms of conclusions or even 

terms of politics. But I have never seen in ten years, a leader who presents himself as a potential 

Premier, standing up and supporting the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland, refusing to make 

documentation of evidence and refusing to withdraw. 

 

The withdrawal this afternoon was in the dictionary. The dictionary was brought out. They said to us 

that ‘filthy’ means dirty, soiled, heavily soiled, therefore, they would drop the word ‘filthy’ and use any 

one of the others. That was their withdrawal. They wouldn’t use the word ‘filthy’ if that made the 

Attorney General uptight. They wouldn’t use that word, they would use one of the other synonyms. It 

was that kind of a withdrawal. By the lack of documentation that you’ve produced at my request, and by 

the evidence of Mr. Helmsing, as imperfect as it might be, from my point of view politically, but in 

basic consequence to the essence of the issue, rebutting the submissions made by you, I think that this 

has been indeed a day of despair and a day of hope for the political process. But it’s not enough, Mr. 

Chairman, because there are people in Regina, who are concerned about this kind of an allegation. 

People all over Saskatchewan are concerned. I think that we can draw some conclusions as a result of 

this testimony and I believe, Mr. Chairman, that a motion is not only appropriate, but at this stage in the 

game, is mandatory to clear the air. Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I propose to move, seconded by my 

colleague and friend from Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen), who has had a large concern in this whole area 

of hospitals, the following Motion: 

 

That this Committee, having heard the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital, Mr. Hewitt 

Helmsing, concludes that the said hospital is not filthy and the Committee further concludes that 

statements made, expressed and implicit to that effect, are unfounded. 

 

I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate continues on the Motion. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I want to address a word or two to the 

Resolution and to the proceedings because the proceedings, as Members know, were initiated in no 

small part by ourselves. What was before us earlier in the day was a charge made yesterday, that a 

hospital or hospitals in the province, were filthy. That was the first allegation that was made yesterday. 

There was then a challenge that came from the Government side to produce documentation as to 

whether or not the accusation was accurate. Today the Conservative Party, who made the allegation, 

brought forward some documents indicating that the charge had been made relative to the Regina 

General Hospital. It’s a fair conclusion, I think entirely fair, given those two facts and the comments 

earlier of the Leader of the Conservative Party, that the allegation did clearly refer to the Regina General 

Hospital, indicating that that hospital was filthy. We indicated that we thought that was a very serious 

question that had been raised. The question is or was, was that charge accurate? And if it had been 

shown to be accurate, these would 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2116 

 

be, in our view, the consequences. 

 

The city of Regina Health Department, which clearly bears some responsibility for the cleanliness of the 

Regina General Hospital, would have deserved to have been chastised by Members for neglect. 

Secondly, the Hospital Board of Directors, had the allegations been established, would have drawn some 

very serious questioning as to the judgment that they’d been exercising these past several months. 

Thirdly, the Government that must ultimately bear the responsibility, quite apart from the responsibility 

of the city and Board of Directors of the hospital, would have drawn and deserved our highest 

condemnation had the largest hospital in the city of Regina, the largest hospital in the province, serving 

a community of 150,000 people, indeed been found to have been filthy. I say that to indicate to 

Members the dimension of the question that was before us. 

 

Now, the question is: to what degree, if any, was the charge substantiated? I think that there are four key 

questions in answering that question. The four key questions as we saw them were: 

 

(1) Have the standards of cleanliness at the Regina General Hospital significantly declined in the course 

of the past few months? We are satisfied, having listened to the evidence of Mr. Helmsing, that the 

answer to that is, no. Firstly, generally the standards of cleanliness at the Regina General Hospital have 

not been permitted to deteriorate and secondly, certainly not to the point of being able to characterize 

fairly the hospital as being filthy. 

 

(2) The second question of vital importance in this was whether or not there was a current threat to the 

health of patients in consequence of the uncleanliness in the hospital. The question is: is there, or was 

there a threat to the health of the patients? Again, we are satisfied that the answer to that question is, No, 

there isn’t. 

 

(3) The third question is: are there serious problems affecting health care, patient care in the hospital to 

be reasonably apprehended as a result of present conditions? Members can appreciate how serious that 

would be, quite apart from the past, if there was reasonable ground to apprehend that we are getting to a 

situation where there is a real concern about proper patient care as a result of lack of proper cleanliness 

— a key question. Again, we are satisfied from the evidence of Mr. Helmsing, the answer to that one is, 

No. 

 

(4) Then the fourth question which is the largest of all, and the key question: is there any area of the 

hospital that could fairly be characterized as filthy, or does it present a hazard to patients? Was there a 

single operating room or caseroom, delivery room, any of the isolation wards, any ward, the kitchen, 

anything of that variety, was there a single piece of evidence to show that any aspect of the hospital in 

that sense could be fairly characterized as being filthy and, therefore, a threat to patients? The answer to 

that one again is, No. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, we, who I indicated at the outset had played a key role in having Mr. 

Helmsing indicate what the conditions there were, and what one can reasonably apprehend them to be, 

are satisfied. There have been some cutbacks in the hospital and clearly the hospital is having some 



 

Committee of Finance  April 14, 1977. 

 

2117 

 

other problems in respect of which the Government is going to have to answer for, but that is a question 

for tomorrow and perhaps later, and we will be probing that one as well. But the key question is whether 

or not the allegation had been established and as I indicate, we are satisfied that it had not been. 

 

The question for tomorrow, as I indicated, is to bring the Government to account, in a responsible way, 

for some of the problems that currently are there, and there are some problems which the Attorney 

General fairly admitted. Those are questions and issues which we will continue to raise as long as we are 

on Estimates. 

 

The question for tonight is: was the allegation established? The answer in our view is, No. What does 

that lead to? It leads to the conclusion that a charge had been made in a loose and irresponsible way 

yesterday, and confirmed again today by the Leader of the Conservative Party. No evidence, really of 

any variety to substantiate the charge, was made. What does that come to? It says that there was, over a 

period of time, some aspersions cast on the Health Department of the city of Regina. Similar kinds of 

aspersions were cast on the Chairman and members of the Board of Directors of the Regina General 

Hospital. Apprehension was caused among the citizenry of the city, and concern aroused among the 

Members of the Legislature, not least of all, as the Attorney General has indicated. This is the first time 

in many, many years that the Legislature has had to involve, in effect, a public servant, and to expose 

him to the difficulty of having to come here in this way and testify to conditions in his hospital. 

 

There is one narrow political lesson to be learned in the process and that is a lesson that I hope our 

friends to the left of us will have learned. That is, you ought to make allegations of that variety with 

extreme care when you are involving so many people and so many groups; and secondly, when you 

make them, you had best be prepared to substantiate them. The Member ought never to have 

characterized that hospital as being filthy. Unfortunately we’ve had to go through the arduous process 

that we have been through to establish that that was not so and to relieve the concern which we had and 

many others had. 

 

As I say, if there is one lesson to be learned from it, the lesson is that when Members, and this applies 

particularly to Members to our left, make suggestions of that variety they had best be accurate and 

secondly, they had best be prepared to substantiate them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Motion was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas — 51 
Blakeney Dyck Penner 

Thibault McNeill Cameron 

Bowerman MacAuley Thatcher 

Smishek Feschuk Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) 

Romanow Faris  

 



 

April 14, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2118 

 

Snyder Rolfes Anderson 

Byers Cowley McMillan 

Kramer Shillington Collver 

Baker Vickar Larter 

Lange Nelson (Yorkton) Bailey 

Kowalchuk Allen Lane (Qu’Appelle) 

Matsalla Koskie Birkbeck 

Robbins Johnson Ham 

MacMurchy Thompson Berntson 

Mostoway Malone Wipf 

Banda Clifford Lane (Saskatoon Sutherland) 

Whelan Wiebe  

Kaeding MacDonald  

 

Nays — 00 
 

Nil 

 

Progress was reported and the Committee asked leave to sit again. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:12 o’clock p.m. 


