



















































Hansard: December 08, 1977


739 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 8, 1977 

 

Evening Session 
 

SECOND READING 
 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 10 - An Act 

respecting the Enforcement of Extraprovincial Custody Orders. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of an Act respecting the Enforcement of 

Extra-provincial Custody Orders. Mr. Speaker, it's proposed in this bill to enact legislation which will 

facilitate the enforcement in Saskatchewan of custody orders made by a court or courts outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The bill is designed to deal with a situation where a person, very frequently a 

parent, usually a parent, in breach of the terms of the custody order made in another province and which 

grants custody of a child to the other parent, absconds, if that's the correct word, to Saskatchewan with 

that child. At common law, a Saskatchewan court in considering such a custody order is not obliged to 

enforce it according to its terms, but rather must form an independent judgment on the matter. The 

parents to whom custody was granted by the court in the other province would have to apply here in the 

Saskatchewan court for, in effect, yet another custody application and custody order and the 

Saskatchewan court on such an application would be obliged to rehear the entire matter. And is, of 

course, not bound by the provisions of the extra-provincial, original custody order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill seeks to prevent, or to curtail in any event, what might be the abusive of the 

common law rule in many cases by some individuals who have been described as in effect, civil 

kidnappers, who move from jurisdiction to jurisdiction demanding successive rehearings of the custody 

issue, exhausting the legal process, involving usual fairly large sums of money in terms of legal and 

other costs. The bill accomplishes this by obliging the Saskatchewan courts to enforce the order and 

restore the child to the person to whom custody was granted by the extra-provincial court. Thus placing 

the onus on the would-be civil kidnapper, so called, to apply to the extra-provincial court that made the 

order for variation of same. The bill will, it is hoped, rid the kidnapper of the advantage to be gained, 

which she or he may have, by moving from province to province with the child and thereby starting all 

again the legal and financial process that I described. Mr. Speaker, the bill is a flexible one, in that it 

permits the Saskatchewan courts to vary the order, if the child no longer has a substantial connection 

with the province in which the original order was made and has a substantial connection with 

Saskatchewan or if all of the parties reside in this province. Mr. Speaker, this bill was originally 

proposed as a uniform bill by the Conference of Commissioners on the Uniformity of Legislation in 

Canada. All of the provinces are moving for the implementation of this uniform bill in order to make the 

applicability of the law identical in the enforcement of extra-provincial custody orders and thereby come 

to grips with the problem of so-called civil kidnapping. The court for the purposes of this bill would 

include the Court of Queen's Bench and the Unified Family Court project which is before this House in 

consideration on adjourned debates second readings. Mr. Speaker, it must be stressed that this law will 

do nothing to aid to aid the situation whereby, a person leaves with a child, withstanding a custody order 

leaves the country entirely, there of course, international law and treaties and relationships would have 

the play but this bill will make a very giant step forward in removing many of the 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

740 

 

inequities and hardships which now exist as between various provinces in Canada and Canadians. With 

those few, brief words, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 10, an Act respecting the 

Enforcement of Extra-provincial Custody Orders. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): Mr. Speaker, I only wanted to say that we, in the 

Liberal caucus will support this legislation, we're very pleased to see the government with this, with the 

unified family court Bill and with some of the other legislation that they have for this session, finally 

addressing themselves to some of the problems that couples face on the occasion of marriage 

breakdown. We consider this to be good legislation, similarly having consulted with my colleague, Mr. 

Cameron, on that particular bill, legislation such as that, which will come in a moment regarding 

subpoenas, is good legislation. I hope that the Attorney General might consider at the next conference of 

Attorneys General addressing himself to the question of husbands absconding out of a jurisdiction, 

almost half of the permanent social welfare recipients are in fact, single parents. So that if you have a 

husband that skips from Saskatchewan to Manitoba or Ontario, the result is that we on behalf of the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan find ourselves picking up the price for somebody else’s children and 

somebody else’s problem. We could have a far better program than we have under the current reciprocal 

enforcement of children maintenance orders act legislation. We could have a program similar to that in 

Germany where judgments from one jurisdiction are automatically registerable and the garnishee from 

one jurisdiction can garnishee in another jurisdiction. I just say to the Attorney General that if is he's 

looking at this whole area of marital law that's an important vacancy and important gap in our law now 

which puts a great strain on women and a strain on the public purse of the Department of Social 

Services. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 11 - An Act respecting 

the Interprovincial Adoption of Subpoenas. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill is as the title indicates obviously, legislation designed to cope with a 

particular problem which has been outstanding for quite some time in judicial matters. Bill No. 11 is an 

act respecting the Interprovincial Adoption of Subpoenas. 

 

Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, persons are subject only to the jurisdiction of the courts of the 

province in which they reside. And there has never been a procedure for securing the attendance of 

witnesses who may be required for civil suits who are outside the province in which the suit is brought. 

And as I've indicated, the general provision is that we, as people of Saskatchewan, are subject only to 

the jurisdiction of the courts in the province of Saskatchewan here in which we reside. 

 

It is proposed to enact a bill which is before the House, which would require our courts to adopt 

subpoenas and civil matters from outside of the province and require residents of Saskatchewan to 

attend outside of the province to give evidence. For example, a person commencing a civil action in a 

court in Manitoba who needed the evidence of a person who is a resident of Saskatchewan could have a 

subpoena issued and then apply to a Manitoba court for the required judges' certificate as to the 

necessity of the evidence. The Saskatchewan court would then adopt that subpoena and require the 

Saskatchewan resident to attend and to give evidence in Manitoba. The bill, which is before you, Mr. 

Speaker, would also permit a person who commences a civil action in a court in Saskatchewan to have a 

subpoena issued and apply to a judge 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

741 

 

here for the required certificate where he needs the evidence of a person who is conversely or similarly 

resident in a province outside of Saskatchewan. The one perhaps caveat, which is attached to this, is that 

that other province would also have to have similar legislation in force. The courts in that other province 

would then adopt the 'subpoena under the provisions of this bill, The Interprovincial Subpoena Act, and 

require that person to attend and give evidence here in the Province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

will not get into the clause by clause details as I think these can be best dealt with in the Committee of 

the Whole, I would point out, however, that the bill provides that the witness fees and travelling 

expenses of the person subpoenaed must be paid by the person who subpoenas him. It also provides that 

a person who fails to comply with a subpoena which has been adopted is in contempt of court. 

 

This bill, like the previous one, Mr. Speaker, was originally proposed at the Conference of 

Commissioners on Uniformity of the Law; it has been enacted in three other provinces, Manitoba, 

Newfoundland and British Columbia, and we will be the fourth province in Canada to adopt this, what I 

consider to be a very worthwhile piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 11. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 12 - An Act to amend 

The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1968. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 12 is an act to amend the Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Act, 1968. These are not major amendments. In this act, we propose to amend the definitions of court 

and proper registration officer to include the Unified Family Court and the local registrar of that court. 

Members will quite obviously and readily recognize that the purpose of this bill is to give Unified 

Family Court judges jurisdiction compared with that of judges of the Court of Queen's Bench and the 

District Court to deal with matters under this act. In essence, Mr. Speaker, one might generally describe 

this bill as a consequential piece of legislation which is part of a general package of legislation designed 

to shift jurisdiction in family law matters or family law related matters into the proposed pilot project 

which is the Unified Family Court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those very few brief words, I move second reading of Bill No. 12. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, while the amendments are before you 

let me only remind the Attorney General that the absolutely incredible lousy operation that other offices 

of the Attorney General do across Canada of enforcing Reciprocal Maintenance Orders and I assume 

that your office does the same incredibly lousy job. I don't know, but I can't imagine now that he has a 

new found, if temporary interest, in legal matters at the next meeting of the Attorneys General to 

examine the operation across Canada of The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 

because it is not working very effectively. 

 

Now with those positive comments we, of course, will be supporting these amendments. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one or two words in 

brief rebuttal perhaps to the remarks made by the hon. member for Regina 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

742 

 

Wascana. 

 

My remarks really are not intended to be too critical of the hon. member for Wascana, but I would like 

to point out to the members of the House that I don't believe in six and one half years that I have been 

Attorney General (and this bill has been around sine 1968) that I have heard once in writing from the 

hon. member for Wascana on this particular issue and the remarks that he has made, nor may I say (not 

just to single out the member for Wascana) have I heard from the Law Society of Saskatchewan or from 

individual other members of the Bar. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — It's so . . . they didn't think to write. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The hon. member says it's so bad that they didn't think to write and I am saying 

to the hon. member for Wascana that the Law Society of Saskatchewan every year meets in convention 

and deals with resolutions which the lawyers feel are of some importance and interest and I look to that 

body to give me direction in this area. I am not arguing that the situation is perfect, but I do argue that it 

is just simply not good enough for the member for Wascana to get up and make some general comments 

because apparently he doesn't think it is sufficiently important to put it down in writing to me or 

sufficiently important to put it down in a resolution to the Law Society of Saskatchewan to me, but it is 

sufficiently important to apparently make a few remarks on a second reading speech and then say "take 

it up with the Attorneys General of the rest of the provinces." On what evidence that is before us, Mr. 

Speaker? So I don t want to belabour the point, Mr. Speaker, but I do say to the hon. member that he 

does not set a good standard or a good course to follow in this particular area because if there is 

legitimate need for change in the law then I would invite him to communicate with me in a way that I 

can take a look at the cases, where I can see where the experiences are bad, where I can go to my 

colleagues say in Nova Scotia and say, look, here is the member for Wascana who says this is his 

experience with your department of the Attorney General, or I can go to my colleague in British 

Columbia or Alberta and say here is what the Law Society says is the experience about your lawyers not 

paying attention to this matter. I will undertake to him that I will do that and perhaps even call for a 

federal-provincial, or at least a provincial look at it, but I am not going to do it based on a few cursory 

words said in the course of a second reading speech here tonight. He is going to have to provide me with 

some detailed information before I proceed further on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 13 - An Act to amend The 

Surrogate Court Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill and the next bill are in a sense complementary bills. I would like to give 

this brief second reading explanation of the act which is before the House, namely an act to amend The 

Surrogate Court Act. 

 

The amendment that is before the members of the House is considered necessary so that the province 

can avoid incurring financial responsibility for any supernumerary judge of the district court who 

performs occasional duties under The Surrogate Court Act. 

 

By section 8(1) of The District Court Act, supernumerary judges holding the office created by 

subsection 7(a) are judges of the district court. Section 6 of The Surrogate Court Act provides that the 

Surrogate Court shall consist of the same number of judges as there are in the district court and the 

judges of the district court shall be judges of the  



 

December 8, 1977 

 

743 

 

Surrogate Court. Therefore, supernumerary judges as judges of the District Court are also judges of the 

Surrogate Court. Under Section 95 as it presently reads, supernumerary judges who may perform 

Surrogate Court duties for a week would receive the same payment as a District Court judge who 

regularly performs Surrogate Court duties throughout the year on a regular basis. 

 

I think all members would agree that that kind of an arrangement would appear to be inappropriate 

under the amount of work and responsibility that is involved. The judges have expressed their agreement 

to this particular amendment to try and avoid that kind of a circumstance. Therefore it is being provided 

that supernumerary judges will not be entitled to payment under the present Section 95. As I say we 

have had this matter for consideration before the District Court judges who concur in the proposal which 

is before you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The District Court Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 14 – An Act to amend The 

District Court Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 14 is an Act respecting The District Court Act. The Judges Act of Canada 

provides for the establishment of the office of supernumerary judge among the judges of the District 

Court where such office is established by provincial legislation. 

 

The creation of a supernumerary judge within each province requires enabling legislation by the 

province. This is the purpose of this proposed amendment. The federal provisions allow a judge who has 

attained the age of 65 years and who has been a judge for 15 years or a judge of the age of 70 years who 

has held office for 10 years to elect to hold the office of supernumerary judge. Such an office enables 

that judge to perform such judicial duties which allows the court to better facilitate the emergency 

situations and special duty assignments arising from time to time which conflict with the ordinary 

sittings and the regular judicial duties. Compulsory retirement in the court is normally the age of 70 for 

these judges but in electing to occupy the supernumerary office the judge is allowed to remain active for 

a longer period. 

 

Through the use of the supernumerary judge, the District Court will have a greater capacity to attend to 

its work load in the court as the supernumerary office is created upon the election by the Judge, frees 

one of the existing positions and allows the appointment of a new judge to fill that office vacated by the 

judge who elects to become a supernumerary. Members of the House will recall that a similar 

amendment was enacted by this Legislature in 1972 for this province allowing for this procedure of 

supernumeraries in the area of the Court of Queen's Bench. Mr. Speaker, it is anticipated that existing 

judges of the District Court, qualifying and electing to occupy the office of the supernumerary judge, 

will add considerable flexibility and capacity to the District Court by providing an available source of 

experienced Judges to deal with illnesses, to deal with emergencies and to aid the existing judges in 

attending to backlogs which may develop during heavy sittings or unexpectedly lengthy trials. Mr. 

Speaker, these judges will also be available to perform special judicial duties that may be assigned to 

them, or pursuant to provincial law, with a minimal disruption of normal sittings and duties. The special 

duties will therefore not place additional strain on the existing circuits and jobs. The salary of the 

supernumerary judge is maintained and is 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

744 

 

the responsibility of the federal authorities, so that the financial burden on the province is not placed 

through any significant financial burden apart from perhaps office space is not placed upon the province 

through the creation of the office of the supernumerary, although as I've indicated space and related 

facilities will obviously have to be furnished by the province for this additional position. Mr. Speaker, 

the amendment to Section 8 of the Act is considered necessary to ensure that supernumerary judges 

appointed under subsection 7A are recognized to be under our jurisdiction as judges of the District 

Court. The amendment makes supernumerary judges members of the Court. which is necessary as 

jurisdiction is conferred on the court and not the judges under the act. Mr. Speaker, I move, Bill No. 14 

an act to amend the District Court Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I want to address some comment to this Bill. 

It's a bill which affects the makeup of the District Court in Saskatchewan and I know the Attorney 

General will acknowledge in the replies to me that I did write him some time ago by letter, suggesting 

that we ought to have some jurisdictional changes in respect to the District Court and I want to indicate 

to members the suggestions I made to him and ask him if, in fact, those suggestions are receiving some 

consideration and when we might expect some amendments in those respects. And they are these. 

 

We have in civil terms in the province now, three levels of jurisdiction in the Courts. First, the 

Magistrates' Jurisdiction extends up to $500, that's the civil jurisdiction, which the Attorney General's 

Department and the Legislature has given to Judges of the Magistrate's Courts appointed by the 

provincial government. They can't handle any cases beyond $500 in value. Then, we have a second level 

of court which is the District Court in the province, which can handle cases under our District Court Act 

up to $5,000 in value. Then there is the Queen's Bench Court, which can handle cases in excess of 

$5,000 Anything above $5,000 is taken to the Queen's Bench, between $500 and $5,000 goes to the 

District Court. The distinction between the District Court and the Queen's Bench Court in some terms is 

this, the District Court Judges are resident in their areas, they are local residents, they are accessible on a 

virtually daily basis and certainly a weekly basis in chambers. The Queen's Bench Judges, as the 

Attorney General knows are resident either in Saskatoon or Regina and are on circuit. The Queen's 

Bench Court doesn't have as easy access for people to it, as the District Court does which is the local 

court. 

 

Now we haven't had a change in the monetary level of the jurisdiction in the District Courts since 1967, 

when it was raised from $1,200 to $5,000, which means now over the course of the last 10 years the 

jurisdiction of the local court, the District Court, has been eroded significantly by inflation, so that we 

are now getting to the point where cases of only a rather modest variety of civil case can go to the 

District Court. I have suggested to the Attorney General by letter some time ago that he should consider 

and I would have hoped we've had some amendments in this session to increase the monetary 

jurisdiction of the District Court from $5,000 to about $10,000 to begin with, and secondly, to increase 

its jurisdiction up to $50,000 in the event you get the agreement of the parties. Very often two parties 

will want to have a matter tried readily and locally before the District Court but if it happens to exceed 

$5,000 in value they can't do it. If we raise the usual limit, the $5,000 limit up to 10 to $15,000, they 

could go 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

745 

 

to their local District Court in respect to those issues. Thirdly, I've suggested that if they have a dispute 

in excess of $15,000, but under $50,000 if they both agree, it ought to be tried before the District Court 

in the local area where it's simpler and less expensive and more accessible to them. Also suggested, at 

the same time that we should consider increasing the Magistrate's jurisdiction above $500 up to $1,000 

and I take the occasion, to speak to those suggestions about further reform since the act now before us 

relates to the make-up of the District Court and I would hope the Attorney General would indicate to me 

that his department is considering those suggestions. I hope, in fact, he's gone to the Chief Justices and 

asked them their opinions, because I think that, (a) there is a very definite need for an increase in the 

monetary level of the District Court from $5,000 up at least to 10 to 15 thousand, and secondly, I think it 

would serve the communities very well if there was a concurrent jurisdiction with the Queen's Bench 

between 15 and 50, so if the parties agreed they could go to the District Court up to $50,000 in the event 

of a dispute but we certainly support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

746 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would only rise to say that I think the suggestion made by the 

member for Regina South is a good suggestion, and indeed I do acknowledge the fact that he has 

submitted it to me some time in advance of this. I am hopeful that there may be some additional 

amendments in The District Court Act or any event I will be in a position to deal with this matter before 

the spring session or before the spring part of this session runs out. 

 

The larger issue which is raised here, or at least is raised in my mind, I know that you can separate the 

two, is I suppose the general issue of melding the two courts, the District Court and Queen's Bench into 

one, in effect, consolidated court, totally eliminating the differences and distinctions between District 

Court and Queen's Bench. At the time of the receipt of your letter as the hon. member will know, I have 

for some time been considering this as a fairly broad sweeping reform of the law. Whether it is good or 

bad I suppose is open to one particular view but I kind of hold the bias that there is some merit to this. 

At the time I thought that rather than doing it on a piecemeal fashion, namely going to 15,000 and then 

ultimately going to 50,000 by consent, perhaps we should be looking at the larger substantive policy 

issue, namely that we simply eradicate the District Courts and amalgamate them with the Queen's Bench 

and make it into one consolidated court. The hon. member will not be surprised if I close parenthetically 

speaking that that idea has had mixed reception in some quarters of the bar and in some quarters of the 

judiciary. The result is it has not progressed very much further. The result is that your proposal has also 

been kind of left in limbo pending the larger decision. But I do want to indicate to the member that we 

have not forgotten it, we are looking at it and we will see if I can give a report to the House at the time 

of my estimates later in the spring or perhaps even in the form of a bill later in the spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 15 - An Act to amend The 

Revised Statutes Act, 1974. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the most recent revision of provincial statutes was in 1965 and the revision before 

that was in 1953. Obviously a revision is due. 

 

In 1974 The Revised Statutes Act was enacted creating a Statute Revision Committee and empowering 

that committee to prepare and arrange for the publication of the consolidation and the consolidated and 

revised statutes of Saskatchewan. I must report to the House that that committee has been very active 

since 1974 and in fact at this time has already sent the first of the revision materials to be printed. 

However, the revised Statutes Act of 1974 only authorized the committee to include in the revisions 

legislation passed in the 1973-74 legislative session and the two sessions immediately following and 

provided that the revised statutes would be referred to as the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1976. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in as much as the work of the committee is not yet complete, those two requirements of the 

act cannot be complied with, perhaps should not be complied with. It now appears that the work of the 

Statute Revision Committee will be completed 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

747 

 

during 1978 and so it is proposed that section 4 be amended to authorize the committee to include the 

four legislative sessions following the 1973-74 session and if the completed work in effect comes at the 

end of the session 1978, it is hoped this will be entitled the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1978. 

And I think that that does make eminent good sense and, accordingly, Mr. Speaker. I move second 

reading of this bill. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): - Just a comment, Mr. Speaker. It has been under consideration for 

some considerable period of time about the computer printing of the revised statutes and moving to the 

loose leaf system as opposed to the bound volumes. There was some dispute, as I recall, between the 

type of system considered by the federal government and say the type of system implemented in 

Manitoba. I realize this is a fairly innocuous bill but the idea, I think, of computer printing of the statutes 

in maintaining a continuous revision is something to be considered by the government. I would urge the 

Attorney General to seriously consider it and implement it as soon as possible. I think it has a great deal 

of merit. We see today the problems of attempting to do a revision with a vast number of bills and 

statutes passed by this Assembly. I know now that we have gone to it for Hansard and we are getting the 

immediate printing. I think it has a great deal of merit and I would urge the Attorney General, if it is at 

all possible, to speed up the study of that aspect and implement it in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again I believe that this is a very worthwhile suggestion that the 

member for Qu'Appelle has made. Personally, I believe in the computerization of statutes, the so-called 

loose leaf binder system of statutes, although I think the member would agree with me that there would 

be perhaps no unanimity in this regard as far as many members of the bar. It depends on whom you talk 

to, of course, but I have had many lawyers who are comfortable with the bound, fixed statutes and the 

revisions that come out periodically every ten years or so and they have a feeling of comfortableness 

with this. I know that in my discussions with a number of people about the loose leaf folder there is a 

kind of a built in resistance to it. 

 

I do want to say, however, that a considerable amount of work has been already carried out with respect 

to the computerization of statutes. We have engaged an outside expert from Queen's University, I forget 

the name right now. He has done this in the past for other provinces. The question of money becomes 

very relevant. I tell the member for Qu'Appelle. I think the position that I can summarize for the 

government at this stage of the game is simply put this way - that if on Treasury Board's assessment of 

the budgetary priorities that are before Treasury Board for this coming budget, the cost factors, the cost 

benefit analysis works out somehow to the reasonable favor of computerization, I am quite confident 

that we will also be introducing that at the time of the revisions. This is the right time to do it, you're 

dead right, so that decision has not yet been made it is still somewhere at the lower echelons of the 

Budget Bureau Treasury Board for preparation. I'd personally support it without trying to close off any 

options for my colleagues but that's the kind of situation. So I would say to the member if he could wait 

for a couple of months, I'll undertake at the spring session to provide him all the details of the names of 

the advisors, costs and everything else, and we can talk about an estimate at that stage in the game if that 

is O.K. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW moved second reading of Bill 16 An Act to amend The Court Officials Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the three amendments which are proposed to this bill, An Act 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

748 

 

to amend The Court Officials Act, are all incidental to the passage of The Unified Family Court Act. 

Section 17 would establish the hours for the staff of that court as the same hours required for the staff of 

the Court of Appeal, Court of Queen's Bench, District Court and Surrogate Court. Section 42 deals with 

the duties of the registrars or clerks of the Court of Queen's Bench and District Court to receive and keep 

records including bank accounts and to attend this Chamber Court during chamber sittings. The 

proposed amendment to that section would create the same requirements for the local registrar of the 

Unified Family Court. 

 

Section 43 in the bill before you authorizes the appointment of inspectors to inspect the offices of the 

different courts and report to the Attorney General. The proposed amendment would authorize these 

same inspections of the Unified Family Court as well as the other courts and as the other courts are 

being inspected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the sum and substance of the amendments which are before you. They are as I've 

described them incidental or consequential to the passage of The Unified Family Court Act. It is 

proposed that they come into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation rather than on a set of course, in 

order to give us the flexibility for the establishment of the Unified Family Court. I move second reading 

of this bill. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I just want to make an observation in passing of some credit 

to the Attorney General. I think when he was asked by press some months ago as to whether this would 

be a heavy or light session he indicated it would be a light session, we didn't really have a lot to do in the 

absence of CIGOL. Then the Premier was asked a couple of weeks later the same question and he said 

that no, he expected it to be a relatively heavy session. He had some 90 odd bills or something or other. I 

give to the Attorney General more honesty in that respect that I give to the Premier. Now the fact is that 

all these bills we've seen here could readily have been put into an omnibus bill which would have made 

the Attorney General's prediction quite accurate as distinct from the Premier's. It looks as though this 

kind of stretched out into several bills to give some sort of support to the Premier's proposition that it 

would be a heavier session. But with that little credit to the Attorney General for his more accurate 

assessment of the session in the absence of CIGOL, we'll support this bill. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to argue, I'm just going to take careful note of the 

fact that the Liberal Opposition is of the view that apart from CIGOL this is a very light session. I will 

particularly take note of that when we come to debate the Education Act on consolidations. I will take 

particular note of that when we deal with other appropriate legislation which comes down in the future. 

Finally, I would say only in passing, Mr. Speaker, that it's so very difficult to know exactly what is light 

and what is heavy in the minds of the opposition. It varies like Nathan Detroit's floating crap game from 

place to place, sometimes it's heavy and sometimes it's light and sometimes it's controversial but I do 

believe that this package of legislation which is before the House, especially the lead bills; Unified 

Family Court, the Interprovincial Adoption of Subpoenas, the Extra Provincial Custody Orders are very 

major reforms, including the consequential bills which the House should fully consider. I move second 

reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW moved second reading of Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Trustee 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

749 

 

Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, at common law a married woman was incapable of holding or conveying property 

as a bare trustee. This section was enacted to give a married woman power to so hold property. 

However, The Married Woman's Property Act removes any disability that a married woman had at 

common law to hold and dispose of real and personal property. Accordingly, Section 40 is redundant 

and can be repealed. This section is discriminatory against married women on the basis of sex and 

marital status. Its repeal has been recommended to the government by the co-ordinator for the status of 

women as a result of a study of various statutes in the province of Saskatchewan. I move second reading 

of an act to amend The Trustee Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW moved second reading of Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Limitation of 

Actions Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Limitation of Actions Act and the Trustee Act are 

required to remove certain discriminatory features contained in these two acts. In putting forward the 

amendments, in response to a request which came to the department from the minister as he then was the 

minister in charge of the status of women, the hon. Ed. Tchorzewski, the amendments to these bills fulfil 

the purpose of removing a reference to a married woman where there is no corresponding reference to a 

married man. In addition, the development of the common law and the enactment of our Married 

Woman's Property Act, as I explained in the earlier bill, render both references to a married woman in D 

Section superfluous and they should be removed. At common law, as I have indicated, a married woman 

did not have the legal capacity to own or dispose of property. This was true even where a married 

woman was named a trustee of an estate, therefore, the existing Section 40 in The Trustee Act was 

necessary to remove the disability but recent case law and the recent Married Woman's Property Act 

amendments make this section unnecessary. As a result of the legal incapacity of a married woman to 

own or dispose of property the courts in England created two fictions. First it was possible to convey 

properly to a person for the separate use of a married woman. This in essence was the forerunner of the 

trust concept as we know it today. Property conveyed to a married woman for a separate use actually 

made the married woman a beneficiary under the trust. Then to ensure that a married woman to whom 

property was conveyed by separate use could not dispose of the property, there was developed the power 

to restrain a married woman's power of anticipation, namely her powers to dispose of the property. 

Hence, the property could be conveyed to a married woman for a separate use with or without restraint 

upon anticipation. In this bill, the limitations of actions act, section 43, sub (2) which is amended here, 

was originally enacted to ensure that a trustee was entitled to claim the benefit of limitation period when 

action was brought by a married woman who was a beneficiary by virtue of the property being conveyed 

to the trustees for a separate use. This now is rendered not necessary as a result of the developments in 

the law of the married woman properties act rendering this portion of the section superfluous and the 

amendment which is before the House. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Limitation of Actions Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill now read a second time. 

 

HON. RJ. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 19 - An Act to amend 

The Legal Profession Act. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

750 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in 1971 The Legal Profession Act was amended to create the law foundation 

which was empowered to establish and maintain a fund to be used for the purpose of legal education, 

legal research and law reform. In part of those amendments it was provided in section 44(e) that a 

solicitor would pay to the law foundation all interest received on moneys that he holds in trust for his 

clients. This requirement was made subject to the power of the client to require that he receive that 

interest. The exception is expressed in section 44(e), sub 4 of the law. The Law Society of Saskatchewan 

has raised the concern with me, that section 44(e) sub 4 creates particularly refer to sub (a) of that 

section, creates a possibility that after interest is credited to a solicitor's trust account with no 

arrangement that that interest remain the client's property and therefore, the interest becomes owing the 

law foundation that the client could by a written demand require the solicitor to pay that interest to him 

thereby putting the solicitor out of pocket conceivably the amount of the interest. The purpose of the 

proposed amendment is to ensure that an agreement between the solicitor and the client making interest 

on trust accounts the property of the client will only effect interest credited to the trust account of the 

solicitor after the agreement is entered into. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill now read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 20 – An Act to 

amend The Administration of Estates of Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I now rise to give another dissertation with respect to an Act to amend The 

Administration of Estates of Mentally Disordered Persons Act. I want particularly the Member for 

Moosomin, pay careful attention to these provisions of the bill. Thank you very much. It's proposed to 

amend section 7 of the Act, by adding thereto: section 7(a), (d) (a), I only say that in jest, I say to the 

hon. member for Moosomin. I know he is a man with a sense of humour. The reason for this amendment 

is that the present section 7 does not give the administrator of estates the power to do such things as 

purchase clothing, medical aid, drugs, and other personal necessities for the mentally incompetent 

parson as well as to pay for his room and board. This amendment is intended therefore, to give the 

administrator of estates the power to effectively manage the mentally incompetent persons estate by 

allowing him to dispose of money held by him in a manner which is beneficial to the mentally 

incompetent person and meets his daily needs. While the mentally incompetent person was in an 

institution and was receiving care, his needs were looked after by the institution. However when the 

patient is discharged into the community, the administrator is then responsible for looking after this 

person's needs. The administrator must then be given the power under the act, to pay for the patient's 

care and to purchase for the patient such items as are necessary for his daily existence. Many of the 

mentally incompetent persons who are discharged from the institution and into the community live on 

their own, in nursing homes or are being looked after in boarding rooms. These people are not so 

incompetent as not to be able to appreciate the things that competent people take for granted. They enjoy 

watching television and participating in sports and reading about the debates in the Saskatchewan 

Legislature. This amendment is intended to meet not only the need to provide shelter and food for these 

people but as well to give the administrator of estates the power to spend these peoples' funds in such a 

manner as to provide for them some of these other comforts. These needs have been met by the 

administrator in the past and his authority for so doing was section 7(a) of this Act. The amendment 

would clarify and expand section 7(a), making it clear that the administrator of estates can in fact, deal 

with the mentally incompetent person's property in such a manner as to met all of the mentally 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

751 

 

incompetent person's needs. Section 7 deals with situations where the administrator is given the power 

to provide for the mentally incompetent person's dependants and to deal with the mentally incompetent 

person's real and personal property. However it does not specifically state what power if any, he has in 

spending the incompetent person's estate for the benefit and use of that person. This amendment clarifies 

and expands section 7 so as to provide that the administrator is empowered to spend the estate in such a 

manner which is beneficial and meets the mentally incompetent person's needs. The proposed 

amendment will make it clear that the administrator of estates as committee of the incompetent person 

can provide such daily necessities as previously mentioned to the mentally incompetent person out of 

the mentally incompetent person's estate. The amendment section 7(e) is intended merely to substitute 

the word 'consider' for the word 'deem' as a matter of drafting policy. The two words I think, mean the 

same and no consequential change is intended to result from this aspect of the bill. Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of An Act to amend The Administration of Estates of Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of An Act to amend The Police 

Act, 1974. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendment provides for the payment of witnesses and interpreters who are 

subpoenaed to appear before an inquiry or a hearing of an appeal conducted by the Saskatchewan Police 

Commission. There is no provision in the current act for payment of witnesses and interpreters who are 

required to appear before the Commission and it is considered necessary that such persons should be 

entitled to the same fees and allowances that a witness or an interpreter receives if subpoenaed to attend 

at a regular summary conviction trial. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 22 – An Act to amend The 

Creditors' Relief Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in their spare time if they are interested read Section 24 

(2) of the Creditors' Relief Act. The amendment to this legislation was recommended by one of our 

judges of the District Court. Under The Creditors' Relief Act the judge is that of the District Court but 

his jurisdiction is confined to the amount of $1,200. The jurisdiction of the DC judge under the District 

Court Act is that of $5,000 as was mentioned by the member for Regina South a few minutes ago. The 

effect of this amendment would be to raise the jurisdiction of the court from that of $1,200 to $5,000 as 

it applies to applications under The Creditors' Relief Act being consistent with the present jurisdiction of 

the District Court Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW(Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The 

Wills Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill and the next bill are very closely related. This bill is a consequential 

amendment resulting from the proposed amendment to The Intestate Succession Act which I shall be 

explaining in a moment, raising the preferential share of the intestate estate going to the surviving 

spouse from $10,000 to $40,000. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

752 

 

Section 31 presently provides that when a testator dies leaving a legacy in his will to a son, grandson, 

brother or sister and, for example, the son predeceases the testator but leaves behind a wife or children, 

that legacy goes to the son's family as if the son had died intestate, except that the son's widow is not to 

receive a preferential share of $10,000 as provided in The Intestate Succession Act, Section (4). It is 

necessary to change the $10,000 to $40,000 in order to conform with the general policy proposals in the 

amendments which follow in the next bill The Intestate Succession Act which will raise the surviving 

spouses preferential share of the deceased spouses estate from that $10,000 figure which has been 

around for quite awhile to $40,000. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW(Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 - An Act to amend The 

Intestate Succession Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, indeed the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley has never spoken truer words 

in this Assembly since I've been here. Now, Mr. Speaker, in this bill we will be amending Section (4) 

The Intestate Succession Act, by increasing the preferential share of the intestate estate going directly to 

the widowed spouse as I indicated in the earlier bill in increasing that from $10,000 to $40,000. The 

present legislation was enacted in 1960 and the spouse is entitled to the first $10,000 of the deceased 

spouses estate. If there are no children, the surviving spouse receives the full estate. If there is only one 

child, the surviving spouse receives the first $10,000 and one half the remainder. Where there is more 

than one child, the surviving spouse receives the first $10,000 plus one third of the remainder. The 

proposed bill will increase the surviving spouses preferred share from $10,000 to $40,000. This is done 

in the spirit of keeping up with the obvious costs of living and the inflationary costs that have taken 

place in Canada since 1960 and may I say that those are considerable costs of inflation in Canada but I'll 

make that speech a little later on and at a more appropriate time. 

 

Other provinces such as British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario are also giving consideration to or have 

increased the preferential share of the surviving spouses. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKl (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 - An Act to 

amend The Marriage Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we are going to have a little change of pace here. Mr. Speaker, the amendments to 

the Marriage Act being introduced for consideration by Legislature is the result of very careful 

consultation with a wide cross section of people in this province. We solicited the advice and the help on 

this issue from all the ecumenical leaders in Saskatchewan. The views and the opinions of the marriage 

commissioners in our province were sought and the implications in other provincial legislation has been 

carefully considered. These amendments are the consensus arrived at as a result of this extensive 

consultation about a matter which is very important to our society. Presently the law states, that in 

essence, no licence shall be issued to a person under 15 years of age and no marriage of such person 

shall be solemnized unless there is furnished a certificate of a duly qualified medical practitioner stating 

that immediate marriage is necessary in order to avoid illegitimacy of offspring. The act further states 

that a child marriage cannot take place, unless the consent of both parents is received. If this parental 

consent cannot be obtained, the 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

753 

 

individual may apply to a judge of the Court of Queen's Bench or to a District Court judge for such 

consent. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the marriage of persons under 15 is a very rare occurrence in 

Saskatchewan. In 1970, there were three child marriages; in 1971 there were two; in 1972 there were 

five; in 1973 there were five; in 1974 there was one child marriage; in 1975 there was one child 

marriage; in 1976 there were three. One child marriage may very well be too many. Members and the 

public should be aware that there is no alarming change in the pattern of child marriages in this 

province. I suppose, therefore it might be asked why is there a need for an amendment to The Marriage 

Act at all? One of the reasons is that in the last year the present provision and the law was strongly 

questioned both in the Legislature and by the public. The criticism basically was that children under 15 

were just too young and immature to become married and this prompted the consideration of the present 

law. But there are other reasons as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We considered today, there is on the order paper an example of the concern for marriage and for the 

breakdown of marriage in the form of the Unified Family Court. as well as other things. Marriage is not 

something that should at any time or by any couple or by their parents be treated lightly. I read in an 

article in a church publication recently the statement, "Married people are partners in a formidable 

enterprise." When one considers that in marriage there is a commitment for life, there are usually 

children to raise and in the extended family there are other adults to be considered among many other 

obligations, I seem to think that this statement is fairly apt. All of these obligations should be carefully 

considered by any couple planning to marry; lack of this type of consideration, inadequate counselling in 

some cases and pressures from society including peers and parents have contributed to an increasing 

number of marriage breakdowns. These things as well as in some cases living conditions and the 

influence of the media have led to the destruction of modern marriages and, in fact, threatened the 

viability of the family. Society must become aware of what is happening and must make every effort to 

reverse the shift in the attitude of western society towards the importance of marriage in the family. 

Reports state that three quarters of all teenage marriages alone end in divorce. In the United States, one 

out of every three marriages is said break down and figures released by the federal government in 

Ottawa show an almost equally serious overall situation. 

 

The amendments to The Marriage Act which we are considering here will not solve this problem but the 

public concern expressed about child marriages is in my view part of a larger concern about family 

breakdown, the heartache, the suffering and the casualties that result from it. The present legislation as I 

have said, that permits marriage of someone under age that is under 15 years of age when it is proven 

that the girl is pregnant is common in many provinces and is a reflection of the culture of the past. The 

weakness of this provision is that it may actually encourage that the girl become pregnant in order to be 

married and also the fact of a pregnancy does not make the marriage easier or prepare people for 

marriage. In one of the statements made by a church leader during our consultations on this bill it was 

said, and I quote him: 

 

A concern for the child will also lead us to consider that being born illegitimately is a lesser evil than 

having been the cause of a marriage that was ill prepared and resulted in misery, hospitality and 

eventual divorce. 

 

Pregnancy in itself is not sufficient reason for marriage. There may be some who might say that making 

a legal requirement for the solemnization of marriage is an excessive intervention by the state in the 

lives of individuals. This criticism would be short-sighted in that surely it is important to protect the very 

young from contracting 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

754 

 

responsibilities they cannot fulfil, or would with greater maturity choose to avoid. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . Cause for marriage . . . 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You can read it in Hansard. 

 

Once again, an excellent commentary in support of this was made by a church leader in response to our 

request for advice on this bill when he said, "We can emphasize that to opt for marriage is not only an 

act of freedom, but also a renunciation of many freedoms even before the law, and the acceptance of 

duties and responsibilities." 

 

The bill being introduced proposes to raise the age at which a person can be married with parental 

consent from 15 to 16. This is the age at which marriage with parental consent is allowed in British 

Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Nova Scotia. Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland. Not only is this 

age in keeping with the majority of our sister provinces, 16 years of age is rather like a sub-age of 

majority. It is an acceptable age for certain acts of independence. At sixteen one can apply for a driver's 

licence, one can apply for social assistance on their own and one is no longer considered a juvenile by 

the courts. 

 

A person under the age of 16 wishing to be married will require the approval of a Magistrate's Court 

Judge. The judge will take into account all relevant factors, including the maturity of both parties and, 

where applicable, the pregnancy of the female party. One of the things that this may lend to some 

significance is it will provide in most cases, if not in all cases, a very important cooling off period. A 

Magistrate's Court judge was chosen to make this decision because at this point it is the Magistrate's 

Court which handles most family related cases. The Magistrate's Court judge was felt to be the best 

person to make the decision as this court is somewhat local and, therefore the chances are more likely 

that the magistrate would be familiar with the background of those making the request. 

 

If a person under the age of 16 does not receive the consent of the Magistrate's Court to marry and thus 

bears an illegitimate child, he or she can marry with parental consent at the age of 16 and are given the 

option to legitimize the birth of the child by applying to the division of Vital Statistics. The proposed 

amendment will raise the minimum age from 15 to 16 years as I have indicated. Parental consent as set 

out in sections 38 and 40 will continue to be a requirement. We believe that this revision will reflect 

more accurately society's present views on the subject of marriage between very young persons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Marriage Act which our government has introduced into the 

Legislature constitute the fulfilment of a public commitment made during last Estimates when this 

document was discussed. With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 

this bill. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I'd certainly be awfully frightened if 

the minister ever got to introduce an important piece of legislation in the House if he can take that long 

to rag around this change, which we think is a good change. God knows what he would do if he had 

some big piece of legislation before us. You know, Mr. Speaker, if somebody just wandered into the 

House in the midst of that speech and heard him curing the problems of pregnancy, cooling off young 

love, 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

755 

 

keeping marital couples together forever, ending illegitimate births, they would think that the minister 

was the Pope - or God, one or the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has quoted everybody who has ever offered him any opinion at all about this legislation. 

The only people he didn't bother to quote were the member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) who 

moved the resolution to do just this and myself. I moved a bill last year amongst other things that there 

would be a referral to the court. Members opposite then said, no, they didn't think that that was really 

quite something that was appropriate. 

 

I suppose, Mr. Speaker, today, I have seen the Social Welfare Workers' Act changed which I moved an 

act along those lines and now this act and I gather. Mr. Speaker, that now that members opposite know 

I'm leaving they want to do good things that make me feel better and make me feel a little more wanted. 

You remember that when this caucus came into the House three years ago, amongst other things we said 

that, unlike previous oppositions they would find in us a far more constructive approach to government. 

You have seen from our caucus a series of bills and amendments, not just critical but also bills and 

amendments that we proposed to the government in good faith, and others said to the government, look 

we hope you will listen, we hope you will apply your mind and we hope you will listen to things that we 

present to you regardless of the source from which those things have come. 

 

Frankly, I am very pleased to see the government listening in this area. I think that a reference to a court 

may well work in the way the minister has said as some sort of a cooling off period. You will find that in 

this session my colleagues and I will be moving other bills and bringing resolutions before you in that 

same spirit, in a positive spirit, trying to convince the government to do good things. I and my 

colleagues when we were elected and found that we were on the opposition benches and not in the 

government didn't take the sort of hangdog approach that some oppositions take, we took the view that 

our job still was to propose the best legislation that we could when we thought there was an opportunity 

to help the government whether we were on opposition benches or not. 

 

I am very pleased to see this bill brought before the House. We will be supporting the bill, Mr. Speaker, 

but nonetheless I may have some further comments and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 - An 

Act to amend The Urban Municipal Elections Act, 1968. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Urban Municipal Elections Act is designed to clarify three sections being 

introduced now to make sure that it's in place for next fall's municipal elections. This bill makes three 

changes, all of which are as a result of discussions held with the urban administrators and with urban 

municipal councils. The amendment of section 20 ensures that sitting members of an urban council are 

given a more equitable opportunity to run in any by-election held to fill a vacancy on their council. This 

section would normally apply in the billing of the vacancy raised by the resignation or the death of the 

mayor. Secondly, many of our smaller urbans desire to fill such a vacancy as quickly as possible but not 

rule out . . . (interjection of laughter) . . . (watch it now Tony) . . . existing council members from 

seeking the vacant position. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

756 

 

Under present legislation an elected member of council must resign his council seat at least ten days 

prior to the date of nomination and, therefore, this has resulted in some undue delays in filling vacancies. 

The amendment simply deletes the ten day requirement. 

 

The amendment to section 38 contained in Bill 25, will make it legal for any candidate to have two 

agents present in the room while voting takes place but only one if he, himself, is present. The present 

legislation provides for a candidate and two agents to be present while voting is occurring but does not 

permit all three to remain in the room while the counting of votes takes place. Thus the amendment 

gives the same provision for over-seeing the voting process as it does for the counting of votes. 

 

The last two amendments to section 74 contained in this bill are designed to speed up the process in the 

event of a recount. These amendments will require the deputy returning officer to maintain separate 

packets for each candidate and/or for each by-law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, therefore, move that the said bill be now read a second time. 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could just make a comment 

or two. I think, as in many other bills, this should have a short title. We should probably call it 'The 

Henry Baker Bill'. I think one of the things we ought to do, Mr. Speaker, is if the minister would be 

prepared to accept an amendment I think we could probably support the suggestions that he has put 

forward. I think that the amendment ought to have something to do with this, that if Henry runs and 

beats Tony, Tony automatically gets the consolation prize and he's the mayor and if it goes the other 

way around, Henry keeps the job as mayor. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: What about the poor citizens? (Laughter from the floor) 

 

MR. PENNER: — We think, Mr. Speaker, that this bill like many others that have been put before us 

tonight has a number of very significant aspects and we'll support it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 50 - An Act 

to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents. 
 

He said: Hon. members will note that a great majority of the annual reports have been tabled, however, 

there are a very few which aren't, whose preparation is not yet complete due to some reasons, printing, 

auditing and so forth. Under the existing legislation The Tabling of Documents Act, 1973 documents are 

required to be laid before or submitted to the Legislative Assembly by the Lieutenant-Governor in 

Council or a member of the Executive Council or by any other person directed by an act to do so. And if 

the session of the Legislature commences after September, those documents are required to be laid 

before or submitted to the Legislative Assembly within 15 days after the session commences or within 

15 days after the document is received by those persons, whichever is later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a strict interpretation of the act requires that the documents received prior to the 

adjournment of this present sitting but received less than 15 days prior to the adjournment must be laid 

before the Legislature by the 15th day, even though that 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

757 

 

period expires on a day between the adjournment and the reconvening of the Session when the House is 

not, in actual fact, sitting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will recall that during the 1973-74 session and the 1975-76 session of this 

Legislature similar acts were passed allowing the tabling of documents at any time during those sessions 

but those acts only applied to the session sitting at the time of the enactment. 

 

Because of the problem which I raised earlier involving some reports such as Sask Media, Student Aid 

Fund, Liquor Board, it is deemed advisable to follow a similar procedure during the present session and 

the proposed Tabling of Documents Act, 1977-78 would make a similar provision for the tabling of 

documents placing this procedure in the same position as it was during the 1973-74 and 1974-75 

sessions of the Legislature and allow for the tabling of documents at any time during the current session. 

I, therefore, move, Mr. Speaker, that the said bill be now read a second time. 

 

MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I urge every member of this 

Assembly to vote against this bill and I speak not only on behalf of the members of the opposition but on 

both sides of the House. I want to tell you why, Mr. Speaker, very, very briefly. 

 

I suppose that all members of the Assembly, including those on the opposite side of the House, are 

elected to this Assembly and the whole concept of democratic government is fiscal responsibility. The 

whole key to government in a democracy is representative government examining the books of 

government in order to ascertain if expenditures are legitimate or not. 

 

Today we had an example, Mr. Speaker, where an annual report was tabled before this Assembly and it 

was not even audited. We also had an example, Mr. Speaker, of a bill introduced in this Assembly 

asking for carte blanche privilege to borrow $500 million. 

 

The net expenditures of the government of Saskatchewan, when you eliminate the federal contribution, 

were about $800 million or $900 million. They are asking the civil servants in the Saskatchewan Power 

Building to have the power to borrow $500 million to do what they want and not even report about it for 

a year and half later. They are asking this government to pass a bill of this Assembly to give the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation the right to spend more money than the entire Department of Health, 

the Department of Welfare, or 50 per cent of the ministers sitting in that government. Mr. Speaker, is 

that the kind of arrogance and insensitivity to the democratic process that this NDP government has? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — To turn around and request this Assembly to give the power of one Crown 

corporation the ability to spend more than 50 per cent or to borrow more than 50 per cent of the net 

budget of the entire province of Saskatchewan in one fiscal year without any kind of authority or 

responsibility but on their own reconnaissance. Mr. Speaker, is an insult to this Assembly and the 

democratic system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me give you an example. We have had, for example, the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan — a very embarrassing document which the Minister of the Potash Corporation was 

forced to table in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I suggest 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

758 

 

that that particular document will get a great deal of discussion in the province of Saskatchewan in the 

weeks and months ahead, a great deal of discussion. But wouldn't it be nice and handy for the minister in 

charge of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation to lay that document on the table the day that this 

Assembly prorogues next March. Wouldn't it be convenient for a government going into an election 

campaign, with no sense of responsibility, to report to this Assembly or the people of Saskatchewan 

about their fiscal management or their irresponsibility until the day the election is called. 

 

Let me give you a further example. Next spring, in 1979, there is a provincial election about to be called. 

On March 15, the Premier decides that he will prorogue the House and call the election, so he calls in his 

Cabinet ministers and says to hold onto the annual reports and lay them on the table. They all lay them 

on the table and then the Premier prorogues the House and calls the election. Mr. Speaker, that is the 

kind of abuse that is possible under this piece of legislation and I hope that the backbenchers on the 

government side of the House will have the same sense of responsibility and concern for the democratic 

process in this province to turn down this bill as I hope you will turn down that bill on the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation and every bill of its kind and like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have more to say on this bill and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minster of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill 8 - An Act to amend 

The Agricultural Incentives Act, 1973. 
 

Ha said: Mr. Speaker, in 1973 the New Democratic government of Saskatchewan introduced The 

Agricultural Incentives Act. This was a pioneering legislation of the type for which Saskatchewan has 

developed a reputation in North America. I need only refer to the hospitalization legislation in 1947, to 

medicare in 1962 and to government insurance legislation, to put into proper perspective what I mean 

when I refer to pioneering creative types of legislation for which Saskatchewan is noted. 

 

If you do not think that the Farm Start program has been considered by other jurisdictions in North 

America to be like the first furrow broken in a new field, I will only refer to you the fact that most other 

provincial governments in Canada have legislation which in many respects bears a similarity to the Farm 

Start program and the same can be said for many American states. 

 

I wish to note that the New Democratic Party and the CCF government before it have not only 

developed a reputation for pioneering legislation but that this is in contrast to the inability of those great 

innovators across the floor to carry out their promises. In both 1964 and in 1967 the Liberal government 

at the time made election promises to establish a program which, in their vague way of making 

promises, bore some similarity to the Farm Start program we have introduced. Of course, they are once 

again playing their middle of the road game of borrowing ideas from the NDP, but never implementing 

them. 

 

Within two years after we had assumed government responsibility in 1971 we completed thorough 

research of the kind of program needed, introduced the legislation, established the administrative 

procedures and gave out the first loans and grants under the new Farm Start program. That's progress. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

759 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is follow-through on a pioneering legislation of programs needed by the people of 

Saskatchewan and is the reason why the people of Saskatchewan are recognized as pioneers in North 

America and the people of Saskatchewan respect this New Democratic Party government. 

 

The opposition should bear in mind that it is for reasons like Farm Start that the NDP government was 

returned to office by the people of Saskatchewan in 1975. There is one other reason why the voters in 

Pelly constituency returned to us one of the best members they have ever had. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — The Farm Start program was set up to deal with the problems that entrants to 

farming are facing today. New farmers and small farmers were having a tremendously difficult time in 

not only getting in, in the first place, but acquiring enough assets to set up a reasonably-sized farm unit. 

They could not compete with other well established farmers, or non-farmers for land, and up to the point 

in time that Farm Start was established there was very little assistance for them to try to intensify 

production on a smaller land base. They were simply left out in the cold. The result was having a 

devastating effect on the rural community and fewer and fewer farmers survived dictates of the so-called 

'natural economic forces'. It is old hat now, Mr. Speaker. I believe that most thinking men recognize that 

the old natural economic forces have to be interfered with to give new and small farmers a chance to 

acquire land, a chance to intensify production of their land base, and a chance to be assured of 

reasonably stable prices for their products. 

 

Land Bank has given many an opportunity to acquire land. Farm Start has given many an opportunity to 

get better production off their land and stabilization programs such as SHARP have given farmers 

assurance of reasonable prices for their products. 

 

These three thrusts, in unison, complete the full circle of creating a more stable farming industry and 

Farm Start has proven to be a major component of that endeavor. 

 

In 1971 Statistics Canada reported that there were 76,690 census farms in Saskatchewan. In June of 

1976 they counted 70,958 farm holdings. This represents a decline in numbers of farms of 1,200 per 

year. However, when this is compared to the decline in the period 1966-1971 the rate is very favorable 

indeed. In 1966 there were 85,600 farms and the average annual disappearance between 1966 and 1971 

was 1,743 farms per year. Our own calculations are that each year in the period 1968 to 1972, 2,529 

farmers quit and only 768 farmers started new operations. Our estimates are that for the ten years to 

follow 1972, because of the high age of the Saskatchewan farmers, which is over 50 years, that an 

average of 2,836 farmers would be retiring each year because of age alone. This does not include those 

who quit for many other reasons. Therefore, because the net decline per year was only 1,200 between 

1971 and 1976 and because the number of farmers quitting must have been very high, there must have 

been many new entrants into farming and many small farmers were able to hang on rather than to quit. I 

think programs like Farm Start have had a great deal to do with it. 

 

To date Farm Start has 2.660 farmers under the Farm Start program and they have undertaken almost 

3,000 new expansions. Total dollars approved to these individuals is over $76 million. Of this money 

approved, over $55 million has been disbursed in loans and almost $12 million in grants. With that 

money these new and expanding 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

760 

 

farmers have purchased approximately 100,000 beef cows, 9,000 dairy cows and 12,000 sows. You can 

see that the impact has been fairly major. 

 

In the last couple of years loan activity has dropped off mainly because of the lack of optimism in the 

beef industry. However, that activity is beginning to pick up again and Farm Start estimates that there 

will be at least 550 expansions this year. 

 

Farm Start has been a good and well accepted, yet responsible public program, because of its unique 

design. Let me illustrate the major essence of the Farm Start Program in its ability to ride with the 

farmer who goes into livestock production. This is illustrated in the way it is designed so that farmers 

will have the ability to repay their loans regardless of whether livestock prices are low or high and still 

have enough left over for their personal living expenses. 

 

The province recognizes that it would be folly to develop a program for livestock expansion that was not 

tied at all times to net returns and livestock production and the ability of a farmer to repay his loan. The 

long term repayment period for the loan is there because it reduces the annual payment and makes it 

possible for the farmer to repay within the constraints of his income from his livestock operation. The 

interest rate is now at 7 per cent in contrast to market interest rates which are much higher. Once again, 

this is done to further reduce the farmer's annual payments and to make it possible to expand and repay 

from his earnings of the livestock operation. Likewise, the grant effectively reduces the amount of 

annual payment that the individual will have to make. These three features have been incorporated 

specifically in recognition of the problems that livestock producers may have in expanding and repaying 

for their loans from their means based on the returns in livestock production. 

 

When we developed the program we didn't stop there. We recognized that in an expanding operation 

that returns may not be forthcoming for a certain period of time as a farmer expands and gets his 

operation under way. Therefore, we built in a further delay feature before the first payment was 

expected. For almost all loans first payments of the loans advanced to date is not expected for the first 

19 to 24 months but after the date of which expansion starts. Consequently, with these features built in, 

the Farm Start plan under average situations gives the farmer an excellent opportunity of meeting his 

obligations with Farm Start. I am sure that you will all recognize that these features in itself are unique 

and our recognition of the problems that are faced by the livestock industry in the province. No 

commercial lending institution will provide loans for so long a prepayment period for livestock 

production. No commercial institution will provide grants which would make it more feasible for 

livestock expansion. Furthermore, very few other governments in North America have loans for 

livestock production with the same quality features. 

 

But we did not stop there, Mr. Speaker. We recognized that despite the low annual payments that are 

featured under the program, there will be years when net returns from livestock production will be very 

low. We also recognize that there would be years when the net returns for livestock production would be 

very good. It did not make much sense to us that as a lending institution we should expect that annual 

payments would be the same in all years despite the ups and downs in the livestock sector. We recognize 

that there were cycles in the livestock industry and that there were systematical occurrences of periods 

of low net returns and periods of good net returns. We saw that if we were to encourage livestock 

production and encourage people to stay in livestock production during the poor years, repayment would 

have to be tied to this phenomenon in the industry. This idea of tying repayments of loans to the fortunes 

in 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

761 

 

the livestock industry was innovative and revolutionary. It was a break in tradition from the banking 

world. Bankers could not understand that we would not expect a farmer to starve his family and make 

his full payments in a year of poor returns from livestock production. To them it was incomprehensible 

but we were willing to bet not on bankers but on farmers. 

 

Effective December 1, 1975, we implemented a flexible repayment feature, the Farm Start. Schedules 

were calculated for beef and hog enterprises. As expected returns in hog production were very good and 

the schedule indicated that no downward adjustment in the annual repayment for hogs would be required 

on payments due within the next few years. However, the calculations of this schedule for beef 

operations indicated that a dollar adjustment of annual payments required for beef loans certainly were 

justified vis-à-vis the annual returns from beef operations. Notices were, therefore, sent out to Farm Start 

borrowers who had payments on beef loans due on December of 1975. They were advised that it was 

their right and I should emphasize that it was their right to make as little as 40 per cent of normal 

payment if they so chose. Of course they were also counselled and considered in their own personal and 

unique situation what the implications may be for them of opting for such a reduced payment. They 

were counselled to consider that a reduced payment now inevitably means that they will have to catch 

up on their payments sometime in the future. This catch up would be when the livestock situation 

improved. They would then be ready to higher the normal payment as long as the livestock situation was 

good and until they had caught up on their normal payments. They were asked to consider their cash 

flow situation now and what they foresaw in the distant future. One of the things they were asked to 

consider was that if their cash flow was good now, primarily because of good grain prices, that they may 

want to consider making the normal payments. They would then not be faced with a higher than normal 

payment at some time in the future when they might like to have some extra cash for instance to expand 

their operation. 

 

We gave them that choice, Mr. Speaker, but we designed it so that they could fully understand the 

situation now and make judgments for the future and this is all very consistent with good farm planning. 

So we have implemented, so to speak, an industry and an adjustment under repayment on beef loans 

under the Farm Start program. New schedules were calculated as time went on. Apparently beef 

producers are expected to make a 50 per cent of normal repayment while hog producers are still 

expected to make the normal payment. We think it makes good sense for the farmer to repay less than 

the normal amount in a poor year and repay more than the normal amount in good years. By this 

adjustment the farmers will still be able to live well and yet repay his loan over a 15 year period. 

 

Now this is a stabilization program pertaining to the repayment of loans. We recognize that there may be 

a unique situation which requires even more flexibility. We recognize 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

762 

 

that there would be unique financial problems experienced by farmers who had a good long run potential 

enterprise but were very constraining right now. We, therefore, felt it necessary to be able to postpone 

his payments in certain instances, instances where an individual had a great deal of difficulty in making 

even the 40 per cent payment but demonstrated good long potential and could show in the future that he 

could catch up on those payments. 

 

Since 1976, we have been operating on this postponement of payment feature in cases where it is 

warranted and provided that it can be shown that there is some time in the future when the individual 

can catch up on his payment. In most cases we have been postponing up to 100 per cent of his payments. 

We have to be very careful when we're making adjustments of this kind. We can justify flexible 

repayments for the normal farming situation when we tie it into the net returns of livestock production. 

When we get into abnormal situations where the repayment capacity of the individual is not related to 

the net returns in livestock production. We must be very careful. We can't be willy-nilly postponing 

payments which may get an individual out of an immediate problem or help resolve an immediate 

problem but make the situation down the road much worse for him. Therefore, we insist that when we 

are postponing payments we must be assured that we are not simply postponing an inevitable problem 

which may, more than anything else, be related to the management capability of that person. 

 

Financial management for an individual borrower and for a lender is very delicate. Financial dealings 

with an individual must be tailored to the individual's situation. I believe we have been very careful 

under the Farm Start program. We have developed features that are tailored to each individual 

borrower's needs and this is much more than possibly could be imagined under any other commercial 

lending program, or for that matter, programs of any other government. 

 

Incidentally, history has shown that of cattlemen given an option to utilize flexible repayments that 

about 50 per cent have opted for the minimum payment while 40 per cent have selected a normal 100 

per cent payment and 10 per cent have selected a figure somewhere between the two. To me this 

indicates that we have done a reasonably good job in establishing farm enterprises that can survive and 

maintain normal repayment, even under such very severe conditions as experienced by the beef industry.



 

December 8, 1977 

 

763 

 

There are other indicators of success of the program as well. In April of 1977 Farm Start had 276 active 

hog producers, many of these are quite large. They are not the inners and outers of the industry. 

Twenty-five of these were marketing, or were being established to market, over 1,000 hogs per year. 

The Hog Marketing Commission figures back in April indicated that only 52 farms in the province were 

marketing over 1,000 hogs per year. So you can see that Farm Start recipients are providing 50 per cent 

of that production which is over 1,000 hogs per year. 

 

Farm Start has been making loans and grants in the Outlook irrigation area. Forty per cent of the 

irrigation farmers have received assistance through the Farm Start program. I could go on, Mr. Speaker, 

but I think that what we have said is enough to illustrate the importance of this well-conceived and 

well-managed program. 

 

You may point out and say, "Yes, but we have had failures too." And, of course, we have. We are 

dealing with a higher risk than normal and less secure individuals. But that is the way it should be, or we 

would not be doing our job. We have delinquencies but we do not consider them to be abnormal. We 

have had some failures and some bankruptcies, but these have not been large in number. Occasionally 

we feel bad when we have done all we can for a client and he still has to quit. But rather than reflecting 

on the failures that we have had, we should reflect instead on the approximately 95 per cent success rate 

that we have experienced. That exceeds what most people and most financial institutions would expect. 

 

**As you know, Farm Start has also administered under The Agricultural Incentives Act other programs 

that the government was asked to assume, in 1974 it gave out almost $35 million in advances to 

cow-calf producers who were reeling under the impact of disastrous market prices for beef. In 1975 it 

gave out almost $42 million in advances in a renewed program. In 1976 a total of 29,076 cattlemen in 

Saskatchewan, received a total of $80,533,000 in assistance from Farm Start. Almost $50 million of that 

was in the form of loans, while $30,875,000 was in outright grants. I think you can agree that it is 

important to have the Legislative authority to continue to provide assistance under the long-term loan 

and grant program and also to be able to handle emergency programs such as the Beef Industry 

Assistance Program. 

 

Section 29, subsection (1) of The Agricultural Incentives Act limits the borrowing powers of the 

corporation for capital purposes to $150 million principal outstanding. It is now estimated that by 1982 

the amount outstanding under loans on the long-term grant and loan program may be $150 million in 

loans and that it will top $200 million by 1986. In 1979 the amount outstanding in loans on the 

long-term grant and loan program is estimated to be approximately $87 million, but with the roll-over 

provisions under the cash advances from the 1976 Beef Industry Assistance Program, the total 

outstanding under The Agricultural Incentives Act may get dangerously close to our existing figure of 

$150 million limit. Now is the time to make the change, Mr. Speaker. I recommend that we make the 

change now to increase the capital constraints under The Agricultural Incentives Act from $ 150 million 

to $225 million. This change will enable Farm Start to continue to deliver the high degree of service 

expected of it by our rural population and to handle emergency programs that may, from time to time, 

prove necessary. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

764 

 

I trust, Mr. Speaker, that this bill will get the full confidence and full support of all members opposite 

and I, therefore, move second reading of the bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 

welcome the minister back to Saskatchewan and back to the Legislature. We were beginning to miss 

you. 

 

I didn't expect such a long deliberation on such a short amendment involving such a great expenditure. 

What we are looking at is an amendment. basically. to The Agricultural Incentives Act which was 

introduced in 1973 and which is an act to provide financial assistance to encourage and promote the 

development and expansion of the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan. That's not too difficult to 

disagree with that concept. When we look at that act which was introduced and passed in 1973 its 

borrowing limits were set at $100 million. The next year they increased it by $50 million to $150 million 

and now you are increasing it by another $75 million to $225 million. 

 

Mr. the Minister of Agriculture has heard my views before on the direction our agricultural industry is 

going in this province . That is very simple. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . orderly marketing . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, the member suggests orderly marketing . . . he might note that it was a 

Conservative government that introduced the Wheat Board and when it was tossed out it was 

re-introduced again by a Conservative government. We are quite aware of orderly marketing and all 

your jibber jabber and your hooting and hollering over there about the Conservative members being 

opposed to orderly market is just that, just jibber jabber. You are looking for something. You're grasping 

for straws and if I was going down hill as fast as you people I would be grasping for something too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture goes on with a great speech about all of these wonderful 

programs and I thought for a moment, Mr. Speaker, you were going to call him to order because he was 

discussing the medicare plan, SGIO and heaven only knows what. I don't know what I should discuss. I 

could maybe go on to the Department of Highways or the Department of Labour (I see the Minister of 

Labour (Mr. Snyder) is in the House tonight and in his seat. That's always nice to see.) But I am not 

going to do that, Mr. Speaker, because I know what the rules of this Legislative Assembly are. 

(Interjection) 

 

You ask the Minister of Agriculture - you can suggest it's time for me to sit down because I'm going to 

tell you you've been out here for a long time and for that reason I haven't been able to get on my feet. 

(Interjection) 

 

Anyway now that the members opposite have had their time to air their frustrations once more as they 

do every day, I might continue. The minister failed to point out some of the problems which they are 

having with regard to Farm Start, which is the reason for increasing the borrowing. He says that there is 

more need for expenditures and assistance to the agricultural industry in this province and there is but 

it's a question, Mr. Minister, of how you are going to go about spending those funds that you are asking 

this Assembly to approve an increase of tonight. 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

765 

 

You know as well as I do, Mr. Minister, that the farmers in this province are in debt not only to federal 

lending institutions but provincial lending institutions, the banks, credit unions and the suppliers. I 

wonder if you have ever put any thought to the fact that you might be just taking them behind an eight 

ball that they are never going to get out from. 

 

I noticed, too, Mr. Minister, that you are riding fairly high on your programs and that may well be 

because you've got some pretty wide acceptance of the Land Bank Program by the American people. I 

might suggest to you. Mr. Minister, that the people in the United States are not going to be voting in 

Saskatchewan on these programs. Yes, he mentioned Pelly, and there is no question that you got a lot of 

votes up there because if you look at the amount of Land Bank land in the Pelly constituency per capita 

it is mostly there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the great length and deliberations on this rather short amendment to a 

reasonably old bill requiring an increase in the total expenditures, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, before the member sits down . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Will the member permit a question? The member has asked leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 51 – An Act Respecting 

the Registration, Application and Implantation of Animal Identification Marks. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill is designed to provide for the registration of all permanent marks of 

ownership for livestock except tattoos which are administered by Agriculture Canada. The bill simply 

replaces that aspect of the present plan of brand inspection which governs the registration of a brand. 

Use of marks to show proof of ownership for livestock has a long history in the settlement of the great 

plains of North America. Many ranchers regard them as party of their heritage. Registered marks are the 

most practical method of identifying livestock. Many states and several provinces in the western part of 

North America have their own central registry system for animal marks. To be sure of protection in the 

use of a mark a producer must have exclusive use of that mark. To avoid duplication in the issuance or 

use of a mark requires an efficient central registry to administer to the registration of all animal marks. 

 

The present Central Animal Identification file which is administered by my department has nearly 

26,000 actively used brands. During the last year and one-half the system has been computerized to 

improve the speed and efficiency with which the program can function. For the sum of $2 a producer 

can register a brand for exclusive use for a period of four years. In October of this year the new 

electronic system was able to reprint and prepare for mailing 7,000 renewal notices on an overnight run 

at SaskTel. 

 

In recent years losses from rustling have continued to plague the livestock industry. In the past year 

alone it has been estimated that the losses from rustling amounted to something like $750,000. Every 

year the SARM in its regional and annual conventions has asked the government to tighten up its 

regulations. The Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association has also made similar requests at their annual 

meetings. My department has met with these officials and these organizations in an attempt to 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

766 

 

resolve the problem. It is now mandatory for all livestock with two exceptions to be properly manifested 

prior to being transported. My department can trace the ownership of any branded animals which are 

reported missing or stolen. Six RCMP vet co-ordinators are working in the province and brand 

inspectors are doing a good job of reading brands and reporting discrepancies. I am confident that for 

branded animals our program provides the best and the most efficient search capability that exists in 

North America. 

 

The key to the success of the program requires that brands be registered and then properly applied to the 

animals. This bill makes provision for new technology in electronic animal identification which is 

presently being researched. It enables the licensing of dealers and distributors of identification 

equipment. This is necessary to assure co-ordination in the allotment of parks for animals to ensure the 

principle of exclusiveness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation represents an upgrading of existing legislation including the adoption of 

modern technology and I would therefore want to move second reading of this bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — It is my intention at the conclusion of my brief remarks to adjourn the 

debate on this particular bill. Let me say before we get further into the bill that I'm very, very pleased 

that the Minister of Agriculture has two speech writers. He has one that is extremely long-winded and 

one that is rather brief. I wish he would use the one that is rather brief a little more often than he would 

use the one that he did on Bill No. 8 which we dealt with a short while ago. 

 

My initial reaction to Bill 51, which is now before us, was such that I felt that there were segments of 

the bill which we would have no were difficulty in supporting. There other segments of the bill which I 

have some questions about and the minister in his remarks today certainly did not answer any of those 

questions or doubts which I have. 

 

One question I would like to pose first of all and that deals with section (a) of section (2) of this act. Let 

me just read that section to the members of this Assembly. It is in this act the interpretation of the word 

"'’animal' means any herd or any head of cattle or other animal of the bovine species; any horse or other 

animal of the equine species; any sheep, goat or swine or any inter-species hybrid of the same". Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, just exactly what does – ‘or any inter-species hybrid of the same’ - mean? Is the 

Minister of Agriculture saying that he has knowledge or his department has knowledge that they are now 

capable of crossbreeding a hog and a horse? What happens, Mr. Speaker? What will be the result of that 

crossbreeding? Will you get a hog that is capable of running a fantastic distance or will you get a horse 

that is able to mature in six months? I think, Mr. Speaker, these are questions that I hope the Minister of 

Agriculture will be able to answer before we tackle the more serious aspects of this particular bill. The 

member for Regina South was wondering whether a cow and a goat could be crossed under this 

particular bill and if that's the case, I imagine he might get an animal where he didn't have to have a 

stool quite so high when he wanted to milk that particular crossbreed. 

 

Another aspect of the bill, however, Mr. Speaker, and this is something that might be taken on a bit 

more serious note is the ability or the authority under this act for inspectors, who are hired or appointed 

by the Department of Agriculture, to search the 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

767 

 

residence or the farm of an individual without a warrant. They must have a warrant to search the 

particular individual's dwelling but under this act they do not require a warrant to search the individual's 

barns or the land or the holdings which he has. That may in turn be all right in the event of the RCMP 

conducting those types of brand inspections or searches. I question, however, the authority and the 

training of some of the people who may be hired in order to carry out their responsibility such as this. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this bill does not deal with another aspect of a question which I must pose. What 

happens if an individual rancher has a brand registered; he brands his particular cow; that cow is sold 

after two or three years to a neighbor or someone else down the line, other than his bill of sale, what 

proof does that individual farmer have under this act that that animal, in effect, is his when he is not 

allowed under this act to change any portion of that particular brand if that brand is applied on the 

outside of the animal? These are questions which we have in regard to this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would ask leave at this time to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 9 - An Act to amend 

The Farm Security Act. 
 

He said: This is a short one. Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to speak to Bill No. 9 to amend The Farm 

Security Act. It has been traditional, since the act was originally passed in 1944, to extend this act for a 

period of three years. The purpose of reviewing the act every three years is to ensure that it continues to 

serve the purpose for which it was originally intended. Thus, the amendment before the Legislature 

today has the effect of extending the provisions of this act to the years 1979, 1980 and 1981. This act 

protects the farm operator who has probably rented land or land being purchased under an agreement for 

sale which is mortgaged by specifying the portion of the crop which may be retained by him for 

purposes of paying taxes, cost production and family living expenses in years of crop failure. The 

provisions of this act become applicable when the average value of production per acre sown is less than 

the value of 10 bushels of No. 1 CW spring wheat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events of the 1977 crop year emphasize the importance of the bill now before us. While the 

exceptionally long and continuous period of favorable harvest weather in October enabled completion of 

harvesting in Saskatchewan this year, I think we can agree that we were very fortunate. Prior to the 

commencement of the favorable harvest weather I referred to, I believe most of us were considering the 

possibility that much of the 1977 crop would remain in the swath over winter. If this had happened there 

is no doubt that many Saskatchewan farmers would have been in very serious financial difficulties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan farmers are experiencing serious financial difficulties this year as a 

result of a renewed cost-price squeeze even though they have been able to harvest their crops. I would 

like to note, Mr. Speaker, that the importance of this bill has been reduced somewhat since 1971 as a 

result of markedly increased use being made of crop insurance in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 

farmers. During the past production season roughly 48,000 Saskatchewan farmers purchased over $700 

million worth of protection under the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program. However, in spite of this 

remarkable progress in respect to the application of the Crop Insurance program in Saskatchewan there 

are still many farmers who have not elected to protect themselves through purchases of crop insurance. 

This bill before us is still 



 

December 8, 1977 

 

768 

 

therefore, extremely important to the remaining 30 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers who have not 

protected themselves by utilizing the Crop Insurance program. 

 

I would like to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the Crop Insurance Board is continuing to expand these 

provisions of crop insurance to include a broader coverage of crops with emphasis in recent years being 

placed on research which will lead to the possibility of offering insurance coverage for more of the pulse 

crops and possibly vegetable crops. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the provisions of this bill are required 

by many Saskatchewan farmers and I hope that this bill to amend The Farm Security Act will receive the 

unanimous support of the Legislature. I move second reading of the bill. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:07 o'clock p.m. 


