



















































Hansard: April 11, 1977


1877 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

35th Day 

 

Monday, April 11, 1977. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

RESTRICTIONS ON LICENCE 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 

Minister in charge of SGIO. I realize that he is a city Member and perhaps he is not aware that the 

present restrictions that have been placed on our licence prohibit a traditional activity of co-operation in 

that many farmers get together, one swaths, one combines and one will do the trucking, the new 

restrictions on our licence prohibits that activity from taking place. Would the Member not agree that the 

new restrictions are a bit of a deterrent to the traditional practices in farming at harvest time in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office): — Mr. 

Speaker, I think that question should be directed to the Minister in charge of the Highway Traffic Board. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question. The Minister to whom I addressed the question is in 

charge of the Licence Bureau now and I would expect that he would have some information. Would the 

Minister then agree to provide this House with some statement so that we can give some assurance to the 

people who have traditionally co-operated in that nature that these restrictions may be lifted. 

 

MR. WHELAN: — I’ll take it as notice and discuss it with the Minister in charge of the Highway 

Traffic Board. 

 

SEAT BELT LEGISLATION 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to 

the Premier. I wonder if the Premier could clear the air a little bit on one subject that is causing some 

concern and that is, the suggestion by the Government in the Speech from the Throne that you would be 

introducing legislation providing for compulsory wearing of seat belts in automobiles in Saskatchewan. 

It is my understanding that there has been some stepping back from this position and it is possible that 

such legislation will not be introduced in this particular Session of the Legislature. I have had numerous 

inquiries about it and my understanding was that it was the Government’s full intention to bring this 

legislation forward. I wonder if the Premier could clear the air and tell us what the Government’s 

intentions are? 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1878 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Government previously indicated that it 

would be proceeding with mandatory seat belt legislation at this Session, that was the Government’s 

policy at that time, and is the Government’s policy at this time. Any changes in Government policy will 

be announced in due course. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question. Is the Government considering making changes in its 

policy at this time in connection with compulsory seat belts? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Government is always reviewing policy decisions which it has 

made in the past. It has reached no conclusion to change policies. Any such conclusions will be 

announced in due course. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question. I wonder if the Premier would not agree with me, is it 

not somewhat unusual for the Government to change its position after stating its policy in the Speech 

from the Throne. In this case I believe it was a very definite commitment in the Speech from the Throne 

that this legislation would be brought forward. Does the Premier not agree that it is somewhat unusual 

that the Government would possibly be reconsidering that policy at that time? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Not at all, Mr. Speaker. We consistently review policy positions taken in the 

past. I don’t want the Hon. Member to feel that this is in any different category than other 

announcements made in the Speech from the Throne. The policy stated in the Speech from the Throne 

remains the policy of the Government and any changes will be announced in due course. 

 

LAMB PROCESSING PLANT 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Last week you indicated that 

you would be looking into the problems regarding the financial collapse of the Innisfail Lamb 

Processing Plant. I am just wondering if the Minister has been in contact with the Saskatchewan Sheep 

and Wool Marketing Commission and whether any arrangements have been made to ensure the balance 

of the 75 per cent payment to producers in the province for lambs which they have marketed through 

Innisfail? 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, we have been in conversation with 

the Alberta Government in this regard and they have advised us that they will be paying the 75 per cent 

balance which is due as soon as they are able to get their books and their procedures in order. You will 

understand that they are now transferring from the co-operative over to some new government structure 

and this will take some time in terms of just ordinary procedure going over how you pay out bills and so 

on. They have accepted the obligations which they had, the outstanding obligations, and they have 

assured us that they will be paid. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Can the Minister give us some indication as 

to when the producers may 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1879 

 

receive their payment and in the event that the payment does take a considerable length of time because 

of the problems you have outlined, will interest be paid on the outstanding balance of 75 per cent as it 

does represent a fairly substantial portion of the income that producers would have from the sale of their 

lambs? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the decision for that would be in the hands of the 

Government of Alberta. I think they will decide whether they will pay interest on that or not. I am as 

concerned as you are about the length of time it has taken to get the payments out but we have asked 

them to facilitate it and I hope that they will do that as quickly as possible. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Sheep and Wool 

Producers, have you personally or has your department made representation to the Alberta Government 

in this regard urging quick payment and also suggesting that interest be payable in the event that the 

time span between now and the final payment is delayed considerably longer than anticipated? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — No, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t made that kind of an approach to the department in 

Alberta, we have simply asked to expedite the procedure. 

 

POSITIONS ADVERTISED — SYLVITE MINE 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan 

Potash. I understand the Government in taking over the Sylvite mine the original target was the 15th and 

it is now to be the 20th or 22nd of April. The Government will also end certain management positions in 

the mine and is advertising for positions in the Leader-Post and the Winnipeg paper. With only nine 

days to go before the takeover there is a distinct possibility there will be no management continuity. 

What is the Government doing to ensure some of the existing senior management stay on? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister in charge of Potash Corporation): — Mr. Speaker, it is my 

understanding that all of the existing management have been offered positions with the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan in the event that we take over the Sylvite mine on the 22nd as the Member 

suggests. I want to point out what I said was that we hoped that this would be accomplished by April 

30th and that is still some time off. 

 

MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister tell me how many of these 

present management have accepted positions with the new Potash Corporation? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — No, I could not, it is still somewhat speculative. The final agreements haven’t been 

signed with Sylvite. The management of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is handling it and I 

have no knowledge of which individuals have said yes or no. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Final supplementary. The Government knows that a failure to give continuity of 

management after takeover will cause long-term disruption, why did the Government decide to cancel 

these management positions? 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1880 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, none of the management or their positions were cancelled or are 

cancelled. They are all still working for Sylvite. They were all offered positions with the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. Some may choose not to take those positions. Some of them will be 

working and have worked for Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting for many years, they perhaps started in 

nickel, worked in copper, ended up in potash and their chain of succession or whatever it is that they are 

going through has been with HBMS. They may choose to continue their career with HBMS because that 

is where they started it, perhaps they didn’t plan on staying forever in a potash mine. Others may have 

other reasons for changing positions at this particular time. The great majority I am convinced will stay 

with PCS. I don’t see any particular problems. Obviously if some people leave they will have to be filled 

by people from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, from outside or from the Cory mine but we 

don’t foresee any particular problems judging by the number of people that they have talked to, to date. I 

don’t have the information or the particulars of who has indicated they are going to do something else 

but I am sure that at some future date that can be provided. 

 

SETTLEMENT WITH SGEA 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Premier regarding the labor negotiations between the Government and the SGEA. It is my understanding 

that the strike has been averted and that there has been settlement. I wonder if the Government would 

indicate when they propose to announce the terms of that settlement and if the Premier would indicate in 

percentage terms the approximate cost to the Treasury of the increase? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I will make some general comments, if there are 

some supplementaries I will ask one of my colleagues to comment. Firstly, the strike, which so far as I 

am aware reposed solely in the mind of the Member for Regina Wascana, has indeed been averted, at 

least to this point. Secondly, there has been, I am advised, an initial agreement between the bargaining 

teams of each of the respective parties, that is the Government of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees Association. My information is that the proposed settlement is being referred by 

the SGEA bargaining team to the membership for ratification. The ratification has not yet been 

completed and accordingly I cannot announce a settlement. Our arrangement with the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees Association, or my understanding of it, is that we will not make public the 

proposed terms of the settlement until they have had an opportunity to communicate the terms to their 

members and the members have had an opportunity to express a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the proposed terms. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, it may be that the Premier will have to refer this question, but the 

Government has indicated an intention to move out of wage and price controls. Will this settlement be 

subject to the Board in Saskatchewan? Secondly could there be some indication of when the ratification 

vote is intended to take place? And thirdly, although I might well accept that the Premier isn’t in a 

position to give the specific 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1881 

 

terms, could the Minister of Finance indicate the cost, when you include the fringes, what will be the 

cost in percentage terms and perhaps in dollar terms in approximate figures to the Treasury? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will ask my colleague the Minister of Finance to respond. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the first question was whether the 

settlement be subject to the incomes and prices compensation board. The answer is, yes. In case of the 

dollar amounts that the Hon. Member is asking, I do not have those figures and if we did provide the 

figures based on the number of employees that are employed it would then be fairly easy to start 

calculating what the settlement was. As the Premier has indicated it has been traditional that members of 

the SGEA have their views known before the final settlement is announced to the public. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary. I wonder lastly then, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister, though he is 

not prepared to give the dollars, would indicate in percentage terms how much of an increase including 

the fringes is involved? I wonder, also if the Minister would be prepared to say whether the package is 

within the guidelines or whether an exception to the guidelines will be required? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the Member keeps on probing as to what are the percentages. If we 

gave the percentages the people would know what the settlement is. Mr. Speaker, I think if the Member 

knows anything about collective bargaining that there are confidences. The agreement has been reached 

on a tentative basis and I think it is only fair that the negotiators of the SGEA have an opportunity to 

refer the matter to the membership and the membership have a chance to vote on the settlement. 

 

Insofar as whether it was within the guidelines, I am not sure what the Member means, by what 

guideline and whose guidelines. In as far as the Government is concerned we do not set guidelines for 

collective bargaining because we believe in free collective bargaining. 

 

SURGERY INCREASE IN SASKATOON HOSPITALS 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Health. 

 

Has the Minister taken any steps whatsoever to increase the amount of allocation to the Saskatoon city 

hospitals and more specifically the Saskatoon City Hospital in terms of allowing them to increase the 

amount of surgery that may be performed in those hospitals? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, last September we did take steps with 

regard to all the hospitals in Saskatoon, particularly with 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1882 

 

regard to City Hospital and St. Paul’s Hospital where day surgeries were set up. It is the intent and the 

belief of the department and the Government that this will reduce the waiting lists in that particular area. 

And some additional compensation was provided to those hospitals in relation to beds as a temporary 

measure because of the tightness of the situation, particularly in Saskatoon. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware that the waiting list at 

the Saskatoon City Hospital, especially in the field of orthopedics, is extremely long, stretching in some 

instances six to nine months and in some instances almost a year of waiting period for people to get into 

the hospital and that that condition continues? The Minister has mentioned some steps that were taken 

last fall. Have any additional steps been taken since February 22? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, as usual the Member for Nipawin has his facts wrong. There is not a 

long waiting list at the City Hospital with regard to orthopedic surgery, there is at St. Paul’s. The 

problem is specifically at St. Paul’s. A lot of that problem is related to some extent with constraints on 

orthopedic surgeons’ time. It is a fact of life. We have also had discussions with the Board at St. Paul’s 

Hospital and the medical staff with respect to rectifying this problem. But you could double the beds or 

triple the beds for orthopedic surgery in St. Paul’s and you would still have a long waiting list a year and 

a half from now. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — A further supplementary question. I am sure the Minister of Health would 

recognize the name Graham McIvor as being a respected medical doctor in Saskatoon. I believe that the 

Minister will recognize that if this medical doctor has replied to one of his patients as late as February 

22, 1977, as follows: 

 

As you know already the pre-booking committee at Saskatoon City Hospital has felt that urgent 

admission is not required and they feel that you will have to wait on an elective basis. 

 

The bed situation is incredibly bad as far as the waiting list is concerned for orthopedic surgery. 

 

This particular woman has been waiting since November 26, 1976 for needed back surgery, he says: 

 

Even at this time I think it may be a number of months before we get definite confirmation of your 

admission date to Saskatoon City Hospital. 

 

Would the Minister not agree that that kind of situation is unacceptable that it is continuing and it 

requires immediate attention by the Department of Health? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that there are certain orthopedic surgeons who have long 

waiting lists. We admit that. The long waiting lists are really at St. Paul’s and not at City Hospital. In 

fact we have had people seeking orthopedic surgery who have switched doctors and have gone from St. 

Paul’s 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1883 

 

to City and got in very quickly. This particular doctor may have a fairly long waiting list. You can’t 

generalize the whole situation simply by picking out one particular doctor. 

 

MILEAGE OF CABLE TV TO BE INSTALLED 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of incurring the wrath of all 

Members I shall direct a question to the Minister in charge of Sask Tel. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh no! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I would like to ask the Minister, in view of the fact that in all major centres in 

Saskatchewan we see trucks from all over Canada installing cable television as quickly as possible, 

concisely and briefly could the Minister . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — . . . tell this Assembly how many miles he has in mind to install in the current 

fiscal year? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister in charge of Sask Tel): — Your question is with respect to cable, urban 

cable TV. Mr. Speaker, Sask Tel is continuing an aggressive policy which started in 1968 of laying 

cable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — With respect to the city of North Battleford — the laying of the buried cable there is 

almost completed. With respect to Moose Jaw, the tentative timetable for completing the laying of cable 

is late this fall, certainly by the end of 1977. There are very aggressive construction projects under way 

in both Saskatoon and Regina. It is not expected that the laying of buried cable will be completed in 

Regina or Saskatoon in 1977. But it will be completed in early 1978. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. He almost has me beaten down but not 

quite. Would the Minister indicate to the House how he is financing the cable which is presently being 

installed, and how that has been financed which has been installed previously? 

 

PENSIONS — GOVERNMENT SUPERANNUATES ASSOCIATION 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. In 

my letter to yourself dated December 3, 1976, the Saskatchewan Government’s Superannuates 

Association set out its position calling for fairer pensions, particularly the increase in pension for the 

surviving spouse and they have met with you since. Can you tell this Assembly when the Government 

will announce its pension increases or pension changes for the Saskatchewan Government 

Superannuates? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Government’s program will be announced in due course. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1884 

 

POSITIONS ADVERTISED — SYLVITE MINE 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of potash. Could 

the Minister tell me if the position of the senior management of Sylvite Potash has been advertised and 

in order to get these positions that they have to bid in on these jobs? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, the officials from the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan have been talking with some of the senior management of Sylvite. In the 

event that an individual indicated he wasn’t going to continue in the employment of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, because he intended to stay with HBMS or whatever he intended to do, 

positions were advertised. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it not true that the individual senior management 

personnel at the Sylvite mine have been informed that all new jobs are changes of positions with PCS 

and therefore, they will have to apply for those jobs in the normal course of events in competition with 

other applicants, that all of them have been so informed? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, that is not true, like most of the Member’s statements. 

 

NEGOTIATIONS WITH SYLVITE 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 

the Minister as well, concerning Sylvite, but on another aspect of that particular problem. I’ve noticed a 

certain hesitancy on behalf of the Minister in dealing with negotiations. They are going on now and 

you’ve been questioned about them before. I’d like to ask the Minister, is there a deadline within the 

offer that was made by the Government to Sylvite by which time the offer had to be accepted, that the 

agreement is contingent on it being accepted by a certain date? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m always in some difficulty in responding to the questions from my 

learned colleagues opposite with respect to offers and agreements because I have a sort of simple 

understanding of an agreement. You want to buy something, you get an agreement and you make an 

offer and they agree to it. Then follows the legal part that I have more difficulty comprehending, but I’m 

sure the Member has a better grip on that than I do. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Agreed. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I’m sure you do on the legal stuff. I’m not sure I envy you though in that respect. 

 

With respect to this, my understanding is that we have made an offer, it has been accepted in general 

terms. There are a great many details to be worked out, some of which obviously involve money in their 

interpretation. So to that extent we 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1885 

 

haven’t made the final formal offer, because we haven’t agreed on the terms of it and they have not 

signed it, the final formal offer, whatever the appropriate legal description for that is. If the Member 

wants I’ll take notice and get one of the lawyers to write it out for me, but we haven’t got to that stage 

yet, so that we haven’t signed the final agreements. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, you really didn’t answer the question. I asked if there was any time 

limit put on these negotiations and I wonder if you would address your mind to that rather than talking 

about the legal ramifications? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no time limit that I am aware of attached to them. I 

think, for us to put a time limit on ourselves and say that we are going to have it done by April 30 would 

obviously hinder us, we have to then wind it up no matter what the other side’s position, by that date. I 

am hopeful that we will have things finalized by April 30th. I still expect that date to be reached or 

sometime earlier but the deal won’t fall through, at least from my perspective, if it isn’t done until May 

1st. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. If the arrangements have not been 

wrapped up within a reasonable length of time, be it April 30 or sometime thereafter, is it the intention 

of the Government then to invoke its power by issuing a vesting order to take over the Sylvite operation? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a hypothetical question. I would have to wait and see 

what the circumstances are and then the Government would have to make an appropriate decision. 

Certainly the Government has no predetermined course of action that it will necessarily follow. 

 

MR. MALONE: — May I ask as a final supplementary then, Mr. Minister, is the agreement which you 

have referred to, and which I accept you haven’t got an in-depth knowledge on, is it firm to the extent 

that if the details are not worked out between the Government and Sylvite, that you would be in a 

position to sue Sylvite for specific performance of that agreement and let the court decide on the other 

details that are causing some concern at this time? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I would have to take notice on that question. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — I should like to ask the Minister in charge of potash with the 

takeover of this mine ten or a few more days away, does the Government have a mine manager to take 

over this mine when it goes into business? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Yes. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1886 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 

Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting Warranties on Consumer Products be now read a second time. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill is as you are 

aware a very lengthy Bill and contains many changes in the existing consumer protection law . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Warranties . . . 

 

MR. MALONE: — That’s right, Warranties Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying this Bill is a very complicated lengthy Bill which we have been examining 

very carefully in our caucus. There is some consideration still being given to many of the provisions of 

this Bill, particularly as it affects private sales and there are other aspects of it that we are presently 

studying. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the matter be adjourned at this time because we 

have not completed the assessment of this provision. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Messer that Bill 

No. 39 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation be now read a 

second time. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, we will be opposing Bill No. 39, An 

Act respecting the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. There is a fundamental 

distinction between our approach and the NDP approach over resource development in this Act and this 

Act deals with resource development. Put charitably the NDP believe that mineral resources can best be 

developed by the public and private sectors working together. Liberals believe that government should 

confine itself largely to determining under what conditions mineral lands will be explored and 

developed, and to conducting scientific surveys to provide basic data. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Government can establish a royalty and tax regime suitable to 

encourage exploration of minerals by the private sector and through changing that mineral and tax 

regime from time to time extract maximum possible returns for the people while at the same time 

maintaining the highest degree of development possible for the province. Industry has the expertise and 

capital necessary to search for and develop and market minerals. And we say they, and not the people of 

this province should take the financial risk. We do not believe that in cyclical world markets the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer should be the gambler. The Saskatchewan taxpayer now has something in the 

neighbourhood of $1,000 per family invested or gambled depending upon the word that you choose to 

use in the potash 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1887 

 

industry. The Saskatchewan taxpayer now has something in the neighbourhood of $500 per family 

invested in other forms of resource industries. If the Government really believes they are acting on the 

wishes of the people of Saskatchewan in gambling money, and the Hon. Member says, agreed. If you 

really believe that the janitor outside this door wants to gamble $1,500 in resource development, why 

didn’t you make an effort to encourage him to invest in resource development? 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale had gone out and said to the janitor 

outside this door or the man working downtown, “How would you like to invest $1,500 in the resource 

industry?”, the person would have looked at him as though he were crazy. Indeed, he may be crazy for 

all I know. But beyond any doubt, Mr. Speaker, people of this province would not voluntarily be 

investing their money in the resource industries in the way that they are forced to invest by this 

Government. Mr. Speaker, 99 per cent of the people of this province would have said ‘No’ they don’t 

have the money to gamble yet this Government forces each family to become a gambler in the risky 

resources areas. 

 

We say, that every dollar that can be extracted from the industry should be extracted, but that 

Saskatchewan tax dollars should not be gambled in the process. We say that the public and the private 

sector cannot work closely together. Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the realities of dealing with business, you 

have to know that big business is reactionary. They’re suspicious, they don’t like government. They like 

NDP Governments even less. The reality of the situation, Mr. Speaker, that they are suspicious in any 

jurisdiction where government forces itself into the areas which have traditionally been considered the 

preserve of private enterprise. You know, Mr. Speaker, what Government Members might say, 

“Wouldn’t it be nice if government could become involved in the public sector and the private sector 

could work closely together beside it.” It might be nice, Mr. Speaker, and I might well be in a position to 

say were that the case if they could work closely together that it was better to have some public 

involvement. The fact is that they cannot work closely together. There’s the state of distrust between 

government and business, and whether or not that distrust is unfair, doesn’t matter, the distrust 

continues. The NDP distrust businessmen, they dislike anyone with a profit motive. The investing public 

dislikes the NDP, dislikes anyone with a narrow perspective as that held by the Cabinet. That’s the 

reality of this situation and the people of Saskatchewan are now suffering because of that dispute 

between the two. It doesn’t help, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister when he moved this Bill said that it is 

the belief of the NDP and I quote: 

 

That mineral resources can best be developed by the public and private sectors working closely 

together. 

 

Who really cares about the mythical situation of what might be? The reality is that the public and private 

sectors won’t work closely together. The reality is that whenever the public sector moves into the private 

preserve of private enterprise, private enterprise invests elsewhere. And that, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

is the reality of what’s happening here. 

 

The Government in 1971, said we’re going to get a better deal from the resources. Fair enough, 

resources were turning 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1888 

 

around. Liberals would have gotten a better deal as well, but fair enough. What was not fair were the 

methods used by the Government. Bill No. 42, Mr. Speaker, was the first initiative into the resource 

area. It strangled the industry. In the last year that the Liberals were in power 1,251 wells were drilled. 

In 1975 that had declined under the NDP as a result of Bill No. 42 to 276 wells. In 1976 that had 

declined to 262 wells. Approximately one-fifth of the development in the best Liberal year and 25 per 

cent of the development on the average in the seven years that the Liberals were in power. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to talk about an increased royalty bite but you have as well to talk 

about the jobs and the lives of the people who have been affected in this province by the destruction of 

the oil industry. Drilling will be up this year, some initiatives have been taken by the Government and I 

encourage them in that direction. The NDP indeed with their series of changes have all but repealed Bill 

No. 42, so the industry in part will start to return to this province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I said the first initiative after 1971, was into oil and gas, the second initiative was 

into the resource area of the potash industry. And in that area, the Government can’t even claim through 

its nationalization to have acquired higher profits to the people of the province. The industry is moving 

out, the industry is trying to replace Canadian reserves with new mines elsewhere. Pennzoil, for 

instance, one of the largest developers was reported to the Wall Street Journal, a few weeks ago, to be 

saying that they feel that they are now in a position that European and other resources will start to 

replace the Saskatchewan source of supply. 

 

In the third area, hard rock mining, the Liberal program was to encourage hard rock exploration. And 

that resulted in some fantastic finds. Those finds are now coming on stream. And just as they are coming 

on stream particularly in the uranium industry, this Government at the eleventh hour foists an inquiry 

upon an industry that, even without the inquiry, barely prepared to stay because of the size of the royalty 

rates imposed upon them. There is virtually no staking going on in the North. Basic exploration is at an 

all time low, Mr. Speaker, in this mining area and that comes closest (in the historical review that Mr. 

Speaker has been kind enough to accept in relation to this Bill) that comes closest to the Bill itself. In the 

North, we’re completing a cycle that has developed in the late ’60s because of the Liberal initiatives to 

get some development going in the North. Spending is up in hard rock mining but it’s really just a 

playing out of the cycle that began 10 and 15 years ago. At the initiating stage of the cycle there was 

seen virtually nothing. Private industry because they won’t work with the public sector, find it very 

difficult to imagine further investments in the North, so they’re not looking for the resources that they 

were looking for in the ’60s. The Government through vehicles like the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation proudly talks about legislation which compels companies to give up 50 per 

cent of their equity after the initial exploration expense has been absorbed by the company. 

 

There are all kinds of stories in the industry of government misusing information, information which had 

come to them in a privileged way through the Department of Mineral Resources. The truth of those 

stories doesn’t matter. It’s the same thing 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1889 

 

that I said before. It’s not that the Minister says, “It would be better if private enterprise and public 

enterprise could work together.” The reality is that they cannot work together. The truth of stories 

believed in the industry that the Government misuses confidential information doesn’t matter. What 

matters is that the industry believes those stories. Businessmen don’t want to deal with any government. 

An industry that doesn’t want to deal with any government finds itself under this Bill dealing with an 

NDP Government which is more objectionable to them and finds that on a venture when they move into 

any kind of basic spending they are compelled to offer a 50 per cent share to the Crown. Some of the 

industry will stay, a large part of the industry will not. And we need all the industry we can get. 

 

Industry, Mr. Speaker, has rightly noted that the Government claims to have all control, and industry 

rightly notes that contracts that this Government signs seem to be meaningless. And they look at the 

kinds of deals that have been given to the oil industry and to the potash industry. Hudson Bay Oil and 

Gas now selling with other companies initiated in 1976 an action that was designed to deal with the 

Government for breaching their agreement. The agreement in 1951 was to get a 30-year basic tax deal 

for the potash industry. Any investor in this province looks at that and says, not only did the 

Government want to get involved with me, not only did they compel me to give up to 50 per cent to 

them in equity but I can’t trust the deals that they write, because I look at what they did to the potash 

industry and I look at what they did to the oil and gas industry. 

 

The various pieces of potash legislation and The Coal Conservation Act allow the Government to 

impose controls by regulations passed by the Cabinet and in some instances by the Minister alone, rather 

than by laws passed by the Legislature. All of that makes the industry know that they are subject to the 

whim of the Cabinet, and subject to the whim of the Premier. All of that makes the industry know that 

they are subject to the discretion of Allan Blakeney who has throughout the piece, acted out of pique; it 

would appear out of bad temper in his dealings with the resources industry. A man who whenever faced 

with legal proceedings which do nothing more than ask that justice be imposed before the court, always 

reacts by saying, the industry is going to do what I tell them. The industry isn’t going to be able to get 

the justice that anyone else would expect — the justice of going to a court and having legal 

interpretations placed on legal agreements that this Government has signed or that previous NDP 

Governments have signed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the industry looks on at all of that and knows increasingly they’ll be faced with changes 

made by regulation. They know that control over mineral resources is no longer in the hands of the 

Legislature but has been turned over by the NDP backbenchers to the Cabinet, to the Premier who, as we 

have seen repeated in these past few years, acted out of pique in all of these questions. 

 

The Government, now has carte blanche to shut down any mineral producing company by regulation by 

the minister in charge. When court decisions established principles which indicated to the Government 

that it could not take the absolute control it was seeking in the various sectors of the resource industry, 

the potash the oil and gas, Mr. Blakeney amended The 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1890 

 

Mineral Resources Act to re-define utilization and conservation in an attempt to circumvent the 

decisions of the courts. And when faced by questions in the press about the likely loss of the Cigol case, 

the Premier said, “If we lost that case, we’ll nationalize the oil industry.” He acted again, Mr. Speaker, 

out of pique. Again the Minister can read the press reports, he was following on the remarks of the Hon. 

Attorney General, the Deputy Premier who said we may nationalize the industry and the Premier backed 

that up. And they didn’t say they’d nationalize the oil industry because they thought it was the right 

thing to do. Or that they would nationalize the oil industry that they thought that would be better in the 

long term in terms of developing the oil industry or getting more money into this province or more jobs 

into this province. No, Mr. Speaker, the response was a knee-jerk reaction that no court was going to 

interpret a legal document for Allan Blakeney. He’d do what he felt was fair, he’d be the arbiter of 

fairness . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have no objection to the Member discussing The Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation Act, however, I think the Member will agree with me he’s straying from the 

topic and indulging in personal debate, rather than debate to the principle of the Bill before us. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the Bill in question is a part of the piece, a part of 

the . . . a tax on the resource industry so high that he has been driving resource development out of this 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister who brought in this Bill, the Minister in charge of Mineral Resources, is 

a little different from the Premier. You know, I have not seen him acting out of pique — not seen him 

acting out his private temper tantrums. Unfortunately, the signs have been almost as alarming in a 

different way. And this Bill that he introduces, Bill No. 39, is an extension of the alarming signs which 

now come from the Minister of Mineral Resources. 

 

In speaking to the Act, the Minister, Mr. Messer, talked of a need for the Saskatchewan Mining and 

Development Corporation to be able to expand outside of the province. He indicated they would have a 

venture going in Alberta, that they had something going now. That they had two ventures going in the 

Northwest Territories, one in Manitoba, and a good deal of direct exploration in Manitoba and the 

Northwest Territories. Members may recall, Mr. Speaker, the words of the Minister of Mineral 

Resources, when he was the Minister in charge of Sask Power. Again, he said the same kind of thing in 

that area, when he was investing Saskatchewan money. I asked, Mr. Speaker, whether the Minister on 

behalf of Sask Power could indicate whether there was investment of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money 

going on outside of the province. He told us there was investment in the Northwest Territories, 

investment in British Columbia and in Alberta, through exploration for gas by the Many Islands 

Company; that we were, in fact, spending more money on gas exploration outside of Saskatchewan than 

we were within. And he said the same — he moved in the same direction when he discussed Bill No. 39 

in moving this Bill. 

 

What does all that mean? It means that jobs are being developed outside of Saskatchewan. It means that 

Saskatchewan money is being gambled outside of this province. The janitor 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1891 

 

outside the door does not want to gamble his $1,500 in the resource industries but he certainly does not 

want to gamble that money to create jobs in Alberta and British Columbia and the Northwest Territories. 

Indeed, I asked the Minister who moved this Bill in regard to Many Islands (the gas vehicle) whether he 

would be prepared to give a commitment to the House that Saskatchewan Power would not conduct any 

exploration in the United States. And he would not even give us that commitment. 

 

He talked about this Bill and in doing that, the Minister indicated that the approach that he will take as 

being the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, is the same 

kind of approach that he took when he was in charge of Sask Power, and that is bad news for the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I like the Minister, I think he is a bright and a capable 

member of government. In some ways he . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They do not like him in Coronach! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Well, I do not know how they feel about him in Coronach, but I will just keep 

reading this. (Did one of their speech writers slip a page in?) In some ways, Mr. Speaker, his ability to 

deal with problems, has the respect I believe of all Members of the House. And I am sorry, in some 

ways, that there are so few of his ilk in the Cabinet. 

 

But in this area, Mr. Speaker, he demonstrates the view of a man almost like a child playing in a 

monopoly game. He thinks that Saskatchewan tax dollars are just sort of free things — they don’t come 

out of people’s pockets, that they can be gambled any place in this continent. He is a man, Mr. Speaker, 

who takes the money of the janitor outside the door and gambles the money all over the west, and 

possibly, for all we know in the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, resource exploration is a highly specialized area, where markets and connections count. 

And I say to you that a bunch of NDP tub thumpers cannot move into the resource industry just as 

though it is a simple prospect and anybody can make a go of it. And that is part of the piece of thinking 

that is like a monopoly game. That is part of the piece of that Cabinet that they do not seem to realize 

that the connections are very important. That when dealing with “big business” which is a world-wide 

business, they may well be out of their league. They do not like businessmen, they distrust businessmen, 

so as a part of distrusting them, they decide that they are incompetent and stupid to boot. So if they say, 

Mr. Speaker, that businessmen are the real dummies of this world, and that is the way they characterize 

them, that anyone with a half a billion dollars to invest, they say can move into the resource industries 

through the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, through gas, through potash, and can 

do very well. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not a monopoly game and the taxpayers’ dollars should not be 

invested in this way. 

 

Section 17 of the Act allowed the province to guarantee loans and bonds for Saskatchewan Potash and 

allows the lending 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1892 

 

of money directly. Again, that will lead to the same kind of situation that we have with potash and that 

we have with oil. We would not object so much, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister were able to take programs 

and have them risk the profits that those programs will generate. If, for instance, as an example, the 

Potash Corporation borrowed the money without pledging the money of this province, we would not 

object so much. If this legislation did not give to the Government, the power to pledge the people’s 

money of the future, we would not object so much. And that is the only section, Mr. Speaker, that I want 

to mention. Particularly Section 17. 

 

I said earlier that we will be opposing this legislation. It is curious that the legislation itself, flows from 

the remarks made by my colleague, the Member for Regina South. The Government had the gall to 

operate the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation without even having this kind of 

legislation; had the gall to think that they could gamble the people’s money in such a singularly risky 

way as the resource industries, and not even pass a Bill through the Legislature. And, a year ago, my 

colleague brought that to the attention of the Government. I suppose then, Mr. Speaker, one could say 

that this legislation flows from the careful analysis of all legislation that the Government is fortunate 

enough to receive from Members like the Member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though the Bill may be a product of the good work of one of the Members on this side of 

the House, it is nothing more than the carrying on of the way that the Government has been operating in 

hard rock mining. We are genuinely frightened of this kind of legislation, genuinely frightened on behalf 

of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, genuinely frightened about the future of this province. Mr. Speaker, 

for all of those reasons, we will not be supporting this Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking against Bill No. 39, I would first like to 

make a few comments and read a letter that refers to Bill No. 42 and as far as the PC caucus is 

concerned, we feel it is going to have equally devastating effects on the resource industries of this 

province. 

 

With your indulgence, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the Member, I do not want to presume what the Member is going to 

say, but what the Members says has to be related to Bill No. 39, and not related to Bill No. 42. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, it does refer to Bill No. 39 but I would have to take it a little more out 

of context. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we are again concerned with the appointees under this Act referring to the 

Mining and Development Act. We are concerned that as in the past, we were wondering if the 

Corporation has the expertise to attract the people to them who know something about the business 

instead of entering into similar programs, as they have in the past, without experienced people in the oil 

industry and in other ventures that the Government goes into. We wonder just how serious these 

appointments are and what considerations are going to be given to them. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1893 

 

In Section 11(1) we have said it many times, that we disagree with this Provincial Government entering 

into the development of the resource industries. We feel that these resources can best be developed by 

private industry, and we still feel that the maximum amount of money to be gained out of these 

industries is going to be gained by the people of Saskatchewan if these resources are developed by the 

private sector. We believe that with the right that this Government has to tax up to 100 per cent on the 

profits, that certainly we can negotiate and give a return to these companies that best know what they are 

doing in this field. 

 

We, too, are against joint ventures such as this Government proposes, especially when the Government 

has the right to pull out of the partnership if it feels it is to the detriment of the province. I believe for 

this reason the private sector will not want to enter into such a partnership as proven in the past where 

some of them are backing off from these partnerships. We feel with the entering into this as other fields, 

you are entering a competitive field and it is a completely different ball game. We now have to go out 

and get our customers. You are competing in a field — it is not like a monopoly where you have that 

business and we do not feel the Members of the Government or their employees have been in the 

competitive ball game too long, and we do not feel they are capable of handling it. 

 

By Order in Council, they could put the other partner out of business if they deemed it for the good of 

the Government. You have the power to acquire and dispose of property and you have too far-reaching 

powers in this Act by Order in Council, there’s no control through legislation on any of these decisions. 

This means more things by Order in Council, more legislation or more powers to the Cabinet, which we 

do not agree with. Again, this is a case where the Government is getting involved in the resource 

industry and when they can get a maximum return for no investment by the taxpayers’ money. Once 

again, I believe this project will have a negative growth effect, as companies do not want to become 

involved with the Government. This Government with its ideology does not have the know-how or the 

foresight to develop on its own, which is keeping this a have-not province. We believe that, again, the 

private sector knows what it is doing, and by negotiating, not by confrontation, that this Government can 

get a maximum amount of return for the people of this province. We feel that Saskatchewan has the 

resource base, as has Alberta to become one of the most fantastic provinces in Canada, but because of 

the management, we are being held back. We will not support the Bill. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might beg indulgence of the 

Members of the House for a few minutes. I would like to introduce to the Members a very dear friend of 

many of us, a former Member of the Legislature from the city of Saskatoon, an outstanding 

Saskatchewan woman whose career in Saskatchewan spans television, public affairs and politics. It 

gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to Members this afternoon, as I say a very 

good friend of many of us, a former MLA from Saskatoon, Sally Merchant. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1894 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I would like to say one thing. It is interesting that 

the former MLA has never come back to the House since the day she was defeated, and/or since the day 

that she did not seek re-election. I know, Mr. Speaker, that there will be large numbers of Members 

opposite who may find that they are not in this House after the next election, and I hope that they will 

come back to the House to visit us more often. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Kelsey-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, may I also recognize the former Member for 

Saskatoon, Sally Merchant. I am pleased to see her back in this House again visiting. It is unfortunate 

that she picked a day to see her son so confused about a particular piece of legislation. You know, Mr. 

Speaker I note that both the Liberals and the Conservatives are back into bed together again. It is such an 

indecent spectacle! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Bill No. 39. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, let me just quote some of the 

remarks that the Member for Regina Wascana said in the debate of this particular Bill. He stressed ‘we 

Liberals’ and I quote him, “We Liberals are opposed, we Liberals feel that you are gambling that poor 

janitor’s money that we are extracting from him . . .” They are, incidentally maintenance engineers now, 

not janitors but it shows just how far back in the stone age he is. I do not know where he got his speech. 

He admitted towards the end of it as he was shuffling through paper that he got the wrong page in, I 

would suggest that he picked up the wrong speech totally. The wrong speech totally, Mr. Speaker! He 

stresses, ‘we Liberals are opposed,’ one would assume when he talks about ‘we Liberals’ he is talking 

about Liberals in Canada, provincially and federally. I wonder where he stands with such Crown 

corporations like Petro Canada? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Are they, Mr. Speaker, using Canadian taxpayers’ money exploring for oil and 

natural gas? He makes no mention of that Crown corporation, but he wants to terrorize people in 

Saskatchewan by alluding to investments of monies that will never bring any return to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. We know that is wrong, Mr. Speaker. He just has to look at the development in northern 

Saskatchewan now to see that never in the history of this province has there been a higher level of 

exploration and development — never in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Now the Member again, and I quote, “We Liberals are . . . (I wonder if he opposes 

Eldorado Nuclear’s operation in Saskatchewan?) . . . opposed to those Crown corporations risking 

taxpayers’ money.” There’s a company that has been up there for 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1895 

 

decades, Mr. Speaker; a Crown corporation of the Federal Government, risking taxpayers’ money and 

ensuring very good returns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, ‘we Liberals’ he said, ‘are opposed — you are gambling our 

money.’ Does he know that the Canadian Development Corporation, among other investments, has 

invested in potash in Saskatchewan? It now has one-third ownership of Texas Gulf, which is involved 

directly in the Allan Potash Mine. Now, I have heard the Member on numerous occasions criticize this 

Government for involving itself in potash. I wonder if he knows that the Federal Government ‘we 

Liberals’ to the Member for Wascana, are risking taxpayers’ money and he opposes that. Here they have 

been investors in potash for some years in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want the Member for Estevan also to take note when he says ‘we Conservatives are also 

opposed to this,’ what do you think is going on in Alberta with Syncrude? What is going on in that 

province? Is Syncrude a risk or is it not? I suggest that there are millions and millions and hundreds of 

millions of dollars coming to the Federal Government, coming for the benefit of the Member for 

Estevan, from the Government of Alberta — that Conservative, Tory Alberta, and also, from the 

Government of Ontario — Tory Ontario. Governments investing in those risky businesses! While, Mr. 

Speaker, they may be risky, I would suggest that governments have undertaken in modern times to look 

at what kind of investment government has to be involved in in order to assure the people that they 

represent, that they will have adequate sources of energy in this instance, Syncrude; that they will have 

adequate returns for the development of their natural resources. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously the Member for Wascana is either mixed up or he is speaking for all the 

Liberals here in Saskatchewan. The Member for Estevan is speaking for all of the Conservatives here in 

Saskatchewan — and they say ‘we are opposed to this kind of legislation, we are opposed to this kind of 

investment.’ It is only the Liberals and the Conservatives in Saskatchewan who are opposed, because 

everywhere else in Canada, Liberal Governments, Conservative Governments, invest in the development 

of our natural resources. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I might say one other thing, Mr. Speaker. Liberals are noted for repeating the same 

old thing over and over and over, and some of those newer Members on the Opposition side of the 

House, I suggest that they will remain to be old Members in the Opposition side of the House. A former 

Liberal Member for the constituency of Melfort in 1948 stated that there would not be one oil well 

drilled in the Province of Saskatchewan, not one oil well, as long as there was a CCF Government in 

power. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP Government was defeated in 1964, much to the regret of most people 

in Saskatchewan, it took them seven years but they learned the error of their ways, and re-elected an 

NDP Government. In 1964 there had been 5,337 wells, not only drilled, but producing in this province. I 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1896 

 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that only a Liberal could be wrong 5,337 times on one given subject. Only 

a Liberal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he talks about statistics — the Member for Wascana. He refers to statistics about 

wells that were drilled and shows that there was some higher activity in the Province of Saskatchewan 

under the former Thatcher Government than there has been in some periods of time under the present 

New Democratic Party Government. That may be the case. But what really counts, and what he will not 

relate to, Mr. Speaker, is the revenue that is generated because of the activity in this province. Oil 

revenues as I have said in this House before, $37 million in the former Thatcher years, compare that to a 

lesser time under the present New Democratic Government, almost $350 million, or ten times as much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then he talks about jobs. Mr. Speaker, let me remind him, perhaps there was some decline in real jobs in 

the oil industry in Saskatchewan, but never had there been in recent history, more jobs created totally in 

the Province of Saskatchewan since 1971, under this NDP Government. Never before have there been 

more jobs created. The lowest unemployment of any province in Canada, until recently where it now 

ranks second lowest. 

 

He made some mention, Mr. Speaker, about risking this poor janitor’s money — I feel sorry for him, 

he’s packed his lunch and left. Always grabbing this $1,500 from this janitor, and he knows full well 

that we are not taking money directly from taxpayers in Saskatchewan. It is not taxing revenue that is 

being involved in these investment operations. He also criticizes us because we will not give him a 

guarantee that we will keep all of that activity or all of that expenditure totally within the provincial 

boundaries of Saskatchewan. And certainly, we will not give him that kind of guarantee. His own 

example, referring to the exploration and development of natural gas, Mr. Speaker, we certainly are 

exploring and developing natural gas in Alberta. We are exploring there because the dollar spent has a 

much better chance of finding natural gas where there is higher volume of gas in the Province of Alberta 

than we have in the Province of Saskatchewan, and in so doing, we have increased the reserves of 

natural gas to the Province of Saskatchewan several times over. And that is certainly a large contrast 

from the former Thatcher Government when they were selling natural gas from the Saskatchewan gas 

field. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and again the Member for Estevan showed his ignorance and he displayed it several 

weeks ago, when he undertook to try to convince, I don’t know who it was, but he was trying to 

convince, perhaps students who happened to be in the gallery at that time — that because we were not 

exploring or developing our natural gas, it was going to evaporate, it was going to disappear. We are 

finding natural gas in Alberta at less cost than it would cost us if we were developing in Saskatchewan, 

and when the time comes we will find gas in Saskatchewan and the price will be higher than it was 

yesterday, higher than it is today. We have given assurance to people in Saskatchewan that we will have 

a reserve of energy for them; something that the Conservatives and the Liberals would not, have not and 

do not display that they would do if they ever have the good fortune of being the Government, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1897 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I simply want to say that he, the Member for Wascana in particular, the Liberal 

Party, a spokesman for the Liberal Party, seeing that he is generally here speaking as if he is leader of 

that party (I sometimes wonder who really is) that he is assuming that we are compelled to invest in 

every activity that takes place in the Province of Saskatchewan and that all those activities are going to 

be losers that is totally false. He knows full well, Mr. Speaker, that we invest in only the activities we 

choose to invest in. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — That is why the industry is so happy! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Oh, and he says the industry is not happy. I wonder if he can explain why, and I do 

not think he can deny it — the level of activity in northern Saskatchewan has never been so high. I 

wonder how you can have that kind of contradiction. In one breath he says industry is all leaving the 

Province of Saskatchewan, yet the facts of the matter indicate that there has never been a higher level of 

activity in northern Saskatchewan. They are not leaving, they know the policy of this Government they 

know that we may choose to undertake to involve ourselves up to a maximum of 50 per cent in such 

ventures in northern Saskatchewan. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that they would much rather have it that 

way, than wondering what the next move of any political party or any government whatever its stripe 

might be, as to legislation or regulations in regard to its operation. They know that once we involve 

ourselves as a partner, that we suffer some of the consequences of that operation. And, I think that we 

have a much better understanding, a much better assurance and a much better rapport that we each 

understand each group’s or each party’s problems. I suggest to you that through this kind of legislation, 

through this kind of co-operation, through this kind of development, we will even reach greater roles of 

development in this province as far as non-renewable resources are concerned. Time will tell, and I 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Regina Wascana will eat his words when he says, ‘we 

Liberals oppose this kind of gambling and this kind of risk-taking.’ 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said those few brief words, I again move second reading of Bill No. 39. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Robbins that Bill 

No. 63 — An Act to amend The Marriage Act be now read a second time. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to make a few remarks 

with respect to this particular Bill. Particularly because of some remarks made by the Hon. Member for 

Regina South in the debate in this House on March 23, 1977. 

 

At that time, the Member for Regina South requested that we consider a House amendment to Section 

31 of The Marriage Act and that particular section, Mr. Speaker, deals with the matter of child 

marriages. Section 31 of The Marriage Act states that, in essence, no licence shall be issued to a person 

under 15 years of age, and no marriage of such person shall be solemnized 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1898 

 

unless there is furnished a certificate of a duly-qualified medical practitioner stating that immediate 

marriage is necessary in order to avoid illegitimacy of offspring. The Act further states that a child 

marriage cannot take place unless the consent of both parents is received. If this parental consent cannot 

be obtained, the individual may apply to a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench or to a District Court 

Judge for such consent. This child marriage provision was not, Mr. Speaker, originally in The Marriage 

Act, and I have been attempting to unearth the social and other reasons which caused this law to be 

enacted by a provincial Liberal Government in the year 1936. 

 

I would like to give the House some recent information about the number of child marriages so that this 

question can be seen in reasonable perspective. In 1970 there were three child marriages in 

Saskatchewan. In 1971 there were two. In 1972 there were five. In 1973 there were five; and in 1974 

there was one child marriage. In 1975 there was one child marriage. The data for 1976 has not yet been 

fully processed, and I am not able to confirm with complete certainty the number of child marriages for 

1976, but it would appear that there were three in the year 1976. In the last few years there have been 

approximately 8,000 marriages per year in Saskatchewan. Even though one child marriage may well be 

one too many, the House should know that there is no alarming change in the pattern of child marriages. 

We believe the reason this topic has been drawn to public attention is because of an article which was 

written in the Saskatchewan Anglican, and reprinted in the Leader-Post under date of February 19 this 

year. 

 

This Leader-Post article drew attention to the child marriage issue and presented one side of the case, 

and one side only. Subsequently, other media channels have picked up this story, and unfortunately we 

believe the public has not yet seen or heard a balanced assessment of the difficulties in dealing with the 

entire issue of child marriages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that I personally do not support child marriages, and I would 

like to see this provision in The Marriage Act changed, however, I do not want to make this change in a 

hasty manner, because there are very wide implications related to it. It is obvious that if we amend The 

Marriage Act to prevent marriages from taking place below a minimum specified age, choose any age 

you want, 15 or 16, the Government would be enforcing illegitimacy upon the offspring of these child 

unions. While I recognize that today’s moral codes may not attach the same stigma to illegitimate 

children as has been attached in the past, there remain in Saskatchewan, many people who are concerned 

about illegitimacy on social and religious grounds. 

 

Moreover, under existing legislation, legitimate children have certain legal and property rights which 

illegitimate children do not have. These legal and property rights of children born to child parents, have 

to be considered and have to be resolved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of even greater concern, is the question of the custody and the responsibility for the babies 

of these child unions. If we are to amend Section 31 of The Marriage Act in the manner proposed by the 

Opposition Member, we are stating quite explicitly that children below a certain age are too young, too 

immature, and too irresponsible to enter into a marriage. But under other existing provincial 

legislation . . . 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1899 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Might I ask the Minister if he is, in fact, discussing Bill No. 63, which is 

under his name, or Bill No. 82 which is under the name of the Member for Wascana, because I gather he 

is talking about the aspects of Bill No. 82? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not. I am discussing the question raised with respect to Bill 

No. 63 by the Member for Regina South, Mr. Cameron, in his portion of the debate. I am not referring to 

Bill No. 82, the one introduced by the Member for Regina Wascana. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I accept the Member’s word that he is in part doing that. Now, there was some 

confusion on my part, and I did not warn the House that the Member was closing debate. However, I 

heard no Points of Order raised with regard to the matter, and I assume that we will continue, since no 

Points of Order were raised on that particular point. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of even greater concern is the question of the custody and responsibility of the babies of these child 

unions. If we are to amend Section 31 of The Marriage Act in the manner proposed by the Opposition 

Member, (I am referring to the Member for Regina South) we are stating quite explicitly that children 

below a certain age are too young, too immature, and too irresponsible to enter a marriage. 

 

Under existing provincial legislation, however, a child mother has complete legal custody over her baby 

regardless of her age. Here we have the dilemma that on one hand we are preventing child marriages 

from taking place, and on the other hand we are imposing the responsibility on these children to rear and 

provide for their babies, regardless of their age. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are only a few of the broad implications which revolve around the child marriage 

issue. I believe that we can reach a sensible solution to this problem, but it will take some time, and a 

great deal of consultation to find the best answer. I want, Mr. Speaker, to inform the House that officials 

of the Department of Health and of the Department of Social Services are reviewing all of the legislation 

relevant to this issue. In addition, the Department of Health will shortly be contacting all marriage 

commissioners and ecumenical leaders in Saskatchewan to question their opinions, their comments, and 

their suggestions concerning child marriages and solutions to the problem. 

 

The Department of Health has already been in touch with most of the provinces in Canada to examine 

the provisions that other jurisdictions have made to restrict or permit child marriages, and to examine the 

solutions which other provinces have adopted or may adopt, with respect to babies of these unions. 

 

We cannot receive this additional information quickly, and it will take some time before the decisions 

can be arrived at. Mr. Speaker, while I concur to some degree with the comments of the Member for 

Regina South, I am not prepared to adopt his suggestion that we accept a House amendment to The 

Marriage Act to prevent child marriages. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1900 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will therefore, prepare a suitable amendment to The Marriage Act, dealing with child 

marriages, for introduction into the Legislative Assembly in the fall of 1977. At that time, my colleague, 

the Minister of Social Services, will have had an opportunity to reconcile any proposed changes to The 

Marriage Act with other social legislation which will also be affected. On that basis, Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of Bill No. 63, An Act to amend The Marriage Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek that Bill 

No. 76 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill that is before us, I 

believe does need some clarification, which I am sure we will receive in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Today, I would like to confine my comments to the role of the Provincial Auditor as is mentioned in this 

particular Bill. Mr. Speaker, I believe this to be another procedure that governments, not only in this 

province, but perhaps in other provinces and even in Ottawa, do where the independency and the powers 

of the Provincial Auditor are being usurped. The Provincial Auditor is an office and a title, that I 

suppose, he’s the Court of last resort is the final check on government spending. 

 

There are times when the auditor, whether it be the Auditor General in Ottawa or the Provincial Auditor 

in Regina or Edmonton or Winnipeg, or wherever it may be, there are times when this office can be very 

embarrassing to the Government, and yet I really do not see why it should be. Because, if I were a 

Minister of the Crown, and that auditor found that some portion of my department was not functioning 

properly, as a Minister of the Crown, I would find it my duty to act on the information, and I would 

encourage the auditor to keep people in my department sharp. 

 

I really do not know why governments do fear the auditor because he can be that last check point that is 

available to see if your department is running smoothly. Granted he is not the be-all or the end-all, but 

he is the mechanism. 

 

This Bill will allow Crown corporations to use someone other than the Provincial Auditor to audit their 

books. I do not know exactly what the intention of the Minister is, in proposing this change. I am aware 

that the Provincial Auditor is vastly understaffed. He is having problems in recruiting people and I really 

do not intend to go into that because I am told that this is being looked after in another portion of 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is a very dangerous thing when the public auditor does not personally, or his 

officials do not personally, view the financial statements of a government department or a Crown 

corporation. I will grant you that this Bill still does give the auditor power to examine the financial 

statement of a Crown corporation, but I believe that it should go further than that. I believe that the 

Provincial Auditor and his staff should be doing the accounting. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1901 

 

First of all, it has got to be cheaper. If the Provincial Auditor’s staff is going to be expanded, and 

hopefully through another vehicle or another medium it will be, then the Provincial Auditor must look at 

the entire, overall picture. I have every confidence that the Government is going to expand the office of 

the Provincial Auditor; make the necessary changes that he has requested; give him the staff to properly 

and completely do his job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many additional comments which I would like to make to Section 16(a). I would 

prefer to deal with them at more length on another day, therefore, I would bet leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed ;motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek that Bill 

No. 79 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we see an example of tax increases in regard to the tobacco 

tax, and this is probably an area where governments all over seize upon to impose increases because 

they think that they are not going to be criticized. 

 

I suppose tobacco and alcohol are considered fair game. Frankly. I think people who choose to smoke, 

or choose to consume alcohol, have some rights too. Because one does choose to consume alcohol, it 

does not make him an alcoholic, and because one may choose to have the odd cigar, occasionally, it 

does not necessarily mean that he is going to die of lung cancer. And, if he so is going to, I believe that 

is his choice. 

 

I do not believe that these taxes are imposed in order to eliminate consumption, because certainly your 

statistics show very conclusively that they do not. I believe that the time has come to have a little mercy 

on our tobacco smokers, and for that matter on those who may purchase alcohol, because they are not all 

necessarily bad — contrary to what some people across the way may tell you. Not everybody is an 

alcoholic and not everybody is a chain smoker. 

 

And, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Bill. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, there is not very much to rebut. The 

Member for Indian Head-Wolseley said that they would oppose the Bill, or that he would oppose the 

Bill. I am not sure whether he was speaking for the total Liberal caucus. I am not sure whether the 

Member who just took his seat has indicated the position of the Liberal Party or whether he is just 

speaking for himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the question of consumption and price, whether it be in tobacco or cigarettes or any 

other consumer item, has a relationship. The higher the price, the less the people will use the commodity 

or purchase the particular item. I am certainly hopeful that by increasing the price that we can reduce 

consumption. There are some indications in other countries in the case of alcohol in particular, that by 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1902 

 

increasing the price, of what is a so-called social pricing policy, has had a dramatic effect on reducing 

consumption of alcohol. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Name one! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I’ll name one. I can name you Sweden, I can name you Norway; the Scandinavian 

countries! By sharply increasing prices there has been a dramatic reduction in the consumption of 

alcohol. They have proven it conclusively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in considering the whole area of tax increases, I think it is fair to say that people object less 

to increases in such things as tobacco and liquor, than they do in other commodities. We found it 

necessary to raise additional revenue because of government expenditures going up. We looked at all 

taxes and felt that this is one area where we could increase the tax without too much resistance from the 

consuming public. We believe that this is one tax that will not be resisted too much by the consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few words, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 74 — An Act to 

Regulate the Practice of Denturists in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain the main principles incorporated in this proposed Act, 

called The Denturists Act, This legislation will legalize and confer self-regulation status upon denturists 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other than the Maritimes, Saskatchewan is the only province which does not have 

legislation legalizing denturists and regulating their practices. 

 

Denturists have been present and practising in our province for a number of years, but have until now 

lacked any reasoned legal basis for their practice and have technically been illegal as a health discipline. 

This legislation has been requested by the Denturist Society of Saskatchewan in order to establish a legal 

basis for the practice of denturists and to put in place a regulatory mechanism under which basic 

training, competence and practice standards for denturists may be defined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health has worked very closely with the denturists and the dentists in 

the province to develop provisions for this Bill which can be accepted by the major interest groups. 

 

Under controls and safeguards established by this Bill, denturists will be enabled to fit and supply 

complete dentures, directly to patients. Provision is also made for denturists who meet special 

requirements to fit and supply partial dentures in collaboration with dentists. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1903 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the public this Bill will ensure that all denturists in Saskatchewan have met basic 

licensing requirements through examination and have demonstrated satisfactory levels of training, skill 

and performance. Furthermore the public in Saskatchewan at the present time do not have any protection 

against the malpractice of denturists. 

 

When this Bill is enacted, Mr. Speaker, the criteria for malpractice will be established and the public 

will have a legal basis and an organization to which it can direct its complaints and its concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will notice in this Bill that we have separated the function of dispensing complete 

dentures from the function of supplying partial dentures. We realize that supplying partial dentures is 

subject to much more risk for the patient than supplying full or complete dentures. Before a patient 

should receive a partial denture, very careful diagnostic work should be undertaken by a dentist to 

ensure that a patient’s dental health is such that a partial denture can be placed in the mouth of that 

patient and that the partial denture will not adversely affect the health of the other existing live teeth in 

the mouth of that individual. 

 

The matter of allowing denturists under very strict conditions to supply partial dentures was a subject of 

extensive discussions with the dentists, the denturists and the Department of Health. Agreement has 

been reached that supplying partial dentures should not be established as part of the basic scope of the 

practice of denturists. Special criteria and limitation will be established in regulations, governing the 

dispensing of partial dentures. Fully licensed denturists may write a special examination to qualify them 

to supply partial dentures and if this examination is passed, the denturists will be known as a partial 

denture technician. These partial denture technicians will then be enabled to fit, manufacture and 

dispense partial dentures, only in collaboration with dentists as spelled out in this Bill, with details found 

in regulations pursuant to the Act. 

 

Organizationally, Mr. Speaker, there will need to be a transition period during which the new 

organization for denturists is established and during which examinations will be held and any necessary 

educational upgrading provided for practising denturists in the province. During this transitional period, 

denturists will be regulated by a Transitional Governing Council, to be appointed by the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. The Transitional Governing Council will be responsible for 

establishing licensing requirements for denturists, for defining standards of competence and practice and 

for otherwise regulating and governing the practice of denturists. 

 

During the interim period, all denturists will be examined by an independent board of examiners, to be 

appointed by the Transitional Governing Council. Those denturists who immediately satisfy licensing 

requirements will receive full licences. Those denturists who are found to require further training, will 

be awarded provisional licences, which will be valid for no more than 12 months. These provisional 

licences will enable denturists to practise under controls, while they become fully qualified. However, 

provisional licences will not be established as a permanent feature of the Act. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1904 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain to the House, the provisional licensing feature a little more fully. 

Formal training courses for denturists have been established in other jurisdictions, only relatively 

recently. For this reason, denturists currently practising in our province have become skilled in their 

craft in a number of ways but chiefly through apprenticeship and other types of on the job training. 

Because of the considerable variations and backgrounds of Saskatchewan denturists we have decided 

that there will be no grandfather licensing and that all denturists will be required to prove their 

qualifications before they are licensed. We have provided under provisional licensing a reasonable time 

period of 12 months during which denturists are to be allowed to practise under conditions established 

by the Transitional Governing Council. During that period they are expected to upgrade their education. 

 

I should mention. Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Continuing Education will make available to 

denturists the necessary educational upgrading that will allow them to become fully licensed. If 

denturists require educational upgrading before they are entitled to receive full licences and if they are 

unwilling to take this upgrading after 12 months they will not be able to practise in this province at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill requires the Transitional Governing Council to turn its responsibilities over to the 

board of directors of the Denturist Society of Saskatchewan at the direction of the Lieutenant-Governor 

when sufficient numbers of denturists have become qualified and have received full licences. Only 

holders of full licences will be eligible for membership in their society. On the date that the board of 

directors of the Denturist Society of Saskatchewan assumes the responsibilities of the Transitional 

Governing Council denturists will have reached full self-regulatory status. Even when the society 

becomes fully self-regulatory the Bill empowers the Lieutenant-Governor at his discretion and if he 

considers it to be advisable to appoint one or two persons to be full members of the Society’s Board of 

Directors, in other words there can be public representation on the board of the Denturists Society. 

 

I would like to summarize and emphasize the important safeguards for both denturists and the public 

which have been incorporated in this Bill: (1) The status of denturists will be recognized by law for the 

first time in the Province of Saskatchewan. (2) Licensing will be by examination only. (3) Examinations 

will be conducted fairly and impartially by an independent examining board. (4) A Transitional 

Governing Council will be appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor to administer and implement the Act 

during an interim period before the board of directors of the Denturist Society of Saskatchewan assumes 

its full regulatory responsibilities. (5) Regulations enacted by the Transitional Governing Council or 

later by the board of directors of the Denturist Society of Saskatchewan must be approved by the 

Government before they become law. The Act further provides that the Minister may request that a 

regulation be amended, enacted or repealed and if a satisfactory agreement has not been reached within 

60 days the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council is to be empowered to impose such changes as are 

considered necessary. (6) Denturists who require upgrading training will be provided such training on a 

fair and impartial basis. (7) Denturists who are initially unable to fully meet licensing requirements will 

not immediately be denied the right to practise and will be allowed a fair and reasonable 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1905 

 

period of time in which to obtain full qualification. (8) Appeal procedures from the decisions of the 

Transitional Governing Council and later the board of directors of the Denturist Society of 

Saskatchewan have been provided in this Bill. (9) Denturists will be entitled to appeal disciplinary 

decisions to a special three member tribunal headed by a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are confident the Denturist Bill contains necessary safeguards that will protect public 

interest and the legitimate interests of denturists and dentists. Mr. Speaker, I therefore move that this Bill 

be given second reading and be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and 

Delegated Powers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill I understand is 

to recognize the Denturists Society by law in Saskatchewan and I presume this is the wish of the 

majority of denturists in Saskatchewan. I understand Saskatchewan is one of the last provinces in 

Canada to recognize the denturists as a professional society. I have some concern about Sections 3 and 4 

where it says the directors and officers holding office at the time of coming into force of this section 

shall continue in office until the successors are elected or appointed in accordance with this Act. Section 

5 says, that there shall hereby he established a Transitional Governing Council which shall consist of not 

more than seven members. Section 5(2) says, “The Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council shall appoint the 

member . . .” On the one hand the Bill recognizes the ability of the current officers to conduct the 

business of the society but on the other hand it says that’s fine, but we’ll do it for you. 

 

Another area of concern. Section 10(2) reads: 

 

Every person who makes an application for registration as a denturist who is of good character and 

has fulfilled the qualifications required by the Governing Council may register as a denturist. 

 

The permissive ‘may’ is what concerns me. It seems that a person who makes the application is of good 

character and who has fulfilled all the qualifications required by the Governing Council should be 

registered as a denturist, I just don’t understand the permissive ‘may’. I notice this same clause, by way 

of amendment, is going into The Medical Professions Act, and I just don’t quite understand why it is 

there. 

 

Section 22 says in part: 

 

When the Minister is of the opinion that a sufficient number of denturists have become registered 

and licensed under this Act . . . 

 

the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may transfer the powers to a board. 

 

Section 20 says: 

 

The Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may, on and after the day fixed by him pursuant to subsection 

(1) of Section 22, 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1906 

 

appoint one or more persons as members of the board . . . 

 

This I think is a mixed blessing. I recognize that perhaps members outside the professional society 

should be represented on the board but I don’t see appointments by the Minister through the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council as being the proper way to get these lay members on the board. It is an 

awful lot like the ophthalmic Bill going through at the moment. It would appear that we have another 

instance of the Government saying, yes, we think we should recognize your association but we think that 

we, the big brothers, should determine how it shall be set up, organized and constituted and that we may 

amend the legislation next session. It is just taking, in my opinion, all too much power unto the Cabinet. 

 

This is typical legislation of this socialist philosophy that we are going to run your business until such 

time as in our opinion you are capable of running your own and when we do turn it over to you we 

reserve the right to appoint one or two of our friends to your council to keep us well informed as to the 

opinions, philosophies and the thinking of your membership. This type of legislation is now becoming 

the accepted practice of this Government. ‘We will let you know where you are, what you are, who you 

are, why you are, when we think you are ready to know, when we think you are capable of running your 

own business. After all, we in the Government and in the Cabinet in particular are denturist specialists 

and we know what is best for denturists in Saskatchewan.’ 

 

I favor the principle of the Bill, recognizing denturists in Saskatchewan, however, I have trouble 

accepting the powers that the Government retains unto itself in this Bill. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, our health critic is away this 

afternoon unavoidably. I am sure he will have even more penetrating remarks to make than the Member 

for Cannington and accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. ROBBINS (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The 

Public Health Act. 

 

He said: This Bill to amend The Public Health Act deals with three different and particular issues. The 

Act now provides for the appointment of a board of governors to operate a hospital owned by the 

province. The two boards appointed under this authority in the past have been the board for the Souris 

Valley Extended Care Hospital at Weyburn and the board of the Regina General Hospital in Regina. The 

Act presently authorized these boards to operate, control and manage hospitals assigned to them. 

 

The first amendment to The Public Health Act will confer on these hospitals’ boards the same powers 

that are now possessed by the University Hospital Board in Saskatoon and the Board of Governors of 

the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre which deals with three hospitals in Regina. These additional 

powers will authorize these boards to construct, renovate and remodel hospitals. These additional 

powers are intended to give more flexibility to the manner in which the Regina hospitals’ 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1907 

 

regeneration plan will be carried out. Members will recall that the Government has embarked on a 

program in relationship to hospital regeneration in Regina at a cost of some $66 million over the next ten 

years. 

 

This amendment will permit the Board of Governors of the Regina General Hospital to become 

contractually involved in various aspects of the regeneration plan. 

 

The second amendment is related to the fiscal year of these boards. In accordance with other Bills which 

have been passed by this House in this Session, the fiscal year for hospitals owned by the Government 

will be changed from the calendar year to the annual period fixed by the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. This again relates to the fiscal period of government, April 1 to March 

31, and has been standardized across the country. In effect this amendment will change the fiscal year 

for the Regina General Hospital and the Souris Valley Extended Care Hospital from the calendar year to 

the period from April 1 in one year to March 31 in the next. This amendment will bring the fiscal year of 

hospitals in line with the fiscal year of the Provincial Government and should facilitate budgeting and 

accounting to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The third amendment pertains to the consent required for medical or dental services where the patient by 

reason of physical or mental disability is not capable of making such a decision for herself or himself. In 

the past the legal validity of consent given by relatives in these cases was not entirely clear but was 

accepted in practice. However, when no known relative existed the law did not authorize any other 

person to give consent. The only exception was that where emergency services were required no consent 

was required. 

 

In putting forth this amendment, Mr. Speaker, the Government wishes to clarify the various legal 

responsibilities in such cases and to remove some of the apprehension felt by those involved. The 

proposed changes can probably best be explained by example. Let us say that an individual is referred to 

an extended care hospital for possible admission. Let us say further that the condition which prompted 

the referral has resulted in some mental incapacity such as the individual does not have the capacity to 

either give or withhold consent for medical treatment. The amendment before the Assembly would 

permit legal authority for the admission. If a relative was known to exist it would be that person’s 

responsibility to give or withhold consent. If no relatives existed or if none could be located admission 

would be allowed on the advice of the attending physician and written concurrence of another physician. 

In the case of dental services, the same example would apply except that a dentist may authorize the 

provision of dental services with the written concurrence of another dentist. 

 

There is one further aspect of this question to be noted. It is possible that in some instances the nearest 

relative to the incompetent individual may not wish to accept responsibility for authorizing medical or 

dental service to the individual. In these circumstances the nearest relative may disclaim any 

responsibility for the patient if he so chooses. In these instances the medical or dental consent could be 

obtained by the two physicians or the two dentists mentioned earlier in these remarks. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1908 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will provide the flexibility that is necessary if medical and dental services 

are to be provided in such circumstances without undue apprehension for nearest relatives, physicians or 

dentists. These improvements will be welcomed by the relatives of those concerned and by those 

charged with the responsibility of services in question. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with all the main points of the Bill and I would therefore move second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview). 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Continuing Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 77 — An 

Act to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Bill are fairly routine and my remarks will be brief. These 

reflect an updating in the Act brought about by the establishment of the Department of Continuing 

Education, a separation of a single university into two distinct university institutions. Section 2 of the 

Bill corrects the designation of committee members on the Scholarship, Bursary and Loan Committee 

resulting from the creation of the two universities and of the organization of the Department of 

Continuing Education. The two universities are now represented as also is the director of student 

services in place of the director of administrative services and the assistant to the Minister. 

 

Section 3 of the Bill corrects the wording by replacing education by continuing education. Section 4 of 

the Bill provides for investments of a broader nature than are currently permitted as governed by The 

Department of Finance Act. Certain investments have been made which the Provincial Auditor considers 

are not covered by the present Act but which conform to the Department of Finance Act which covers 

most other government investment. 

 

Section 5 of the Bill arises from discrepancies between the fiscal years of government and universities. 

Because of difficulties in defining fiscal years it is proposed to delete this and cause the legislation to 

conform to current usage. 

 

Section 6 of the Bill provides legislative authority for regulations to be made by the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council which cover the qualification of students to whom awards may be 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 77 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might make a few remarks. I 

agree with the Minister, at least from my reading, this is basically a housekeeping kind of Bill. 

 

The section which the Minister just mentioned, Section 6, with regard to qualifications required by 

students to whom awards may be made is an intent of the Bill that I would have hoped might have been 

clarified a little differently in line 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1909 

 

with the debate a week or so ago in Estimates, about qualifications of students in Saskatchewan who are 

applying for loans as distinct from students who are applying for loans with money, that is basically 

federal money and is handled by the province. 

 

Aside from that particular point, however, the change in the people who are on the selection committee 

and the change to bring the fiscal year into line, would appear to be appropriate and I have no other 

comments to make. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, our education critic is unavoidably 

absent this afternoon. I know that he did have some comment to make on this Bill and I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. ROBBINS (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 80 — An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act deals with two 

particular issues. 

 

My remarks in regard to it will be quite brief. The first relates to the type of services which qualify as 

benefits under the provisions of the Act. Under those provisions, as it now reads, only hospital related 

services qualify as benefits for which payments can be made. The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

is organized to make grants to institutions only on that basis. 

 

The amendment that is being presented will broaden the range of services which can be funded by the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, beyond those provided solely in or by a hospital. 

 

Further the amendment provides for payments to be made to individuals for services which they provide 

pursuant to an agreement with the Department of Health. 

 

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that in addition to paying for hospital based services, we will have the 

administrative machinery in place to allow us to pay for services that may be provided outside of the 

hospital environment. This amendment will provide the Department of Health with more administrative 

flexibility to cope with an ever increasing need for community type programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second amendment relates to the financial reporting period for Saskatchewan hospitals 

and has been referred to in other bills before the House this Session. At the present time the financial 

year for all hospitals is based on the calendar year January 1 to December 31. 

 

This amendment proposes the period be changed to begin on April 1 of one year and to end on March 31 

of the following year. It also proposes that the reporting period for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan be changed to a similar status. Obviously considerable administrative difficulty and expense will be 

eliminated by having the reporting period for hospitals and the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

consistent 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1910 

 

with the fiscal cycle upon which the Government of Saskatchewan operates. This change will require 

transitional periods from January 1 of one year until March 31 of the next. I would suggest to this House 

that such a change can be easily made by Order in Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the amendments to this Bill can only improve the outstanding record of 

this Government in the health care field. 

 

I, therefore, move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of brief comments. The amendment relates to other 

services and I have no quarrel with that. The amendment as it relates to fiscal year — fiscal year means 

a period fixed from time to time by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council and I do quarrel with that. I 

think that if the calendar year isn’t convenient as it relates to coinciding with the government year and if 

April 1 to March 31 is more convenient that that could be legislated and be more acceptable to my 

thinking, at least. The way that it is left here a government of some questionable repute could possibly 

do a little juggling every year by changing the fiscal year back and forth. I am not suggesting that any 

government would do that, but the power exists under this amendment and I have a problem living with 

that as it is laid out. I don’t think there is any problem in bringing forth legislation stipulating what the 

fiscal year should be. 

 

I will have a little more to say on this later so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Telecommunications) moved second 

reading of Bill No. 85 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 85 was prompted by the decision to build a new head office building for 

Sask Tel as part of the larger complex in downtown Regina which involves both Sask Tel and SGIO and 

also providing space and facilities for a number of additional enterprises all of which will hopefully help 

to rejuvenate the downtown area of Regina. It was recognized that some organization had to spearhead 

the overall planning of this project. Sask Tel has the largest needs and, therefore, is the logical choice to 

assume this responsibility. 

 

This kind of participation in urban development projects is not uncommon for telephone companies and 

other enterprises across Canada. The Regina downtown project is large enough that it may not be 

incidental to Sask Tel’s powers to construct and operate a telecommunications system. Consequently the 

purpose of this amendment is to provide assurance to Sask Tel that it has the necessary legislative 

sanction to proceed to construct, manage, lease and dispose of as it appears necessary a large complex to 

accommodate other enterprises as well as the normal operations of Sask Tel. 

 

In a nutshell, then, this legislation will enable Sask Tel to incorporate its own needs into a larger plant, 

which is designed to serve both the interests of the people of Regina and the people of this province. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1911 

 

While the need for retroactivity may be questionable, Sask Tel has been involved in planning the project 

since last September and I believe that the retroactive provision is necessary to assure Sask Tel and 

others involved in this project that there is no question about the authority of the Crown Corporation 

Sask Tel since that date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other amendment increases from $10,000 to $100,000 the value of land sales or 

purchases that do not require approval of the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 85. 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments in regard to this Bill. I imagine 

that we are going to be supporting this particular piece of legislation. The only things that I question is 

that I understand that the particular Bill will provide the authority that Sask Tel needs to construct a new 

head office. 

 

The question I ask is: why is it absolutely necessary that that head office, once again, be located in the 

city of Regina? It seems as if Mayor Henry Baker again is getting all the benefits of the balance of the 

people of the Province of Saskatchewan in terms of locating head offices such as Sask Power, Sask Tel, 

SGIO, etc. We have talked about a government that is trying to diversify its operations and become 

more available to the people of Saskatchewan and yet every major Crown corporation, which is located 

in the Province of Saskatchewan, does have its head office right here in the city of Regina. 

 

I could see nothing wrong with Sask Tel locating its head office, for example, in the city of Swift 

Current allowing people in the southwest part of the province to be able to say, we have a head office 

located in our particular section as well. 

 

One of the Members at the back says that he may lose 1,000 constituents, possibly the Member for 

Morse may then gain 500 and the Member for Swift Current gain 500 in the city of Swift Current and 

the constituency of Morse. 

 

I think it is something that we should certainly be looking very closely at. Instead of locating these head 

offices in the city of Regina, take a closer look at locating them in some of our smaller centres. I should 

like to rule out the city of Saskatoon, as well, Saskatoon and Regina are two of our major cities in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I believe that more attention should be placed in areas such as Swift Current, 

Estevan, North Battleford and so on. I understand that the possibility of changing Sask Tel’s head office 

is too far down the road, as commitments have been made, as the Minister has said, the Bill is 

retroactive to last year. 

 

Again, let me just reiterate my claim stating that I would hope that in the future that new head office 

buildings for Crown corporations be located in centres other than in the city of Regina and that the city 

of Swift Current and the southwest part of the province be looked upon with a little more favor. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to beg leave to adjourn debate because I should like to 

consider the statement made by the Minister. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

April 11, 1977. 

 

1912 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE — Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Auctioneers 

 

Section 1, 2, 3 agreed. 

Section 4 as amended agreed. 

Sections 5, 6, 7 agreed. 

 

SECTION 8 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Chairman, we have no objection to this Bill as stated 

previously. I have checked with the Saskatchewan Auctioneers’ Association and they have agreed that 

the licensing as well as the regulations are in agreement with them and we will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Section 8 and 9 agreed. 

 

SECTION 10 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Chairman, I have a brief question about Section 10 and 

that is simply, if the Minister has any intention of making files available to those individuals for whom a 

file may be kept. We ran into the problem in Crown Corporations the other day where SGIO does some 

investigative work of individuals whom they might be going to insure and will refuse them and will 

refuse to give them reasons why they have been refused. They also refused to allow them to peruse the 

files that SGIO may hold on them, so that if for some reason an individual is refused insurance for 

reasons that the investigators may have picked up he is given no chance to clear himself if that 

information should be incorrect. I just noticed that there is a potential in this Bill to have the same 

situation exist in Saskatchewan, and that is, that a person may apply to be an auctioneer and for 

whatever reason be refused. I would like to know if the Minister has any intention of making those files 

available to the individual on whom they are kept for their perusal? As most of you know, in The Credit 

Act it is compulsory that a bank, for example, or chartered financial institution make available to those 

individuals a copy of their file so that if there is any erroneous information contained in it that they may 

be given a chance to clear themselves. I wonder if that is going to be the situation here? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I think, Mr. Chairman, they are two 

entirely different sets of circumstances and if the Hon. Member will look at 14 carefully and 15, it sets 

out the procedure for a hearing and if the person who has been suspended or refused a licence, is not 

satisfied with the hearing he can appeal to a Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Section 10 agreed. 

 

Sections 11 to 20 agreed. 

 

SECTION 21 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, I should like the Minister to make some 

clarification with regard to this section. I would like to know if the auctioneer would be, in fact, held 

liable for  

 



 

Committee of the Whole  April 11, 1977. 

 

1913 

 

goods that he had auctioned if there was a lien against them or anything of this nature. 

 

MR. WHELAN: — The auctioneer would not be liable unless he was fully aware of what he was doing 

and that there was such a lien in existence. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Would he be held liable and not the person who submitted the goods for auction, 

or would it be shared or which? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — If he knew, he would be liable but if he didn’t he would not. The person who gave 

him the goods to sell would be wholly liable, if the auctioneer was unaware of the lien. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — In other words if the individual were to have some merchandise and have a lien 

against it or maybe had acquired it through illegal ways, he could put it in an auction and if the 

auctioneer knew and it was auctioned, it would be hung on the auctioneer and not the individual? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — In any event the creditor would be liable, but if the auctioneer knew he would also 

be liable. 

 

Section 21 agreed to. 

 

Sections 22 and 23 agreed. 

Section 24 as amended agreed. 

Sections 25 to 29 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Chairman, before we begin our next Bill I wonder if I might engage 

the indulgence of the House to introduce to you and to the Members of this House, Mr. Gilbert Parent, 

the Member of Parliament for St. Catharines, Ontario. Mr. Parent as well is accompanied here today by 

his wife and sister who are located in the west gallery. As a point of interest I would like to point out 

that Mr. Parent, besides being a Member of Parliament for St. Catharines, Ontario, also bears the 

distinction of being the seatmate of Dr. Cliff McIsaac a Member of Parliament for Saskatchewan and 

former Member in this Chamber. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Committee of the Whole continued 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Highways Act 

 

SECTION 1 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — The intent of the Act, as I understand it, Mr. Minister, is that 

instead of just seizing the trucks you can now seize chattels and goods under this Act. Mr. Chairman and 

Mr. Minister, would you tell me are there any limitations as to the upper end limit you could go on in 

finding this? 



 

April 11, 1977.  Committee of the Whole 

 

1914 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Yes, the limitation would be the amount of the fine 

and far more helpful, both to the judge or the magistrate and certainly to the trucker, because the whole 

intent is that we should not be tying up his means of livelihood. It will be easier, for instance, to take his 

television and allow him to continue to operate so that he is not losing his means of earning a living. 

 

Section 1 agreed. 

 

SECTION 2 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Minister the last portion thereof, explain if you would please, 

“. . . no provision of the Criminal Code for enforcing an order for payment of a sum of money shall 

apply.” Could you explain that last portion of the sentence of Section 2(1B)? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The legal staff has inserted that and they tell us that this is necessary in order to 

remain within the letter of the law and it is standard procedure. I rely on the legal people in the House as 

to whether that is factual. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — It seems though that the province is excluding the application of the 

Criminal Code under this particular provision, which the province does not have the power to do. We 

are referring to clause (1B) in the printed Bill, “. . . and no provision of the Criminal Code for enforcing 

an order for payment of a sum of money shall apply.” Well that could be a lot stronger than the Minister 

has indicated, that you are really voiding perhaps a court order and under the Criminal Code of Canada 

the province does not have the power to do that. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — All I can say to the Member for Qu’Appelle is, that is not the advice that we have. 

The intention of the changes, are simply to make procedure a little easier on truckers and to make it less 

difficult for collections. The only thing that a magistrate can do at present, and we have had difficulty 

with this, is to seize at the time of imposing the fine, which, under the old Act, would be the vehicle. 

Magistrates don’t want to do that and we don’t want to do that, we don’t want to take the trucker’s 

livelihood away. There is another factor in here and that is trucking companies. A company cannot be 

sent to jail and we have had instances where the truck driver for the company was charged rather than 

the company; this will prevent this kind of thing from happening. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman, we are sympathetic to what you are trying to 

accomplish. What we are saying is that you may well be having more problems trying to exclude the 

operation of the Criminal Code which the province does not have the power to do than what you are 

trying to solve. My suggestion would be that this particular item be stood and go back for a legal 

opinion, because we think it is wrong. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — In this case, I would pass to the Attorney General 



 

Committee of the Whole  April 11, 1977. 

 

1915 

 

who is more conversant with what we can and cannot do. I am afraid that I cannot pass an opinion on 

that. My advice was that this was necessary in order to do what we intended to in this Act. If you want it 

to stand or if someone else has an explanation they can possibly help the Member. 

 

Section 2 as amended agreed. 

 

SECTION 3 

 

MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman just one quick question to the Minister again to explain in a little more 

detail the intention here. I am a little bit concerned about tired long distance drivers, the long distance 

hauler that he may not have a proper facility or proper position on the highway to park his vehicle for 

rest. Could you explain what the intention is regarding these zones? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The intention is entirely one of safety. Anyone knows that the parking of a vehicle 

on the shoulder of the road presents a hazard unless it is properly lit and even then it presents a hazard. 

There is also a danger in areas where we have a very light surface on the shoulders. A heavily loaded 

truck parked for any length of time causes a depression followed by break-up and we just can’t afford to 

have this happen. You are right, we are concerned about the tired driver. I can assure the House that 

there are areas that are safe to pull off onto and where they do not exist we will certainly see to it that 

there are adequate spots in the road to allow a trucker to take the necessary rest. I don’t suppose that is 

going to take care of every particular instance. The main thrust of this is for an area like our No. 1 

by-pass at Regina. When they went across the highway and started construction there, anyone who 

drove by there last summer especially when it was muddy found lines of cars on Trans Canada, both 

sides, cars and trucks parked for the day which presented a real hazard and we had no authority to do 

anything about it at that time. 

 

The main thrust of the amendment is to see that in congested areas where there is a high volume of 

traffic, that we have the authority to do something about it for the sake of safety. We are not intending to 

harass every tired driver. I think the law has to have some sense, and I am sure that the law enforcement 

officers have that commonsense. We do require this authority in areas like I have mentioned where there 

is congestion and where there is a danger that there will be an accident because of bad visibility and 

crowded conditions. 

 

MR. ANDERSON: — I should like to ask the Minister, in this section, it does not differentiate between 

stopping and parking if you run out of gas, your vehicle stops and you are posted you are going to be in 

quite a bit of difficulty in differentiating between your parking and your stopping. If you stop to relieve 

yourself are you going to be parking or stopping? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I don’t wonder the Member is concerned about relieving himself. Some folks’ need 

is greater than others. It is the letter of the law, not the spirit, if you are going to take the absolute letter 

of the law, it would make an ass out of the law entirely. That is not the intention I can assure the 

Member. 

 

Section 3 agreed. 

 

Section 4 deleted. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 



 

April 11, 1977.  Committee of the Whole 

 

1916 

 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act, 1974 

 

Sections 1 and 2 previously agreed. 

 

SECTION 3 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, would the Minister be kind enough just 

to explain what the intent of this particular section is? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — This particular section, Mr. Chairman, proposed 

amendment, is that we provide an opportunity to the residents of Saskatchewan to invest a portion of 

their savings in shares of an undertaking involving a minimum of investment risk to such shareholders 

and others. And there was some discussion the other day when we were on this particular part of the 

Bill. The description of residents of Saskatchewan is too restrictive even to persons domiciled in 

Saskatchewan but residing elsewhere and that is on a temporary basis, of course, but did not come 

within the previous definition. I want to point out to the Members of the House that we have 24 

investors who have made investments in the Saskatchewan Development Fund, but currently are 

resident outside of the province, and want to continue to make investments in the Saskatchewan 

Development Fund. 

 

For example, there are people who have RRSPs who are no longer residents of Saskatchewan, but wish 

to continue to make contributions to the Registered Retirement Savings Plans operated by the 

Saskatchewan Development Fund, on the basis of the fact that our earnings are very high. Last year they 

were 14.58 per cent on a net basis. We have people who have Registered Home Owner Plans, and that is 

a once-in-a-lifetime deal, and they wish to continue those. We don’t think it is rational or reasonable to 

cut them off. Perhaps you have some further questions on it, that’s all I can say at the moment. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yes I do, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, is it a fair statement to say that The 

Saskatchewan Development Act is, in effect, really a subsidized investment? Would you agree with that 

description? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, I would not, Mr. Chairman. The fact of the matter is there was equity provided 

by the Government of Saskatchewan on a temporary basis, and those advances will be eventually paid 

off. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Loans? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There are loans and equity as well. Both. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — How much interest is being charged? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There is no interest on the equity — there is interest on the loan being paid. But, 

they will all be paid off in time. The fund itself will generate sufficient management fees through the 

fund of the Corporation to pay off those loans. 



 

Committee of the Whole  April 11, 1977. 

 

1917 

 

That is not an uncommon practice, even in private business. When people make investments in equity, 

they don’t expect an interest return. When a new business starts up they put in equity and they don’t 

expect any return, perhaps, for some period of time. We said in the initial stages of the Saskatchewan 

Development Fund that within five years that equity would be paid off. We have every reason to believe 

that will occur. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, perhaps you could tell us, then, you have had advances from the 

Government, which you have put into an equity position. You have indicated that you are not paying 

interest on it, and I respectfully question your assertion that this is a common practice in private 

companies. I am not saying that it never occurs, but I would have to respectfully suggest to you that it is 

rather rare. Now, if you are loaning them money interest-free, any way you cut it, it has got to end up as 

some sort of a subsidy and it does not matter whether it is private or public, because it is still somebody 

subsidizing you in interest rate. 

 

But you mentioned the repayment. And you indicated repayment over five years. Could you tell me the 

dollars that have been advanced to you in the past? What, roughly, has been your repayment schedule? 

How far have you gone in repaying it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We obviously, did not expect to be making any repayments in the initial stages. 

The fund has been operating for two and one-half years. At the end of its first year of operation, it had 

roughly $1.5 million of investment in it. In the initial stages, of course, the equity advanced by the 

Department of Finance had to be available to get the organization started. The same as if you and I 

invested in a private company in terms of equities we would put in money and we would not expect any 

return in the initial stages. That is no different than what happened in the particular situation with regard 

to this. The fund is operated by the Corporation on the basis that as the money flows into investment, the 

management fees will eventually repay that equity. None of it has been repaid to date. That is a fact. But 

we have had loans, and repaid the loans. Obviously the loans are borrowed at the going short-term rate 

— in terms of short-term money. The last one was at 8.68 per cent. That loan was paid off on March 22, 

1977; after the end of the fiscal year. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, could you tell us, in the investments that this fund is making are 

they all being made in Saskatchewan, or are they being made elsewhere? And, could you give us some 

indication of approximately what percentage of these investments are made outside the province, if in 

fact there are any? 

 

MR. ROBBINS — Obviously, the Member was not here when I answered that question for the Member 

for Regina South, the other day. About 40 per cent, at the present time, but . . . 

 

MR. PENNER: — Shame! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, yell shame all you like, but you also have to 



 

April 11, 1977.  Committee of the Whole 

 

1918 

 

realize that we are in the process of picking up mortgages in the province, and that is a rather slow 

process in terms of making all the arrangements, and there is a sizeable chunk of money that will be 

available to the Saskatchewan Development Fund through mortgages as they come available. That will 

increase, the percentage that will be utilized on that basis. I suppose you could use other arguments with 

respect to where that money is invested. A lot of it is in short-term funds on a temporary basis. That is 

common in terms of investment of funds. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, perhaps you could tell me, why when 40 per cent of your 

investments are being made outside the province, as far as I can see to the non-benefit of Saskatchewan 

people, what is the point of the fund in the first place? Why did you feel that you had to go outside the 

province for 40 per cent of your investments? Is it fair to suggest that perhaps you indicated that 

Saskatchewan was a lousy place to make an investment? Would this have anything to do with it? If this 

is what your intention is to continue investing outside the province, why have the fund? There has got to 

be something better than this thing. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan has been a lousy place to make investments in the 

past. We had a Liberal Government for seven years, but it is improving ever since that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I know the Member for Regina South the other day was putting up the argument 

that we should not have gone into this because there are mutual funds available. But, I can tell you that 

mutual fund results for the people in this province have been lousy down through the years. I can cite 

you many examples of individuals who have placed sizeable sums of money in mutual funds, with very 

poor results through the ‘60s and ‘70s. I would contend, on that basis, that there was some merit in 

setting up a mutual fund with some government backing, with the intent of attempting to keep more 

investment funds in the Province of Saskatchewan. I would not suggest, for one minute, that it has been 

highly successful to date, but I would say it is on the road to success. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister how he squares the fact that he 

invests 40 per cent of the fund, outside Saskatchewan, with this provision of the Act that was passed in 

1974? Bear in mind, this provision is mandatory. It is a mandatory provision of this Act. It says the 

Corporation shall establish a fund to be known as the Saskatchewan Development Fund. The fund shall 

be used to provide a source of capital to assist in the retention of the control of the Saskatchewan 

economy by residents of the province. 

 

Now, I wonder, in view of the words — the fund shall be used for that purpose — how then the Minister 

can justify investing 40 per cent of the funds outside the province? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are in the process of moving in that direction. Obviously a new fund when 

money flows in, it has to be invested, 



 

Committee of the Whole  April 11, 1977. 

 

1919 

 

and has to be invested in the opportunities that are available at that particular time. That is why I stressed 

the fact that a large portion of the fund was invested in short-term certificates, on a temporary basis, and 

they roll over very rapidly. As we get mortgages in the province, and we are getting an increasing 

number of mortgages in the province, a larger percentage of the total sum of money will be invested in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Chairman, would the Minister not agree that the 

most significant form of subsidization is the fact that the Government guarantees that anyone who goes 

into this investment, will receive his investment plus five per cent. The result, Mr. Chairman, is that 

somebody who invested in this program in December 1975, a year later had 14.5 per cent, I forget the 

exact number, increase in this equity. Indeed he had an even greater increase than that because that is 

taking into account the four per cent that was deducted as an acquisition cost. So, in fact, the fund did 

about 19 per cent during that period of time. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that says that the fund was either well run, or it says that the fund fell upon pretty 

prosperous times. In fact, the fund fell upon good times. Mutual funds, all these sorts of investments, did 

very well during that calendar year. I am not saying it is badly run. It may well be well run. But those 

kinds of funds can have a similar reversal, and we the people of Saskatchewan, are guaranteeing that if 

there is a reversal — if somebody buys today and during the next year there is a reversal — they get 

their money back and they get five per cent in addition. Now they would have to hold it, I think, for two 

years, in order to get their money and the five per cent, but that is a very significant subsidization. It 

could be a massive subsidization by the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Now what kind of people are we subsidizing after this amendment is passed, because this amendment 

extends the group that we are going to subsidize? Not only, are we now subsidizing those who have the 

money to invest — I’ve got money in this fund, my mother has money in this fund. You know I told her 

three days ago that if this Government is defeated, the first thing we will do is sell our investment in this 

fund, because the first thing that a government would do which is trying to protect the taxpayer is take 

off the guarantee, and that is the only reason that anyone would buy this kind of investment, is because 

of the government guarantee. You are guaranteeing to me, and to my mother, and to others who have a 

few thousand dollars to invest, who have that spare cash floating around, you are giving a guarantee that 

we will get back our money, plus five per cent. And, that could be a very, very significant cost at some 

point down the road. The Members opposite do not know the direction in which the bond market will 

move, for instance. Why did it have this 19 per cent improvement? Because they bought bonds when 

interest rates were higher, now interest rates have gone down. And the result is, that as with all corporate 

bonds, this investment has improved in value. But during the year inflation might take off and this fund 

could go down, and the taxpayers would be stuck. 



 

April 11, 1977.  Committee of the Whole 

 

1920 

 

This amendment, Mr. Chairman, goes even further. At least we could say we were subsidizing the fat 

cats of the province. At least we could say that five per cent was going to be subsidization and protection 

for people like the Minister introducing the Bill and the Hon. Minister behind him, who have a few tens 

of thousands available to make these kinds of investments. At least, we could say that. Now this 

amendment will allow people from all over the country to cash in on the guarantee of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. And that is what it means when the words “and others” are added after “Saskatchewan.” 

It means that anybody with $10,000 or $15,000 to invest can call upon the guarantee of the people of 

Saskatchewan that they will get their money back, plus five per cent. They have all of the up-side, they 

have all of the potential increase that flows from buying an investment that may well appreciate (as bond 

circumstances change) may well appreciate depending upon the vagaries of the market. And for the 

down-side, they have got not only the guarantee of the return of their money which they receive in no 

other mutual fund and no similar investment, but they also have a five per cent guarantee. And, then 

what do the taxpayers get for that? Well, amongst other things, they get almost half of the money 

invested outside of the province. 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, people ask us in the Liberal Party, from time to time, well, what kind of a 

Crown corporation might you abolish? What kind of government employees do you think we do not 

need in this province? I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, this is the kind of program that we do not need. We 

do not need government subsidizing people with money to invest, to employ public servants, who I 

suspect, Mr. Chairman, probably do not do as good a job of handling financial matters as the people in 

the private sector who have experience in the industry, who have come up in the industry. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in fairness, and I would like from time to time to ask the gentleman sitting beside the 

Minister as this Bill goes through, but what experience does he have in the money markets? None at all. 

It is an on-the-job training program for the Chairman of the Board. Probably an on-the-job training 

program because he earned his position by losing so dismally to my colleague, the Member for 

Lakeview in a by-election. Now should Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money be used to subsidize that kind 

of program, and to employ people in this province in the employ of the public service? Mr. Chairman, I 

suggest that they certainly should not, and that this amendment which will now extend that protection, 

make it possible for people with money all across Canada, to cash in really on the guarantee of the 

taxpayers of this province. Mr. Chairman, I suggest that that kind of an amendment is a wholly wrong 

amendment. The concept is a bad concept and the amendment almost makes things worse. At least 

before there was an amendment, we knew that we were helping the fat cats of the province and not 

helping the fat cats of the whole country. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I suggest that this is an amendment that should not be passed, and this is a Bill that 

should the Liberals be in power, this organization would forthwith be abolished. We do not believe, I 

say to the Hon. Member for Saskatoon, we do not believe that the taxpayers’ dollars should be used to 

subsidize people like me, who have a couple of thousand dollars to invest. And, I suggest to the Hon. 

Member that he examine the operation of this Bill in depth, instead of just sitting blindly in caucus 

meetings and listening to the Cabinet. If you examined the operation of that kind of a Bill, the Hon. 

Member 



 

Committee of the Whole  April 11, 1977. 

 

1921 

 

and most of the Members on the other side of the House, would realize that this kind of legislation is 

exactly contrary to what that party usually believes in. I find it offensive, and I am sure that the people 

who support your Government would find it very offensive if they only had the message specifically in 

their minds, of the way this Bill operates and of the way this amendment will operate. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am sure that I may have further comments to make and I call it 5:00 o’clock. 

 

Progress was reported and Committee given leave to sit again. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 o’clock p.m. 


