



















































Hansard: December 05, 1977


615 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 5, 1977 

 

EVENING SESSION 

 

Debate on Bill No. 47 Continued 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back to the oil industry a half a billion dollars and one of the major reasons 

that they can’t afford to pay it back is the mismanagement and the squandering of opposite moneys by the 

government. Mr. Speaker, I always speak with authority, always with authority so if the members opposite 

believe I am speaking with authority in this manner and with some degree of expertise, I thank them for their 

confidence. member one need only examine SEDCO for millions and millions of squandered dollars, lost 

jobs, lost opportunities for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, lost reasons for private sector 

investment to occur in the province. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back $500 

million to anyone because the government opposite wanted to invest $11 million into Continental packers 

and then add more to that in the last little while as explained by the minister responsible for SEDCO, add 

more to that because they’re now in financial difficulty. 

 

First of all, they buy the mines and buy into the mine against the advice of everyone and in so ding they drive 

out other packing plants to the point where Saskatchewan from some 15 or 16 packing plants around the 

province is down to two or three, and those unsuccessful, and those not making a go of it, insist, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of mismanagement, insist that the people of Saskatchewan and the hog producers of 

Saskatchewan without any word from the hog producers must have a hog marketing commission and then, 

Mr. Speaker, watch production in the hog industry diminish from a million hogs a year to 300,000 hogs a 

year and say we have to have this commission and all that income lost to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back to anyone a half billion dollars because the 

government members opposite insist that they have to own oil wells that the companies wanted to get rid of 

and so pawned them off on the members opposite, pawned off producers as they were deteriorating in their 

production, pawned off the gas production they had that was deteriorating in its production, pawned it off on 

the members opposite to the tune of $16 million . . . 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: – No. 1.6. 

 

MR. COLLVER: – . . . $16 million, if I remember correctly in terms of Atlantic Richfield’s particular 

involvement. The government’s purchase from that organization of their production was not quite as good as 

the government thought, was not quite as good as the so-called experts of the government thought. The 

people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back a half billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, because the members 

opposite insist that only through nationalization and control of 50 per cent of the potash industry or more in 

Saskatchewan can they solve the potash problems the had. 

 

Yet in this very bill, Mr. Speaker, they introduce clauses here that they could, through a mineral income tax 

on potash, for example, designed in approximately the same way, 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

616 

 

examine all the books and records of each and every potash mine in Saskatchewan because that’s the right 

that they’ve given themselves with regard to the oil producers. They could have introduced such a bill into 

our province, they could have introduced a bill such as this into the potash industry, Mr. Speaker, that would 

have granted the government, if they deemed it advisable, 100 per cent of the profits of a potash mine in 

Saskatchewan, if they deemed it advisable in terms of setting the rate – and I am not suggesting they should 

– but if they thought that that was what they wanted to get out of the mine, they could have set a tax rate of 

100 per cent of the profit of that mine just as they can set 100 per cent of the profit of an oil well in this act. 

But no, only nationalization, said the Attorney General before, could possibly solve the problems facing the 

Government of Saskatchewan as it related to the potash industry in our province. Yet now faced with a 

Supreme Court decision that went against their former legislation that they were told would be 

unconstitutional in this legislature, that they were advised had serious constitutional difficulties in this 

Legislature, they nevertheless had to bring it in against the advice of the Legislature and members who 

subsequently have proven themselves in terms of the judiciary, members who gave advice with reference to 

the constitutional matter in this Legislature. The government refused that advice, against the advice, Mr. 

Speaker, that they could see the government of Alberta immediately to the West that sat down and worked 

out with the industry a program by which the bulk of the windfall profits could go to the people of Alberta 

and in fact the bulk of the profits have gone to the people of Alberta. In addition, Mr. Speaker, Alberta has 

seen a boom in drilling, a boom in the oil business, a boom in the search for new oil in the province of 

Alberta and continued cutbacks in the province of Saskatchewan year after year. 

 

Well about six or eight months ago the government members suddenly realized that they had destroyed a 

great many lives in Estevan and surrounding community because the oil industry had cut back, suddenly 

realized that the oil industry in the Swift Current area had cut back substantially and a great many lives were 

destroyed, suddenly realized that perhaps the legislation introduced in Bill 42 was not as reasonable as it 

should have been. So they introduced new regulations and new legislation in order to try and encourage the 

industry to come back to Saskatchewan. But having pulled out of the province of Saskatchewan once, having 

pulled out because of the intransigence of members opposite and the refusal by members opposite to 

examine any form of reason and common sense in 1973, the oil industry decided, and I think decided against 

the interest of the people of Saskatchewan and one wishes they hadn’t, to ignore Saskatchewan when it came 

to drilling, to ignore Saskatchewan when it came to new ventures, to ignore Saskatchewan when it came to 

the search for energy so badly needed by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

About six or eight months ago the Premier realized that he must have this revenue, that he had to have this 

tax revenue because the social benefits that the people of Saskatchewan need could not longer be met. We 

were witnessing cutbacks in hospitals, in hospital beds; we were witnessing the very essence if you want of 

the NDP in the province of Saskatchewan, the development of a good health care program and we were 

witnessing a health care program deteriorate before our very eyes. The government decided they had to have 

this revenue fro the private sector and perhaps we should adjust the regulations that were imposed in 1973 

under Bill 42. The people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back a half billion dollars to anyone because 

of increasing bungling by members opposite – increasing, Mr. Chairman, because the government decides 

that they have to advertise Crown corporations in the province of Saskatchewan and spend the people’s 

money to advertise Crown corporation in our province even though those Crown corporations are 

monopolies and the people must 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

617 

 

use them, even though in order to accommodate the increased cost of those corporations the government has 

had to raise the rates for gas, the rates for electricity; they’ve had to raise the rates for power. Even so, with 

increased taxation, the government has to squander its money on advertising to prove to the people that 

Saskatchewan Power is a Crown corporation and that it’s in a family of Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to pay back $500 million because the Government of 

Saskatchewan continues to expand the civil service at an alarming rate to no reasonable end, Mr. Speaker. In 

1948 the Department of Agriculture in Saskatchewan had one civil servant for every 800 farmers 

approximately. Today the Government of Saskatchewan has one civil servant for ever 120 Saskatchewan 

farmers, an increase in growth if you want, per farmer of seven times in those intervening years. The civil 

service continues to grow, the accommodation necessary for the civil service, therefore has to increase, but 

this government doesn’t stop there. It expands the civil service first, then it increases the size of 

accommodation but then, Mr. Speaker, it sends away for a plan for Wascana Centre indicating in its 

judgment, in the Government of Saskatchewan’s judgment, that the civil service is going to grow by eight 

per cent per annum compound, and therefore, what kind of accommodation should we have for the 

Government of Saskatchewan in the long term. And then they build office buildings but they haven’t got 

civil servants to fill them with. So then, Mr. Speaker, they have to fill them with more civil servants which in 

turn adds more cost to the government, which in turn adds a greater burden to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

The people of Saskatchewan can’t afford to repay to anyone $500 million because of the blatant bungling of 

the present government against all rationale. Members opposite insist on raising their own salaries in this 

Legislature. Even though the people of Saskatchewan are in a situation where their costs are squeezed dry 

and their incomes are squeezed by cost, they persist in raising the cost of government, the cost of executive 

assistants. The Minister of Education comes in brand new and immediately adds two highly paid assistants 

to his staff to the tune of $60,000 or $70,000 a year. The people of Saskatchewan can’t afford that kind of 

planning./ 

 

MR. SPEAKER: – Order. I have been attempting to follow the hon. member and his remarks to the 

principle of Bill 47, an Act to provide for the Taxation of Income from Oil Wells. And although I realize 

members should be free to bring in all arguments which are directly related to the principle of this bill, I find 

it difficult to realize in my mind how salaries of MLAs, public servants, Crown corporations or the duties of 

the Education Minister pertain to the principle of this bill. Now it’s true members may cast a very wide net in 

bringing forward evidence to support their case but I would ask the member if he could stay a little closer to 

the principle of the bill. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate 

your advice. I might perhaps suggest to you that it was the Attorney General himself this afternoon who said 

that the principle oft his bill is whether or not the people of Saskatchewan should have to foot the bill to the 

oil companies to the tune of $500 million. What I’m trying to show is that the people of Saskatchewan 

cannot afford to foot the bill for $500 million because of the squandering of the members opposite and the 

squandering of the government and the squandering of the Cabinet in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel that Bill 47 was specifically designed months and months ago to get the NDP who 

designed Bill 42, off the hook. No one knows whether Bill 47 will accomplish this end. Time alone will tell 

that. No one knows whether it will be attacked. 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

618 

 

Even if the Attorney General and the Premier make deals with all of the oil industry, no one knows whether 

or not one oil company or two will attack the bill as being unconstitutional and it merely delays the 

inevitable for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, delays if it is the inevitable reckoning in terms of 

repaying the money that this government should have obtained but did not do so because of their bungling. 

We believe that this bill, as it’s drawn, could set a precedent for retroactive income taxes and could set a 

precedent that could materially affect every farmer, every laborer, every small business man, as a matter of 

fact, every tax payer in the province of Saskatchewan. If that precedent is allowed to take hold, if that 

precedent is used in the future, we believe that the people of Saskatchewan, having paid what they felt were 

their legitimate taxes, as designed by the Government of Saskatchewan, we believe that this particular bill, 

designed admittedly for a particular purpose to save the people of Saskatchewan from having to repay a half 

a billion dollars to the oil industry. We believe that it could set a precedent and in that regard it is a very 

onerous piece of legislation. If the people cannot believe that the taxation they pay today, as set out 

legitimately by their government, if they cannot believe that that is the final tax bill that they will be getting, 

then somewhere down the road a farmer could be faced with a tax bill through a retroactive act of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, a retroactive income tax act – somewhere down the road a farmer could be 

faced with having to pay more taxes, as a matter of fact confiscatory taxes, if the government decided that it 

wanted to accomplish that end by putting every farmer in Saskatchewan out of business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about that precedent but we believe that that precedent may be minimized 

since this particular act was designed to accomplish a particular thing and that was to correct the original 

bungling of Bill 42 in the light of the Supreme Court decision. As I have said before we believe that the bill 

could be construed to be unconstitutional and no one will know that. It is, as I gather, the government 

opposite’s best attempt to try and correct this unfortunate situation. 

 

We have suggested that perhaps if the federal government were to consider such legislation there would be 

no chance of it being attacked or if any would be very, very minimal. In that way our constitutional advisors 

advise us that if the federal government were to pass this necessary legislation that there would be less 

likelihood in the light of the Supreme Court decision of this matter being declared unconstitutional by the 

courts. It may be attacked and as a result more legal fees, more expansion of legal business of Mr. George 

Daly and others, it does create a few other jobs in the legal area, as the Leader of the Liberal Party suggested. 

It may just be that this bill may just be a stalling tactic by the government opposite. We won’t know whether 

it’s a stalling tactic or not for months if not years because we won’t know if the government is going to be 

attacked on this legislation until in fact they’re attacked and until the court settles it because the government 

has refused to submit the issue under The Constitutional Questions Act even after it’s proclaimed, which is 

what our caucus suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also concerned to a very large extent that this bill is taxation without representation. It 

removes from the Legislature in total all rights pertaining to income taxation for the oil industry. The 

Legislature has under this bill not further rights on taxation and the rates are not spelled out, the regulations 

are not spelled out, and even if they were, clause 39 gives the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the Premier 

the right to adjust the taxes in any way he likes either to nil or to half or to 35 per cent or to 90 per cent or to 

whatever the Premier in his wisdom decides. Clause 39 completely eliminates any position of the Legislature 

vis-a-vis to the income taxation in the oil 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

619 

 

industry. We are not asked, Mr. Speaker, to understand what the rates and regulations are going to be in 

advance of the bill. We are told that maybe the rates and regulations, maybe, will be available to this 

Legislature at some point before third reading, maybe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned about that because in fact, if the Legislature does not have the power of 

taxation, then the people do not have the power of taxation. That battle was fought years and years and years 

ago but it is now being re-introduced by the government opposite. It is now being re-introduced in many 

ways, Mr. Speaker. It’s being re-introduced in the bill that they passed last year which allows them to juggle 

from fund to fund. It’s being re-introduced, Mr. Speaker, in the amounts of excessive borrowing of the 

government members opposite and the right to use those borrows for any purpose whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s being usurped by the government opposite in many, many ways but never quite so blatant as in Bill 47, 

never quite so blatant as clause 39. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned about these issues, as they related to Bill 47 but the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan cannot afford to repay half a billion dollars to the oil industry, nor should they, 

nor, in fact, Mr. Speaker, does anyone to my knowledge in the oil industry expect to get away without paying 

taxes on the resources that belong to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we do not believe that the 

people should have to pay this money back and we have repeated that time and time again and we cannot 

afford to do it. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that we believe that the people of this province must realize that a 

bill like Bill 47 could have been brought in as it related to the potash industry, could have been brought in 

and saved $375 million already of the people of Saskatchewan’s money that has flown the coop from 

Saskatchewan and is being used to invest in New Brunswick and in Texas and all over North America but 

not in the province of Saskatchewan. That this money could have been used to invest here, to create jobs and 

opportunities here, to create new energy resources here and the Government of Saskatchewan could have 

achieved the same profit levels that it wants to if it so desired from a bill like this applied to the potash 

industry, the same as it could have . . . a bill like this applied to the oil industry. 

 

We think it is essential, Mr. Speaker, that the people support this. Mr. Speaker, we intend to support this 

legislation, on second reading because we have already told the people of Saskatchewan that we support the 

principles of this bill. When we told the people of Saskatchewan that we do not believe they should repay the 

$500 million, we supported whatever moves to be taken to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan do not 

have to repay the $500 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we intend to support this bill as I said, because we can’t afford to pay back the money; we 

intend to support this bill because we want to spell out to the people of Saskatchewan, through that support, 

that this legislation could have been applied to the potash industry. However, Mr. Speaker, when I say that 

we intend to support this bill in principle, which in principle says “as spelled out by the Attorney General,” 

in principle he said, this bill (and we are taking him at his word) this bill spells out whether or not the $500 

million should be repaid to the oil industry or not. We say the $500 million should not be repaid to the oil 

industry; we said it from the day the CIGOL decision was handed down and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, we 

intend to support the principle of this bill. Let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, ‘the principle of this bill.’ 

 

Interjections from the floor. 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

620 

 

MR. COLLVER: – In due course, Mr. Speaker, I will go on when there is a little bit . . . when there is order, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak. Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I can stand here as long as they can keep talking from 

their chairs. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: – I want the hon. member to know that I can hear him. 

 

MR. COLLVER: – You perhaps can hear me, Mr. Speaker, but I can also hear them. It’s too bad they won’t 

stand up and say these things on the record; it would be very interesting to see if they could justify their 

comments on the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we intend as I have said, we intend to support this bill in principle and to support the principle 

oft he bill that the people of Saskatchewan should not have to repay the $500 million to the oil industry. We 

intend to bring in amendments, however, that first will exempt small Saskatchewan-owned and based 

producers from this bill, in order to encourage the oil industry in Saskatchewan, in order to encourage 

investment in the small producer sector of this industry in Saskatchewan, we intend to bring in amendments 

that will exempt those small producer companies. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General, the way he was nodding would favor such an amendment. He 

might even bring it in himself, because he has always stood, as the NDP opposite, for small business against 

multinationals. They have always stood for the little guy against the big guy, including Saskoil, the big guy, 

the Government of Saskatchewan, the big guy, and Imperial Oil and Texaco, Seagram, BOV, and Schenley, 

all those other big guys. They’ve been in favor, Mr. Speaker, all the way along, of the little guy, so we are 

going to find out just how much they are in favor of the little guy. We suggest that only in that way will they 

prove to the little guy that in fact they are with him and in fact they will provide the little guy with a chance 

to compete in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, we intend to bring in amendments that will remove from this bill the power of the 

Premier to make deals behind closed doors; that any deals made by the Premier, any deals made by the 

Attorney General, any deals made by the Cabinet, in regard to this bill, must be brought forward. Any deals 

made with the multinationals, Mr. Speaker, those giants for with whom and against whom the NDP has 

stood forever, any deals made must come out and be examined at the time they are made, Mr. Speaker, not a 

year and a half or two years from now after the people of Saskatchewan have gone to the polls and the NDP 

can hide the deals from them and say, “Gee, we didn’t make any deals.” And I suggest to the Attorney 

General and I suggest to the members opposite that a deal made for future consideration in order that people 

not attack present taxes is exactly the same, Mr. Speaker, as a deal made for present taxes because all you’re 

doing is postponing the inevitable down the road so that the people of Saskatchewan pay and pay through the 

nose. Mr. Speaker, we intend to bring in these amendments and we intend to bring them in with a view to 

having them passed in this Legislature. We hope that the Government of Saskatchewan will sincerely 

consider these amendments and make, if you want, or eliminate the onerous provisions oft his bill which are 

specific in nature because the intent and the purpose of the bill is to gain for the people of Saskatchewan 

what the legitimately elected government of the day decided should be the taxation levels of the day. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has the right to the revenue from its resources. We 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

621 

 

agree with that principle and always have. The Government of Saskatchewan has the right to set taxation 

levels as it relates to resources; we agree with that principle and always have. The problem, Mr. Speaker, has 

been the bungling of the present government and the difficulty that the present government has had in 

creating legislation that would in fact gain the maximum benefit from those resources. We believe that had 

they looked at the situation more realistically and more reasonably in 1973, they would not be faced with this 

situation today where, unfortunately, the Attorney General had to make a speech in apology, as I have said 

earlier today, had to make another speech in apology today for the bungling of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to just repeat one more time. We intend to support the principle oft his bill because 

we cannot afford to pay back the money because: (a) the government has squandered and mismanaged the 

people’s money to date; (b) the Government of Saskatchewan is entitled to collect revenues from its 

resources as it see fit; and (c) because when we stated in the beginning that the people should not be required 

to pay back the half a billion dollars we automatically said that we would support whatever reasonable 

means there was to achieve this end. That having been said, we need to bring in amendments to this bill that 

will exempt small Saskatchewan owned and based producers from the provisions of this bill, and second, we 

will remove the power of the Premier or bring in amendments to remove the power of the Premier to make 

deals behind closed doors so that any deals made by the government are up front. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): – I am very pleased to have the opportunity 

tonight to address a few comments to Bill 47 and I’d like to start off, Mr. Speaker, by addressing a few 

remarks in reply to some of the more spurious allegations made by the Attorney General this afternoon when 

he introduced this bill for second reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General never ceases to amuse and amaze me. He spent almost two and one half 

hours this afternoon trying to excuse the incompetency, stupidity and greed of the government opposite on 

the basis of morality. He says that the question now facing the Legislature is a question of morality and not a 

question of assessing blame where blame should lie but a question of determining whether the government is 

now acting in a fashion that has some degree of competency about it and that we’ll be able to keep from 

repaying the enormous sums of money involved. He talks about morality. In doing so, Mr. Speaker, while 

talking about morality he took the opportunity as well to launch an attack which I believe, in many cases, 

could be best described as cowardly on a number of institutions, on a number of people, both within and 

without this province. He took a long time to talk about judges and I submit, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding 

the weasel words he used and the adjectives and the adverbs, it can be only taken as an attack on the judges 

of the Supreme Court of Canada. He talked at length about the appointment of those judges and he seemed to 

indicate that because of the system of appointment of the Supreme Court and presumably of the judiciary of 

this country, that those judges that were appointed, were not serving themselves; they were serving another 

master. That is the only reasonable implication, Mr. Speaker, that can be drawn from his remarks when he 

talks about how seven judges of the Supreme Court of Canada decided in the manner in which they did. 

 

He fails to point out, Mr. Speaker, though that it’s well known to him and to the Premier and, I am sure, to 

the other lawyers in the NDP government party, that the system of the appointment of judges to the Supreme 

Court in this country is based on regions. It is based on so many judges 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

622 

 

from Quebec, so many judges from Ontario, so many judges from the Maritimes, the prairies and British 

Columbia. He carefully does not make these statements, Mr. Speaker, because it serves his purpose to make 

it an attack on the seven judges of the Supreme Court of Canada who dared to hold in the manner that they 

did. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, he fails to point out that the same system of appointment resulted in the 

appointment of the Saskatchewan judges when he talks about them with such great pride because they 

happen to agree with his interpretation of Bill 42. That same system resulted in the appointment of the 

Queen’s Bench judge who heard this particular judgment initially. It was the same system of appointments 

that appointed the Court of Appeal that heard the appeal from the original trial judge. He is also very careful, 

Mr. Speaker, not to point out that the judge who wrote the majority decision in the CIGOL case, Mr. Justice 

Martland, first of all comes from the West and, secondly, has a reputation as being a judge who invariably 

finds in favor of the provinces and not in favor of the so-called centralist interests of Ottawa. He is also 

careful not to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the judge who wrote the dissenting opinion, Mr. Justice Dickson, 

comes from the West and has a reputation, apparently, as being a judge who is a centralist judge who wants 

to hold the favor of Ottawa. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that these attacks on the Supreme Court, the method of appointment and by implication 

the appointment of any judges in this country are unwarranted and unfounded and are shameful. But then, 

Mr. Speaker, he found that he couldn’t put all the blame for the disaster that has befallen the NDP as a result 

of his decision on the judges so he turns to a few other people to pint the blame on. He says that for some 

reason it is the opposition’s fault that in 1973 when the Liberal opposition opposed this legislation, we 

somehow weren’t doing out duty. Somehow we were at fault for pointing out to the people of Saskatchewan 

that this Bill 42 could well be found to be unconstitutional, unconstitutional because it taxed indirectly, 

unconstitutional because it dealt with trade and commerce. For some reason it was the opposition’s fault for 

pointing these things out that caused this bill to be struck down by the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition doesn’t apologize in any way whatsoever for their comments in 1973, 

particularly Mr. Speaker, in view of those comments being found to be correct in every sense that they were 

made. Mr. Speaker, the opposition is going to continue to make comments along those lines about the bill 

that is now before you, Bill 47. 

 

But then he goes on and he talks about the oil industry. Somehow the fault for Bill 42 being found to be 

unconstitutional was that of CIGOL and the imputation being there once again that CIGOL, or any oil 

company or indeed any individual is somehow not permitted to exercise a basic democratic right that this 

country gives to them and that’s to go to court if you feel aggrieved by legislation, passed by this 

government, the government of Ottawa or any other government. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

attack is not so much on the oil industry or on CIGOL, it is an attack on a system that this government does 

not believe in because it is a system that shows that this government is wrong time and time again. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we go from the oil industry to another pet enemy of the NDP, the federal government. 

And somehow the federal government is portrayed as a villain because they exercise a basic fundamental 

right that they have by going to court when a constitutional question is before the court, by going to court if 

they happen to agree with the plaintiff’s position and the plaintiff’s position was proven to be right by the 

Supreme Court of Canada. Case after case, after case, we find the federal government going to court and 

giving to the court that they are before their explanation as to what 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

623 

 

they feel the constitution is and how it should be interpreted. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General 

would like to check the law books that are in the Library just down the hall from us, and find out how many 

times the Government of Saskatchewan went to court on a constitutional matter and to disagree with the 

federal government and other provinces. It really doesn’t matter how they get there, Mr. Attorney General, 

they have the right to be there and that’s the right you say that they shouldn’t have, the right you say should 

be only with you, only with the government that sits there. And if that right is challenged in any way 

somehow those people are bad or at fault or are villains. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we get out another pet hate of the New Democratic Party. Some how we find that the 

reason Bill 42 was unconstitutional was because of Otto Lang. Somehow Otto Lange used his influence on 

the Supreme Court or on the government or on members who sit on this side of the House to arrange for this 

decision to come out with Bill 42 being struck down. And again the argument is nonsensical. But they are 

not satisfied with attacking a federal Cabinet minister, with attacking the court, with attacking the 

opposition. He then decides that it is time to attack another institution, the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 

The Regina Chamber of Commerce finally girded their loins and got up and said that they disagreed with the 

government, disagree with the way this government was acting. And I suspect in the days ahead, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to find threats against the Regina Chamber of Commerce just as the Saskatoon 

Chamber of Commerce was threatened, just as the people of Saskatoon were threatened with the loss of the 

head office of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. He attacks one institution which has not manner 

whatsoever of replaying to the attacks, again I say a cowardly attack, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker – one more – the Attorney General just couldn’t miss the opportunity to attack the press. 

Apparently there were some editorials that were written that said the government was wrong and if the press 

says the government is wrong, therefore, according to this government, the press must be wrong. And I find 

it most amusing, Mr. Speaker, to have the Attorney General talk about the responsibility of the press to 

report statements accurately when there is no greater expert in this House or in Saskatchewan, that I am 

aware of, of distorting statements made by members of the opposition, made by members who happen to 

disagree with the NDP government. The foremost expert in the field of distortion, Mr. Speaker, sits across 

from me and holds the title of Attorney General. 

 

Then we have one more villain, one more villain that was to be expected and I am surprised it wasn’t the top 

one on the list and that’s Imperial Oil. Imperial Oil again simply exercising a right that every person in this 

country has, to go to court if they feel aggrieved by the way they are being handled by individuals, by other 

companies or by the government. What does the Attorney General say? He talks about the profits that the 

company took out of Saskatchewan, millions of dollars. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, profits that may be excessive, 

but again he fails to point out is that at the time those profits were being earned, at the time those profits 

were accruing to the shareholders of Imperial Oil, the government of the day was the CCF. The government 

of the day was led by Mr. Douglas. The government of the day had Mr. Blakeney in its Cabinet. He forgot to 

mention these things, Mr. Speaker. He forgot to say who permitted these terrible access profits to accrue 

because it was the government of the party that he now belongs to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say the attacks of the Attorney General were unwarranted and unfounded and we still do 

not see in that government opposite any indication at all that the reason we are in this position today, the 

reason that we are in this mess, is because 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

624 

 

of their actions and their actions alone. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MALONE: – And then, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General has the gall to come to this House and 

speak on behalf of his party and his government about morality. He says, Mr. Speaker, that what Bill 47 tries 

to do is to correct morality, to correct what happened with Bill 42. Let me say to the Attorney General, Mr. 

Speaker, that morality was righted, not by this government but by the Supreme Court of Canada several 

weeks ago when this decision was handed down. Mr. Speaker, I take exception to any member of that 

government opposite to tell us about morality. Where was their morality when they expropriated oil rights 

under Bill 42 without consulting the owners oft hose oil rights? Where was their morality when they 

expropriate oil rights under Bill 42 without consulting the owners of those oil rights? Where was their 

morality when they broke all the lease agreements at that time and changed the royalty rates? Where was 

their morality when they attacked people who can’t defend themselves in this House or elsewhere? Where 

was their morality with the potash industry when they broke an agreement that was to last until 1981? Where 

was their morality when they broke agreements in connection with timber rights? Mr. Speaker, where is their 

morality, or a sense of right or sense of justice in connection with the CIGOL case. We have asked time and 

time again what the intention of the government is with CIGOL and I ask again, are you going to obey the 

law of Canada? Are you going to pay the judgment when it’s presented to you? Where is your morality in 

that case? Where are your answers in that regard? There hasn’t been a day go by when this hasn’t been 

brought up in this Legislature as to the government’s intention with CIGOL and I say to you, Mr. Attorney 

General and the members who sit behind you and beside you, that we will be able to judge your morality 

when you come to pay that CIGOL decision, that CIGOL judgment. If you don’t pay it, if you don’t pay that 

judgment when it’s presented to you or at least settle the decision with CIGOL beforehand, it’s your morality 

that’s going to be in question, not ours, not the oil industry, not the other people that are involved. 

 

Let me say once again, if the Government of Saskatchewan is not prepared to obey the laws of 

Saskatchewan, is not prepared to abide by judgments by the highest court of the land, why should anybody 

else in this province obey the law? Why should anybody else under your jurisdiction obey your laws and 

have any trust or faith in your institutions? There is a question for your morality, Mr. Attorney General. 

 

Again, I resent this argument. The argument that says we are the moral side and it’s a moral issue and at the 

same time, that they say that they do not apologize or acknowledge the stupidity, greed and incompetence. 

Only under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, could we have got the worst of both worlds. Since 1973, we’ve driven 

out the oil industry and now we can’t even keep the money that’s been paid in taxes unless remedial 

legislation is brought forth. 

 

Some other comments about the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker. He says that Bill 42 was passed to protect 

the resources for the people of Saskatchewan. I say to your, Mr. Speaker, some protection! What protection 

have we gotten by Bill 42? What protection? None is the answer, Mr. Speaker. He talks as well about that 

protection, that protection being gained by public ownership and that the [people of Saskatchewan are in 

favor of that public ownership that he advocates. But I ask you again, Mr. Speaker, when in 1973 were the 

people of Saskatchewan consulted about the provisions of Bill 42 and when in 1975 were the people of 

Saskatchewan consulted about the takeover of 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

625 

 

the potash industry? Mr. Speaker, they weren’t but they’re going to be consulted in 1979 and I think I know 

what their answer is going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General and the Premier have been talking the last few days about this particular 

decision of the Supreme Court. The reversal of previous juristics, the reversal of the precedents that that 

have been set in days past and indeed the Attorney General today said there were many cases that took an 

opposite point of view. They take the position that they now seem to be surprised at the position taken by the 

Supreme Court and that they’re shocked by the result of this decision and that they were not forewarned. 

Well let me again set the record straight, Mr. Speaker. If, indeed, they were so surprised, and if, indeed, there 

was a record of previous jurisprudence being reversed and previous precedents not being followed, I wonder 

why then this letter was sent to the Prime Minister in 1976. 

 

As you know the subject of resource taxation figured prominently in the constitutional discussions held last 

year by Canada’s ten provincial Premiers. Unanimous agreement was reached on the need to clarify and 

strengthen provincial jurisdiction in this area and I repeat those words, Mr. Speaker, clarify and strengthen 

provincial jurisdiction in this area. Indeed, the Premiers were unanimous on the specific wording of a 

constitutional amendment, an amendment by the way that we haven’t seen in this House, that would give 

provinces the right to levy indirect, as well as direct taxation, o resource production. Such a provision would 

go far to remove one perennial source of uncertainty and grounds for litigation and the letter is signed by 

Allan Blakeney, Premier of Saskatchewan. In 1976, Mr. Speaker, in 1976 this government was aware of the 

possible decision on CIGOL. They were aware of it in 1973, Mr. Speaker, and I want to refer to the debates 

of that time. Again I quote the Premier on page 530, Mr. Speaker, of the Debates and Proceedings for 1973-

74, Part 1. Now this is the Premier speaking: 

 

Now we believe the position of this province in warding off this attack will be strengthened if the 

province get legal right, legal title to large blocks of freehold oil and gas rights in the province. As I 

understand it that is the position of the government of Alberta and indeed it was. The government of 

Alberta believes (and you can read the statement of the hon. Mr. Lougheed and the hon. Mr. Dickie 

and other Cabinet ministers in the government and of Alberta and they say that they believe) that 

they can resist encroachment ob by the federal government on their powers because they have legal 

title to most of the oil in Alberta. Most of it comes from Crown lands and they are saying that they 

are not even attempting to control the oil that comes from private lands because they doubt their 

power to do so. Now it is because of this (and you can read these statements as well as I) that we 

believe that our position would be greatly strengthened if we acquire title to the gas and oil rights of 

about 25 large companies. 

 

They’re referring to the words, Mr. Speaker, “greatly strengthened”, hardly a ringing endorsement of the 

constitutionality of Bill 42, Mr. Speaker. The Premier, the Attorney General, all members opposite at that 

time were fully aware of the implications of that particular piece of legislation. They knew it was going to be 

challenged and they knew that the chances were excellent that that challenge was going to be successful. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I read somewhere recently, that the Attorney General even took it upon himself to have 

a little discussion with the Attorney General of Canada, Mr. Basford, not after CIGOL, not in the last few 

days or few weeks after the CIGOL decision was handed down, but before it was handed down, Mr. Speaker. 

I am advised that that 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

626 

 

discussion with Mr. Basford - I don’t get this from Mr. Basford, I get it from the newspaper – dealt with the 

constitutionality of Bill 42 and as to whether or not that that legislation was constitutional. So I suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP knew in 1973, they knew in 1976, and they certainly know now that Bill 42 

was illegal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s turn to the reasons for Bill 42. The Attorney General gave some reasons this 

afternoon as to why the government thought it was necessary to pass that legislation. But let’s go back to the 

debates of 1973, now let’s see what the Premier had to say at that time and what Mr. Thorson had to say at 

that time about the money that would accrue to the government as a result of Bill 42 and what that money 

would be used for. And again quoting from the Premier, page 526: 

 

Let me state once again our basic objectives. We believe that the control of our oil resource must be 

firmly vested in the people of Saskatchewan. (No contradiction there, the Premier has said that all 

along). We say this not only because control must be vested there in order to ensure that our 

consumers will have fair prices for oil in the years ahead but also because we must make sure that 

our farmers have oil in the years ahead. (I see no change in the price structure, Mr. Speaker, really 

since this speech was given except it continues to go up.) Whether members opposite oppose it or 

not, we on this side of the House believe it is absolutely essential that we make sure that we have gas 

and oil and in good supply in the decades ahead. (Nobody takes exception with that Number 2, Mr. 

Speaker). We believe that the Government of Saskatchewan must be in a position to control if 

necessary sharp increases in the price of oil and gasoline in Saskatchewan. (I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 

since 1973 when has this government ever controlled the increase in gas and oil in Saskatchewan. 

They haven’t controlled the power rates, they haven’t controlled the rates for SGIO, they haven’t 

controlled the rates for Sask Tel and they certainly haven’t controlled the sharp increase in oil and 

gas in this province.) Number 3, we believe that unearned increases in crude oil prices arising from 

international oil policies should and must go, not to the international oil companies but to the people 

of Saskatchewan. (Well, they believed it then, I guess they believe it now but they certainly didn’t do 

very much to make sure that that did happen, Mr. Speaker.) Finally, number 4, we believe that there 

must be more rather than less exploration for oil and natural gas in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister of Mineral Resources the other day when he was speaking must have 

been smiling or had his tongue in cheek when he was talking about the phenomenal development which lies 

ahead in Saskatchewan in the area of oil well drilling this year. I think he said that there was going to be 

some 500 wells drilled this year, 500 wells in 1977 -78. Mr. Speaker, what he forgot to say was that in 1972 

or 1971 there was something like 1200 wells drilled, 1200 wells drilled before Bill 42 was passed. 

 

Now let’s turn to what the Minister of the day had to say about the use of the moneys that will accrue as a 

result of Bill 42. Mr. Thorson: 

 

Mr. Speaker, what will happen to these funds to be collected by this 100 per cent tax on future 

increases obtained from rising oil prices? (We all know what is going to happen now, Mr. Speaker). 

The revenues will go into a special oil and gas development fund and they will be used for the 

following purposes: (1) They will be available to reduce wholesale prices of refined 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

627 

 

petroleum products in Saskatchewan. (I have yet to see any reduction in wholesale prices of refined 

petroleum products in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.) (2) They will be used to fund the activities of 

Saskoil or any company collaborating with Saskoil in the exploration and development of oil and gas 

resources. (We all know the activity of Saskoil, Mr. Speaker,. The first two years they spent most of 

their time trying to find a general manager who finally left them.) (3) They can be used to improve 

energy supplies for Saskatchewan, whether it is in the form of research or investigation into yet 

unused sources of energy in the province. (Well, I suppose an argument can be made, Mr. Speaker, 

that some of those moneys went into uranium exploration.) (4) Funds can be used to encourage and 

assist research n oil and gas production methods. (Mr. Speaker, I have yet to hear any announcement 

from the government as to research in oil and gas production methods.) (56) To assist and encourage 

persons other than Saskoil to explore for oil and gas. (I wonder how many other persons other than 

Saskoil in the last few years have been exploring for oil and gas in Saskatchewan and when you 

compare that number which is very few indeed to the years beforehand, Mr. Speaker, it is very few 

by comparison at all.) (6) And finally, of course, the funds will be available to improve the general 

revenues of the province. (And indeed some moneys have been paid into general revenues.) 

 

Did you notice, Mr. Speaker, there is something missing, there is something missing in this statement by Mr. 

Thorson, there is something missing in future statements by the Premier and the Attorney General and Mr. 

Messer. What’s missing, Mr. Speaker, is an indication that $320 million, I believe is the figure, of that 

energy reserve fund was going to be used to buy potash mines. That’s missing, Mr. Speaker, during the 

election but we now look back and we find that no consideration at that time was given to buy potash mines 

which under no stretch of the imagination can be considered an energy resource, that that money was going 

to be used for that purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of other matters raised by the Attorney Genera. He says that the province has 

exclusive jurisdiction over resources. And again nobody disputes that, the province does have exclusive 

jurisdiction over resources. Where the problem arises, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal authority whether it be 

a Liberal government or a Conservative government or, heaven forbid, an NDP government, also has the 

jurisdiction to tax, a tax by way of levying an income tax. That income tax can be levied against resource 

companies, whether they are Imperial Oil or whether they are very small, tiny companies. They have a 

legitimate claim to that tax, Mr. Speaker, just as the provinces have a legitimate claim to tax the resource 

industry. As we have said in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and in question period and publicly for weeks and 

months on end, is that nothing will be resolved until this government and the governments of the other 

provinces sit down with the federal authority and determine who can tax what, in what manner, how and 

when. They both have equally good arguments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we have the claim from the Attorney General that Bill 42 was passed to act as 

conservation legislation. He say that the purpose of the bill was to conserve for the people of Saskatchewan 

years ahead the right to use that oil and the right to use that natural gas. So the government really had no 

intention at all of developing those resources after 1973 but they were going to keep them back somehow, 

keep them under the ground so that better use could be made of the resources in the years ahead. Well that 

seems to fly in the face of the statements of the 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

628 

 

Premier, it seems to fly in the face of the statements of Mr. Thorson and indeed, Mr. Speaker, it flies in the 

face of the statements of the Minister of Mineral Resources, who said just a few days ago that the 

government intended on drilling some 400 wells in this province. I say, Mr. Speaker, the government can’t 

have it both ways, the legislation is either for conservation or it isn’t. If the government wanted it to be for 

conservation why did they, in 1974, just toy with the royalty rates just a little bit to see if they’d get back 

some interest in Saskatchewan in the private industry? Why in 1975 did they toy just a little more with the 

royalty rates? Why in 1976 did they throw them quite a bit more wide open? The reason, Mr. Speaker, was 

to induce that industry to come to Saskatchewan to develop the resource so that this government could use 

the taxes that would accrue therefrom for their other NDP socialist purposes. So there is no substance 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, in the argument that Bill 42 was meant to be a conservation device. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn if I may to Bill 47. Of course the member are going to say, are you going to support 

the bill? Mr. Speaker, we have one thing in mind, one fundamental principle in determining whether we are 

going to support this bill or not. That principle is, Mr. Speaker, will this legislation permit the people of 

Saskatchewan to retain all or the vast majority of the moneys that have been collected illegally since 1973 

under Bill 42? And that is the question, Mr. Speaker, that we want answered. It was not answered today by 

the Attorney General, we hope that in due course it will be answered by other speakers from the government 

opposite. Until we get those answers, until those answers are given to us to our satisfaction we will not be 

stating whether we are supporting this bill or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some questions I would ask the members to answer. First of all, it is very clear from the 

Attorney General’s statements today that the government is backing off its former hard line position of 

retaining all the money collected under Bill 42. You will recall the Attorney General’s words, “We’re going 

to retain most of it, we’re going to retain the vast bulk of it.” But nowhere did he indicate, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government’s intention was to retain all of it. So I say to the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, how much 

are you going to give back to the oil industry? When are you going to tell us how much you are going to give 

back to the oil industry, either now with a reassessment of the tax that is to be payable under Bill 47 for the 

years leading up ‘til now, or for the possible sweetheart deal that you’ll give to the industry in the years 

ahead to make up for the taxes that they have been paying to date. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, what is the tax 

rate or tax rates going to be? When will they be set? How will they be set? Will this Assembly be allowed by 

your government to debate those tax rates? Will we be allowed as an opposition, which is a traditional right 

of a Legislative Assembly, to give our opinion as to the rate of taxes that are going to be set? 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, what bout future development. What does the government feel this particular act 

will do to permit future development of the resource in this province? Again the Attorney General was 

completely silent on that particular point. Some collateral issues, Mr. Speaker. What about the heavy oil 

plant in Lloydminster or in Saskatchewan? What effect will this bill have on that development, $100 million 

and more development which the people of Saskatchewan and the people in that particular area are 

concerned about? What have you heard from Husky? What have you heard from the government of Alberta? 

What is your position on this development and will we be able to capture it for the people of Saskatchewan if 

this particular legislation passes? 

 

I think perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the most important thing in Bill 47 is the fact that the tax rates have not been 

set. What of course this suggest to the Liberal Opposition is that there is going to be negotiation between the 

government and between spokesmen of 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

629 

 

industry in setting those rates. We want to know as well, Mr. Speaker, the spirit in which the government is 

going to approach those negotiations. Are you going to take an intransigent position or are you going to be 

flexible? Are you going to acknowledge that if you want investment from the private sector you must leave 

room for them to gain a fair, and I stress the word ‘fair’, profit from that investment? What are your 

intentions in connection with those negotiations, when are they going to commence, who is going to be at the 

bargaining table, what instructions are they going to be given? These questions, Mr. Speaker, I think are 

essential to be answered by the Attorney General, by the Premier, by the Minister of Mineral Resources, 

whoever. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we want to know that if negotiations fail and that this bill has to be passed, we want to 

know whether the bill is going to be constitutional or not. The Attorney General today touched on this in his 

remarks. He gave us examples of previous retroactive legislation that had been declared constitutional by the 

Supreme Court of other courts. But as the Attorney General fully realizes it is just not the matter of 

refractivity that’s important; it’s the matter of retroactivity together with colorability of this particular bill 

that is important. That is, how similar is Bill 47 to Bill 42? As the Attorney General well knows the more 

similar the two bills become, the easier it is for an oil company or an interested party to attack it in the courts 

of Saskatchewan and in indeed in the Supreme Court of Canada. Now already there are many glaring 

similarities, firstly the time frame that is covered by both bill, secondly, the exemptions that have been given 

by both bills to holders of mineral acreages less than 1,280 acres. But what, Mr. Speaker, will be the critical 

factor is that if the tax rate become similar to the tax rate set in Bill 42, that is 100 per cent, then Bill 47 will 

in all respects be similar and the same as Bill 42 and again will be subject to the same attack that Bill 42 

was. It is not a matter of just strictly retroactivity, Mr. Speaker. It goes back to the principle we have been 

talking about for some days in this Legislature – that the court, no court will let you do indirectly what they 

have told you that you can’t do directly. You can’t get in the back door what the court has told you they will 

not let you bring in the front door. Now that’s one issue, Mr. Speaker, of the constitutionality of the bill. 

There’s another one and it is the one, I think, of some concern to the Attorney General because he kept 

referring to it in his remarks today. Just because the government says that this is an income tax bill does not 

necessarily make it one. The bill must pass the test of whether or not it is a proper income tax as known in 

law. The Attorney General talked at length today about how this bill was brought forth in conjunction with 

the judgment of the Supreme Court and CIGOL, and that it was that judgment that caused this bill to be 

brought to this Legislature. Let me say to the Attorney General that I think that he is missing a few very, very 

basic points in that judgment and indeed I hope he has read it. I wouldn’t want to have accused him of not 

having read it but I refer him to page 21 of the decision of Mr. Justice Dickson, now the judge, Mr. Speaker, 

who held in favor of the government. He was talking in the judgment about this very point – income tax. If 

you will just bear with me I would like to read a quote from the judgment because it applied to Bill 42 and I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, will be the test and will be applied to Bill 47. 

 

Counsel for the province attempted to support the tax as constituting an income tax on the authority 

of Forbes versus the Attorney General. The so-called mineral income tax is not an income tax in any 

generalized recognized sense of the term. The term ‘income tax’ means for taxation purposes a levy 

on grains and profits, the evidence of Professor Barber in the case at Bar confirms that view. He 

defined income tax as being, according to generally accepted accounting principles and business 

practice, a tax imposed on net income and in determining such net income any expenses incurred in 

earning that income are inherently deductible. 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

630 

 

And that is the key, Mr. Speaker, the phrase “expenses incurred in earning that income are inherently 

deductible.” Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that by the provisions of Section 7 of Bill 47 that they take 

away basic deductions that are inherently deductible in any other form of income tax – deductions such as 

depreciation, overhead or administrative expenses, exploration, development or preproduction expense, 

depletion, unless these expenses are permitted by regulation approved by the Lieutenant-Governor in 

Council 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to begin with this bill takes away from the basic provisions of what an income tax is. But it 

goes further, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In my view the Nickel-Rim case does not assist the province. The tax is not levied upon net income. 

It is more the nature of a gross revenue tax as above, a certain statutory figure it becomes a 100 per 

cent levy. 

 

And I remind you, Mr. Speaker, he is talking about Bill 42. 

 

That has generally, in the past, been regarded as an indirect tax. The tax is in essence a flat sum 

which will vary according to the sale price of the oil. It is not necessarily reflective of actual expense 

experience. Expenses are discretionary and not inherently deductible so as to fall within the 

definition of an income tax. 

 

If Section 4 (a) (and again this is Bill 42) should ever come into play the tax would be levied, not on 

the price received, but on a ministerial figure. 

 

Key words, Mr. Speaker, – ‘ministerial figure.’ 

 

In sum, an income tax is a tax upon gross receipts less expenses. In the instant tax, it is possible that 

these two figures will be subject to ministerial discretion. 

 

Key words, Mr. Speaker, - ‘ministerial discretion.’ 

 

Section 7 (1)(f) of Bill 47 – any deduction that is not reasonable in the circumstances. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we find in Bill 47 the same inherent dangers that we find in Bill 42 – that the tax itself as 

projected in Bill 47 is not an income tax but perhaps some other form of tax. Indeed, if it is not shown to be 

an income tax, the same attack will be levied – that it is an indirect tax and again the whole house of cards 

goes collapsing down. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of key elements in Bill 47. They are questions that were left unanswered 

today by the Attorney General. The key, of course, to extricating ourselves from the entire mess, the mess 

that was created strictly by the members opposite and nobody else, is the rate of tax, how high that will be 

and how high that will be will be determined to a great extent by the negotiations that take place between the 

government and spokesmen for the oil industry. 

 

We hope, Mr. Speaker, that those negotiations will be successful. We hope that they will be successful, and 

that we will find ourselves in the position of not facing an economic catastrophe for the province of 

Saskatchewan. We say that those 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

631 

 

negotiations must be successful, Mr. Speaker, if we are, first of all, to get out of the mess that we are in 

because of Bill 42 and secondly, to have a development of this industry in the province in the years ahead. If 

the government in the weeks ahead or the days ahead can tell us that those negotiations are going to be 

successful or are successful then indeed, Mr. Speaker, we will consider our position as to whether we 

support this bill or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government comes in and says the negotiations are not successful or if they adopt such an 

attitude in this Legislature that would lead us to believe they will take an intransigent position which in turn 

will permit the industry to take the same position, then we are faced, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the 

constitutionality oft his bill. I say, Mr. Speaker, that I have pointed out two things in the bill today which on 

first reading occur to just about anybody with some little legal training. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the government has a duty to the people of Saskatchewan and a duty to the 

Legislature to send this bill to the Court of Appeal for its opinion and indeed if that opinion is not 

satisfactory, to the Supreme Court of Canada for its opinion. Now what is the reason the government gives 

for failing to do that? They say that we can’t do it before the bill is passed. We have asked them, Mr. 

Speaker, to do it before the bill is passed or after the bill is passed. If they do it after the bill is passed the 

Attorney General gets up and he says that it will be some 18 months. He takes a shot at the Supreme Court 

for delaying the Bill 42 decision. Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Court of Appeal of 

Saskatchewan would likely give any reference to its immediate attention. And I suggest as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Supreme Court of Canada, because it’s such an important constitutional issue for this 

whole country, would give it its very quick attention as well and even, Mr. Speaker, if it did take 18 months, 

we would at least be in the position after that period of time of having some certainty to the situation. 

 

What’s the alternative? The alternative is to let the matter drag through the courts again, take two or three 

years before it gets to the Supreme Court of Canada and then if the government is not successful in 

defending this bill, we find ourselves with a bill to the oil companies of not $500 million but closer to a 

billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, it just does not make sense for the government not to refer this bill to the Court 

of Appeal for an opinion and from there refer it to the Supreme Court of Canada if necessary. If the 

government had nothing to fear, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that is the action that they would take but 

what happens, Mr. Speaker. Why are they so concerned about that 18 months when you compare it to two or 

thee years. 

 

Well I’ll tell you one thing that occurs to me, Mr. Speaker. There is going to be an intervening event. There 

is going to be an election and what this government wants to do is to push this issue under the table or 

hopefully push it under the table until such times as that election is held. I say, Mr. Speaker, that can be the 

only reason for delaying this legislation going to the Court of Appeal or to the Supreme Court of Canada,. 

All my friends opposite, Mr. Speaker, are saying that they’d like an election right now. I think they better get 

out tot eh country. I think they better get out and talk to some of their supporters and what they think about 

Bill 42 and the CIGOL decision. So, Mr. Speaker, if I may follow in the lead of the member for Nipawin and 

repeat myself briefly. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, the key is the rate of tax and in determining the rate of tax, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

negotiation process is going to be gone through. If that process is unsuccessful either because of the position 

taken by 



 

December 5, 1977 

 

632 

 

the industry or a position taken by the government, that the only alternative left to this government, Mr. 

Speaker, is to refer the matter to the Court of Appeal for an opinion so that some degree of certainty can be 

brought to the situation and so that the people of Saskatchewan will know where they stand on this very 

grave and very serious issue. Mr. Speaker, we ask the government to give consideration to our requests, We 

ask the Attorney General and his colleagues opposite to refrain from giving his lectures on morals and 

morality. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we in the Liberal Party look very unkindly on lectures and oratory from 

the members opposite about morality. We suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they examine their own house before 

they start talking to us about matters of this nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one further matter that has to be mentioned at this time and that is the fact that this 

particular legislation in no way deals with the situation in the potash industry. Most legal advisors would say 

that the same result as CIGOL will happen if the potash industry pursues the potash reserve tax through the 

courts. What I say to the government again is that don’t leave us two or three years down the road facing 

another $100 million or more oil land money to be paid back to that industry. I said the other day that the 

taxes collected were approximately $300 million a year. Those taxes are going to be continued to be 

collected and again two or three or four years down the road we can fact the situation when we have a $400 

or $500 million bill being paid to the potash industry as well as to the oil industry. The time to act in 

connection with the potash industry is now and the way to act is through negotiation to avoid a possible 

catastrophe with that particular industry. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): – Mr. Speaker, how do we come to be here this evening 

when obviously hon. members opposite aren’t prepared to address themselves to a very – well they seem to 

just be shocked to be here, so shocked that none of them are prepared. We face in this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, probably the most grievous error that this government has ever committed. In a very weighty matter 

the legislation was tabled on Friday and earlier in the evening we had an honourable member rise with our 

leader and try to catch your eye. Presumably the hon. member had availed himself of the 73 hours to 

prepared for his address. Presumably, knowing that this was very weighty legislation, he decided that he 

would get something together to deliver to us in the House and from what we saw at 7:00 o’clock, Mr. 

Speaker, it would appear that the hon. member had decided to catch your eye in some tactical way rather 

than proposing to address himself to the problem that this province faces. Now, Mr. Speaker, it had crossed 

my mind only in terms of the tactics of the matter to ask hon. members if I might now be permitted to 

adjourn debate and if I had some indication from the smiles or lack of them . . . Mr. Speaker, it appears to me 

that we have now heard from all three parties. I am certainly prepared to speak for 40 minutes or so but I am 

sure with a little more preparation I could make it even longer and more tedious and painful for our hon. 

members opposite and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:30 o’clock p.m. 


