


























































Hansard: March 15, 1977


765 
 

 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 
17th Day 

 
Tuesday, March 15, 1977 

 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER (Saskatoon Westmount):— I should like to introduce a group of students from the 
constituency of Saskatoon Westmount. They are from Estey School, Grade Seven students, 45 in 
number. They are accompanied here today by their teachers, Mr. Earl Peterson, Mr. Dennis Kawalko 
and Maxine Park. I am sure that all Members of the Assembly join with me in welcoming these students 
to the Legislative Assembly today and wish them a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. S. MATSALLA (Canora):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to this Assembly through 
you 40 Grade Eleven and Grade Eight students from the Canora Composite High School. The chaperons 
this afternoon are Mrs. and Mrs. George Ludba, Mr. and Mrs Nick Labuik and the bus driver is Allen 
Kent, and their school teacher, Mr. Don Noble. 
 
I should like to inform the Assembly that the trip to the Legislatures to Regina, has been sponsored by 
our local Kiwanis Club and this is one of the many commendable projects that the Canora Kiwanis Club 
has undertaken. I should like to extend to our visitors a very warm welcome and I hope that they have an 
enjoyable and informative day here in the Capital City as well as in the Legislature. I do hope they have 
a fine trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
HON. H. H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Buena Vista):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to the House 
through you a group of students from St. Patrick and St. Phillips Schools. They are in the Speaker’s 
Gallery. These students are in Grade Six and Grade Eight. They are accompanied by Mrs. Rush, Mr. 
Reiger and Mr. Chouinard. I want to give a special welcome to the students from St. Phillips because 
that is the school where I had the privilege of being principal for three years and also is in my 
constituency. I look forward to meeting with the students. I hope they have an enjoyable time in Regina 
and have a very educational experience in the House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I just received a note that Glenavon 
has not arrived but if they haven’t certainly in their absence they warrant being introduced. I am not sure 
whether they are here or not. But there are 20 Grade Ten students who are supposed to be in the west 
gallery with their teacher, Mr. Preikchat and, of course, come from that Indian Head-Wolseley 
constituency. I want to extend a welcome to them, as they have just now arrived, 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

766 
 

on behalf of all Members of the Legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to add my welcome to that of 
the Member for Buena Vista to the students of St. Patrick and St. Phillips School. There is a two-fold 
reason, as the Member knows, that I had some interest in that constituency at one time, and also I 
understand that the students from the school come from the constituency which I presently represent. I 
hope they have an informative and enjoyable time here and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might add my welcome 
particularly to the Saskatoon people and some of my former colleagues who are sitting in the gallery. I 
was going to say that when the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes) suggested that he had been the 
principal of the school, many of us hope it will not be long before he is principal of the school again. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

QUALITY OF MEDICAL CARE IN THE PROVINCE OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question, a short series of questions, if I 
might to the Minister of Health. 
 
I wonder if the Minister of Health would mind commenting on the reports in the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Brief, presented to the Government of Saskatchewan, which made the claim that the quality 
of medical care in the Province of Saskatchewan was falling far below North American standards. 
 
HON. W. A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health):— I have issued a press release today which will shortly 
be apparent to everybody. I should like to draw the attention of the Members of the Assembly to the 
comments of George Bola, who is Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, who is 
quoted in the March 11th issue of the Leader-Post as saying, there has not been a reduction in the 
services because of the restraint program and I think he should know a great deal about it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister would mind answering 
the question. Would he or the Government of Saskatchewan be willing to initiate a public inquiry into 
the quality of medical care and hospitalization in the Province of Saskatchewan by an independent team 
of medical physicians from outside the province, to answer the charges of low morale, of cutting of 
diagnostic services, of shortage of equipment, of 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

767 
 

reducing hospital beds, of cutting staff which has very seriously jeopardized the quality of medical care. 
Would the Minister agree to a public inquiry into this very serious matter? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— I can’t speak for the Cabinet in that respect at the present time. It would have to be 
considered by Cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might have a bit of time to answer some of the things that the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) is talking about. 
 
First of all he talks about approved patient days, approved patient days for all of the hospitals operating 
under the global budget system, primarily all hospitals over 50 beds . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I believe the Member asked the question regarding the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association and a public inquiry, a subsequent question about a public inquiry, and he 
mentioned a number of points in raising the question. I would hope that the Minister is responding 
specifically to those points. 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— It was my intention. I want to point out that hospitals reduced their actual patient 
day volume over that three year period and the initial adjustments for 1976 were simply a reflection of 
the actual experience of those hospitals, in 1974 and 1975. The total approved patient days in volume for 
all hospitals was established at a level higher than that actually experienced in 1975. There was an 
adjustment made on July 1st. The adjustment did require some effort on the part of hospitals and 
physicians to utilize in-patient hospital beds more effectively. 
 
Hospital utilization rates in Saskatchewan have traditionally been much higher than anywhere else in 
Canada and even after the five per cent reduction was proposed last July, we still use hospital beds some 
37 per cent above the national average. 
 
Through the 1973-76 period a number of hospitals reduced their patient day volume without affecting 
any corresponding staff adjustment, with the result being an actual decline in productivity at the time 
when wait rates in hospitals were escalating at a pace well in excess of normal rates adjustments 
generally. 
 
I want to point out to the Members of this House that we increased the Health budget one year ago by 
some 25 per cent; Alberta increased theirs by 11 per cent and Ontario by 10. 
 
Based on unaudited year-end reports, and I stress that they are not yet audited, Saskatchewan hospitals 
provided 37,000 fewer patient days in 1976 than they were authorized and funded to provide. 
 
Regina hospitals provided 20,800 fewer patient days than approved and Saskatoon hospitals 15,500 
fewer patient days than were provided. 
 
Based on December monthly reports, and again I stress unaudited, hospital expenditures exceeded 
approved budgets by 1.2 million. This represents a variance of well below 1 per cent and indicates a 
good correlation of approved funding and funding requirements. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

768 
 

In addition to providing what represents a significant increase in operating funds to hospitals, the 
continuing development of new and approved services was carried on during the year. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I would ask the Minister to bring his answer to a close because, like the 
questions, the answers must be brief. If I could impress upon the Minister, I don’t believe that it is brief. 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, I pointed out, if I may, respectfully, that the Member asked about 
equipment in hospitals and beds and all the rest of it, and I am simply covering those points. 
 
This is the concluding remark, if I may. Saskatchewan, after the reduction in July statistics available 
show 1,823 separations per 1,000 compared with 1,493 per 1,000 across Canada, the national average. 
The percentage of money that we spent on hospitals is 56 per cent in the last fiscal year compared with 
44 per cent in Alberta and 49 per cent in Manitoba. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— A further supplementary Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister zero in please on the 
problem that the Saskatchewan Medical Association is pointing out for his attention? Would he not 
agree that the hospital beds in Saskatchewan are located in the wrong place, four per thousand in 
Saskatoon, five per thousand in Regina, 8.3 per thousand in the rest of rural Saskatchewan. Will you 
consolidate in rural Saskatchewan? Is there any wonder that there are fewer patient days when you cut 
the budget? You’ve had to reduce staff and were unable to provide the services. Are these not the facts? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— Yes, they asked for consolidation of rural hospitals and we are opposed to it. We 
will not close rural hospitals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— A supplementary. Is the Minister trying to suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of this Legislature that the charges of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association are completely without foundation? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, in a large measure, they are very misleading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan):— Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Minister of Health. This is a 
letter I have on my desk and I am prepared to table a copy, from Local 80 CUPE, Estevan, St. Joseph’s 
Hospital: 
 

Hospital workers are concerned by the cutback of hospital staff, which has been the policy of the 
Provincial Government and we feel that this is discrimination against the hospital worker and is 
unfair to both employees and patients. We the undersigned employees of St. Joseph Hospital, do 
protest all hospital staff cutbacks and, furthermore, that all past hospital staff cutbacks be 
reinstated and no 

  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

769 
 

further cutbacks be made. 
 
What action are you going to take on this letter? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, we make allocations to individual hospitals in terms of funds. Every 
hospital received large increases in funds. How they use those funds is largely their own business. It is 
true that SHSP gives them some information in relation to hospitals in that category in comparison with 
other hospitals across Canada, both in relation to the utilization of those funds and with regard to 
staffing, but the final decision is made by those hospital boards. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 

LOAD LIMIT RESTRICTIONS ON ROADS 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs who I note is not in the House, therefore I guess I will have to go down the line. The Premier is 
not here, so if I may then call on the Attorney General, the deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, will you tell this Assembly, today, after the Minister’s announcement in 
Saskatoon regarding the load limit restrictions on our municipal roads? Will this be by Order in Council 
or will it be passed through this Legislature in normal procedures? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe any determination has been 
finalized in this area. Quite obviously we would prefer if it could be done by Order in Council because 
of the fact that Orders in Council are as legally effective and, of course, Members of the Opposition 
have access to them. They do review them once every week. I know that people from your office come 
in and review the Orders in Council and, of course, the full time for debate on this matter would not be 
thwarted. You can do it during Estimates, during Municipal Affairs Estimates or during Highway Traffic 
Board Estimates. But it may not be possible to do that. I just can’t tell you. 
 
MR. THATCHER:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Since the Attorney General is well 
aware in this proposed change, over our municipal roads virtually every commodity such as oil, potash, 
gravel, cattle etc., can not be hauled. The discrimination is against grain and does the Attorney General 
really expect our farmers to sit idly by while this potential discrimination is enacted into law? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s a question again of discrimination in whose view. I 
would simply remind the Member, as I am sure you would agree, the question of road construction and 
the cost for road construction and the use of a rapidly depleting energy source such as gasoline, all of 
these are factors of which a province with a relatively small financial base and a small population base 
has to be aware. Accordingly, when you draw up weight load limits and weight loads you have to be 
cognizant of those factors and try and work them as fairly as you can by 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

770 
 

considering the competing interests. I don’t think that they are discriminatory. I think in the overall 
interest they work to the advantage of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER:— A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Attorney General tell this 
Assembly whether or not the purpose behind this restrictive legislation is to eventually scuttle and choke 
off the Weyburn inland terminal? Does the Attorney General expect our farmers to obey a rank political 
law? They will not disregard it . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I think the Member’s question is inviting debate. 
 

QUALITY OF MEDICAL CARE IN THE PROVINCE OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. LARTER:— Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct this question to the Minister of Health. Does the 
Minister feel that the workers, the doctors, all the medical people, do you believe, are all misleading the 
public on this whole question of health? Do you think we are being misled by both sides? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, I said they talk in generalities like the Opposition. They prove nothing. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Health. Some very damning comments were made about the Government by the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association but I would like a few specific answers. They cite one case of a hospital being denied 
fundamental equipment such as a respirometer and that led to the fact that the hospital had no means of a 
preoperative assessment of lung function. Can you tell us what hospital was denied that vital equipment? 
 
Secondly, they make a very specific comment that our lab technicians could lose their accreditation. 
Now these are two matters that the Government can take specific action and remedial action on 
immediately. What action is the Government taking with regard to those two specific problems raised in 
the SMA brief? 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— I can’t comment too much with respect to the first. I believe the hospital was in 
Swift Current. I do know that about it but I would have to check the statistics out on it. I know there are 
two sides to the story. I know that these people had ordered a large amount of very expensive equipment 
without even reporting to SHSP and that had something to do with it. 
 
The second one, I really can’t comment on at the present time but I will take it as notice and check it out 
for you. 
 
MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, 
are you aware that the MCIC recently forced the Swift Current Health Region to give up $458,000? 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

771 
 

MR. ROBBINS:— The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that when hospitals are significantly below 
their approved bed ratio for the year, they do make payments back to MCIC. Also we have hospitals that 
have deficits so sometimes adjustments are made in that respect as well. 
 
MR. HAM:— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I am not sure the Minister understood my question. It is 
pertaining to the Swift Current Health Region, number one. Did your department blackmail the Health 
Region into securing a new agreement by forcing the surplus money back to the Government? 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I would ask the Members not to invite debate with the questions. 
 

CABLE TELEVISION 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of 
Co-operatives (Mr. Shillington). Is it a fact that at the beginning of February, members of your 
department in reference to cable met with officials from the national body and that subsequent to that 
you flew to Ottawa to meet with Harry Boyle, and that as a result of your meetings with Mr. Boyle he 
indicated to you that the Government was prepared to concede all of the requests of the provincial 
Government if you would now proceed with cable television in this province as you have laid $15 
million worth of cable already? 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services):— You have got the right Minister, 
but the wrong department. It is the Department of Government Services. 
 
However, we did meet with Mr. Boyle. He made it quite clear that he was not in a position to make any 
commitments on behalf of the Federal Government or the Commission. He made some personal 
comments about what he thought might be possible, i.e. what kind of agreement might be possible. It 
was agreed that the remarks were off the record. I have every intention of respecting that. You are right, 
we did meet with the chairman of the CRTC. 
 
MR. MERCHANT:— A supplementary. Is it not a fact that your officials met with officials from the 
Commission for the first time at the beginning of February. The Commission officials advised your 
department that as far as they knew the Commission would be prepared to agree to all of the requests of 
the provincial Government and that Boyle said the same thing to you, that there was nothing holding 
back cable in this province except the silly attitude of your government? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON:— You are wrong on both points. It was not the first time my officials met with 
the officials of the CRTC. I don’t think a month has gone by that my officials haven’t met with the 
CRTC officials. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

772 
 

Your second assumption was also incorrect. While they are prepared to make some concessions, they 
fall well short of meeting the needs of the province and of Sask Tel owning the hardware. That is not to 
say that an agreement is not possible. I believe it is. I believe we will have an agreement with the 
Federal Government long before the hardware is constructed. You are wrong in your assumption that the 
CRTC have totally capitulated. I dearly wish that they showed that kind of good sense, the kind of good 
sense, I guess you are urging on them. They certainly haven’t. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT:— A supplementary. Did Mr. Boyle not indicate to you that they were prepared to 
concede that the Provincial Government, through Sask Tel, would own the head-ends amps and drops 
and that all that would be required was that a wire be owned by the homeowner, and that that be 
serviced by the companies having the cable license. And was that not confirmed in meetings that you 
then had during that same visit with Madame Sauvé, the Minister in charge. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON:— Again the discussion between Mr. Boyle and myself was off the record. He 
made it quite clear that his comments were personal. He was giving a personal opinion. He had no 
mandate to negotiate on behalf of the Federal Government. On that particular visit which was in the 
second week in February I did not meet with The Honourable Jeanne Sauvé at all. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is there no way that this petty 
dispute can’t be resolved after cable television is installed so that we can get on with the job, have cable 
television for the people, let the dispute be solved at a later date because that’s what the people of this 
province want? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON:— Mr. Speaker, that is a theoretical question. The cable hardware is not now in 
place. It won’t be for at least six months and it is theoretical to ask whether or not that problem could be 
solved afterwards. We are a fair ways from having the hardware in place. 
 

SGIO GUIDE 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to 
the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, (SGIO). Yesterday we had a 
rather interesting discussion about the SGIO guide. The Minister said he was going to take remedial 
action. There are two specific problems. 
 
The first problem is those citizens of Saskatchewan who have already received their assessment for their 
drivers’ license and have been assessed $5, through no fault of their own, have sent the payment in. 
What means are you going to take to repay that $5? What about other individuals who have also 
received their notice through a computer indicating what their charges will be? Some of them will also 
have been assessed additional costs because of accidents which were no fault of theirs. What is your 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

773 
 

intention? Are you going to run another computer run-off? Are you going to send them another notice? 
Are you going to turn around and rectify this in some way publicly or privately? What do you estimate 
that this will cost? 
 
HON. E. C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs):— Perhaps we should, Mr. Speaker, begin by 
pointing out that the number involved is quite a small number. 
 
MR. McMILLAN:— Several thousand! 
 
MR. WHELAN:— No, there are not that many people that have been involved since January 1. I think 
that we should also point out that I said yesterday, remedial action will be taken and we have been doing 
that. The staff people will be giving instructions to those who are issuing licenses and instructions will 
be going out today. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Will there be an extension of the time period when people can make their 
payment for their license as a result of this mess that SGIO has gotten the individual citizens in through 
no fault of his own? 
 
MR. WHELAN:— Well, I think we have to look at the situation carefully before we start blackening all 
the employees of SGIO. They were transferring from one area to another. There were problems which 
had to be looked after. I don’t think there are that many people involved. I have every confidence that 
the SGIO staff will work it out to the satisfaction of the public. They are preparing correspondence that 
will go to the issuers, and I am sure the matter will be taken care of. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives):— A supplementary. Did the 
Minister receive a letter from the chairman of the trucking industry within the last two or three days 
pointing out the problem in administration resulting from the licensing system? If he did, is he prepared 
to tell this Assembly what steps he is going to take to cut the paper work for the truckers in the Province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. WHELAN:— As yet I have received no such letter. 
 

DRUGS IN SCHOOLS 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— I would direct a question to the Minister of Education. 
During the last session, the Minister announced a project by which we were to remove from the schools 
what is known as junk foods, and we certainly commend him on that. I wonder if the Minister has given 
any consideration to a more serious problem which is the drugs in school. Has the Minister approached 
the Attorney General’s Department for assistance in dealing with this particular problem? 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

774 
 

HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education):— Mr. Speaker, I am not familiar with any 
vending machines in our schools which dispense drugs. I am glad that the Member for Rosetown-Elrose 
supports us in our approach to the removal of junk foods and the discouragement of junk foods 
consumption in our schools and, I hope, throughout society. We are concerned as much as anybody and 
as much as obviously he is about the utilization of drugs, not only by young people but the population as 
a whole. The whole Government is concerned, I think, in our enforcement procedures and other methods 
used through the courts. We in Saskatchewan are taking the appropriate steps, on a continual basis, to 
deal with that question. 
 
MR. BAILEY:— A supplementary question. That was a rather flippant answer to a very serious 
problem, Mr. Minister. 
 
Has the Minister been advised of the seriousness of this problem by senior department officials from 
school boards within the province itself? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, that the problem is that serious in our schools as 
such. I have not received, from any school board to the best of my knowledge, at any time, an indication 
by letter or any other way, an expression of that kind of concern. 
 
MR. BAILEY:— Final supplementary. Would the Minister not consider that the problem was serious 
enough to perhaps initiate a similar program as to what he announced last year in regard to the junk 
foods to draw the attention of the Cabinet and the Government and initiate a program which would help 
to alleviate the seriousness of this problem? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Well, I would welcome the Member for Rosetown-Elrose to specifically tell 
us what he deems should be done. I have said in this House in answer to this question, and I think each 
and everyone of us as individuals on both sides of the House and we as a government have said, that we 
have to continue to do what we can to eliminate the utilization of the use of drugs as well as alcohol and 
other such things which are abusive to the individuals in our society and we will continue to do that. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

LAW REFORM COMMISSION - Conflict of Interest 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, I have a brief Ministerial Statement I 
should like to make. 
 
I am pleased to be able to table to this House the Report of the Saskatchewan Law Reform Commission 
on Conflict of Interest. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, I tabled the White Paper on Members of the 
Legislative Assembly and Conflict of Interest Law in 1973. The matter was then referred to the Law 
Reform Commission for study and the Commission has now completed its final report. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

775 
 

Because the Law Reform Commission has just completed its report, the Government has decided to 
table it rather than introducing legislation at this Session. We would like to have the reaction of all the 
MLAs in the House to the proposals set forth in the Report. Then based on the proposals and reaction, 
Conflict of Interest legislation will be introduced in the Fall Session of 1977. 
 
Time does not permit me to outline in detail or even in general terms what the Commission Report says. 
I am going to simply table a copy of the statement that I would have read if I had been given the time to 
read. I would simply say that the most important recommendation is the establishment of a so-called 
Speaker’s Committee which would in effect supervise the question of Conflict of Interest and the 
regulations pertaining thereto. Also, it would allow a certain number of qualified voters to request an 
investigation of an alleged case of Conflict of Interest of any individual MLA, and we would then 
presumably be bound to undertake it on that basis. If Members of the House will permit me to adopt an 
American form of procedure informally, Mr. Speaker, I will simply table the Conflict of Interest and I 
will also table as having said my statement surrounding it. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, just a comment on the Minister’s statement. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has seen fit to put serious and onerous demands for Conflict of 
Interest on local governments. It has been indicated by his statement today that he still doesn’t have the 
courage to put the same standards upon itself. We have studied this matter since 1973. We have had 
White Papers. We have asked, in this Assembly, on several occasions, Mr. Attorney General, for 
Conflict of Interest legislation and all that we have today is more studies, more passing the buck in 
Conflict of Interest legislation. I hope that the Minister has the courage, when this comes in, to make it 
retroactive to 1973 when the problem first came up and to put upon the Government the same onus, the 
same responsibility, that it puts on local governments of this province. The buck has been passed long 
enough and it’s time to get on with some action at the Provincial Government level with Conflict of 
Interest legislation. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. W. E. Smishek 
(Minister of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance, and the 
proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Thatcher. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives):— Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
to re-enter the Budget Debate. 
 
Our Members of the Progressive Conservative caucus will have much to say during the coming weeks 
relating to the budgetary document placed before us last Thursday. During the Estimates, Mr. Speaker, 
we will once again undertake to point out to this Government the shortcomings and dangers contained in 
the 1977-78 Budget, as well as the positive measures therein. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

776 
 

Mr. Speaker, last year during the budget debate, Progressive Conservative Members stated that the 1976 
budget could never be balanced, despite contrary assurances from the Minister of Finance. We stated 
that this Government was intentionally showing less expenditure than it knew that it would make. Amid 
howls from the Members opposite, we unhappily predicted that a deficit of $50 to $100 million for the 
1976-77 fiscal year would result from this dishonest budgeting. We were told, of course, by the Minister 
of Finance, that that was impossible. 
 
It is obvious now, Mr. Speaker, that the deficit for last year could easily exceed the $50 million sorry 
statistic. The Minister currently admits a $45 million deficit, admits spending about $70 million more 
than was planned due to, and I quote: “Unforeseen circumstances”, and admits to including in the 
revenue of the province moneys which had already been included in the revenue of the Energy Fund to 
the extent of $35 millions. The people of Saskatchewan were most fortunate to have had a good year, 
Mr. Speaker. In terms of income, the larger than expected revenue from income taxes saved this 
Government from absolute disaster. In that regard, Mr. Speaker, our predictions of a year ago were 
incorrect. The province had a better year agriculturally than we had anticipated. 
 
We pointed out a year ago, Mr. Speaker, that funds from the Federal Government were estimated too 
high in the revenue column. It was no secret that this source of revenue would be reduced. Yet the 
Minister of Finance buried his head in the sand while his Government continued on the spending spree 
like Arab sheiks holidaying in London, spending about $70 million more we were told. Experience is a 
hard teacher. It gives the lesson after the test. But, Mr. Speaker, has the lesson been learned? This 
Government now plans to spend in excess of a billion and a half dollars, or at least that is what they tell 
us. What they really intend to spend we will further examine during the Estimates, but we probably will 
never know until after the 1977-78 Public Accounts are finally tabled in the Legislature. 
 
They tell us what they plan to spend and what they plan bring in will produce a deficit of about $40 
million. Yet, Mr. Speaker, as one example of the kind of budgetary and accounting juggling that goes 
on, the Liquor Board last year made approximately $43 million. This was transferred to the Government 
in revenue of some $50 million, and in this forthcoming Budget the Minister has included $65 million as 
potential revenue from the Liquor Board. Yet at the same time the Minister suggests, or the Minister is 
well aware, that an all-out program in both traffic safety and the Aware program is encouraging people 
in the Province of Saskatchewan to drink less. And it can therefore be reasonably assumed that if this 
program is successful, and we all hope it will be, that the Liquor Board profits will be less than they 
presently are, or less than $43 million. Yet the Minister includes in his Budget $65 million forecast for 
revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, assuming that revenues increase as much as the Minister of Finance tells us they will, and 
assuming that this year’s Budget expenditures are as poorly predicted as last year, we could face 
disastrous results, worse than even the predicted deficit, worse than anyone could possibly forecast at 
this point in time. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

777 
 

If the Minister of Finance is again $70 million short of what the actual expenditures will be, we could 
well face a deficit of over $100 million. This, Mr. Speaker, assumes the revenues are as currently stated 
in the Budget. 
 
Should net income in Saskatchewan continue on a downward trend, or in other words should the 
economic picture in Saskatchewan continue to slide as it has in the last short time, the people of our 
province could be informed a year from now of a mammoth deficit which could take many, many years 
to recover from. Warning signals are everywhere. Every economic indication points to caution. Net farm 
income is tumbling; the prospect of drought is on the minds of many farmers. The very base of our 
economy at the moment is not sound. Mr. Speaker, as I stated last year, this is the type of blind 
forecasting that the present Government used to create, or that the NDP used to create, a $541 million 
deficit for the people of British Columbia. Now look what the result has been for them. The new 
government in British Columbia forced to raise taxes, cut social services, Crown corporations raising 
prices and services at an alarming rate in both British Columbia and Saskatchewan. And while NDP 
Leader Dave Barrett said: “We were just trying to be compassionate.” But compassionate without any 
common sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may be politically convenient for the NDP in Saskatchewan to watch another 
government take the heat from previous NDP mismanagement, but it is the people who eventually must 
pay the price no matter who is in power. 
 
It appears that the $90 million cash surplus that this Government inherited when it first took office may 
very well have turned into a negative cash forward situation by the end of this year. Unless the 
Government begins to exercise financial responsibility by election year the people of Saskatchewan will 
be faced with a financial albatross the likes of which in Saskatchewan we have never known. All of this 
while our Government borrows money at an unprecedented rate. As I mentioned last evening, in the 
funds and cash forward balances in the Public Accounts for March, 31, 1976, the Government has on 
deposit in cash or in short term securities just a little over half of these so-called funds. The remainder is 
invested in Crown corporations, in other words, invested only in itself. Our sister Province of Alberta 
recently loaned $50 million to another province. Common sense management of their resource industry 
has put Alberta in a position of long-term economic strength. But in Saskatchewan the first mortgage on 
the future of our children will be held by a New York bank. For what were we borrowing huge amounts 
of foreign capital to pay off foreign companies? In exchange for what? New jobs? No, sir. Opportunities 
for our young people? No, sir. Increased potash production? No, sir. The only tangible return we are 
guaranteed are the deeds, a piece of paper, the deeds to mine operations, pieces of paper saying the 
Government owns the mines, the same mines that have been producing revenue for us all along. Profits, 
says the Minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Has he got any yet? The 
answer is, No. Has he seen any yet? The answer is, No. Has he now more money in his Treasury than he 
had before? The answer is, No, Mr. Speaker. We realize the Liberal Government in Central Canada in 
the East, has not been very co-operative in the resource field. Intrusions into provincial jurisdictions are 
commonplace in Canada today as the result of the Liberal appetite for power and control in Ottawa. In 
many respects 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

778 
 

then we applaud the Members opposite for sharing our determination and for showing their own 
determination to regain Saskatchewan’s rights to resource taxation. We commend you for that and have 
all along. We could not expect the same from Members to my right and that is unfortunate even if today 
inconsequential. 
 
I believe it was Robert Frost who once defined a Liberal as someone who is just too broad-minded to 
take his own side in a quarrel. Nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, the PC Party is firmly committed in the 
struggle to retain the provinces’ rights to taxation. We believe our natural resources belong to the people 
of Saskatchewan and want to insure the greatest possible benefit from them. But to get that greatest 
possible benefit there is not only one way to achieve that result. There is not only Government Crown 
corporations as a means to achieve that result. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed with an almost 
incalculable amount of potash. Geologists tell us our supply will furnish the world’s needs for hundreds 
and hundreds of years. Expansion of this industry would mean a great deal to the future quality of life in 
Saskatchewan; not expansion in Montana, not expansion in North Dakota, not expansion in New 
Brunswick but expansion in Saskatchewan. We all know the direct benefits to be achieved from one 
potash mine. Hundreds of jobs are created, secondary and supply industries spring up and are nourished 
by the presence of the mine. The increased economic activity in the surrounding communities is a boon 
to everyone. All of this plus the revenue that goes to the province in the form of taxation, makes 
expansion of the industry seem like good sense but when the Government opposite makes rules and 
regulations and restrictions, not only in the area of direct resource industries, but in the area of 
labour-management relations, in the general attitude of government towards the private sector, such that 
the private sector cannot foresee good times ahead, as they do not in the Province of Saskatchewan at 
the moment, then to suggest that the private sector can possibly expand, is a fool’s paradise. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan must create positive rules and positive laws if it expects the private 
sector to take positive action. This they have not done. This they have refused to do and, therefore, 
complain later when the private sector does not expand. We can accomplish the kind of expansion and 
the kind of generation of revenues for the people of Saskatchewan by commonsense, not by babbling 
with the organizations that are here from now until eternity, but by creating new kinds of organizations 
and new directions in the resource field in Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan should be given the opportunity to participate directly in the future of the 
potash industry, not through the Premier and his Cabinet, but directly. A vehicle must be established 
whereby our citizens could voluntarily invest in a fund to build new lines and expand this vital industry 
whether in conjunction with private companies or on their own in formation of a new company directly 
owned, directly owned by the citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, for the information of the Member for Biggar 
(Mr. Cowley) I suggest to him that he take another look at how a really democratic party determines its 
policy, not by some individuals speaking their minds as we entitle our people to do. God is allowing 
people to speak their minds and we allow our people to do. Not by shutting it down as his convention 
would do, and holding closed sessions from the press, but allowing individual members to speak their 
minds and discuss the issue before the people. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

779 
 

The actions of this Government, Mr. Speaker, in the resource development field, have become an 
embarrassment to our citizens who travel abroad. While people from other provinces, rich in resources 
or industry, can travel with pride in the economic benefits their provinces have achieved, people from 
Saskatchewan are forced to apologize for the actions and attitudes of a Government which all too often 
displays a distinct lack of common sense, particularly in the resource field. People of Saskatchewan are 
proud of our province, but not so proud of the present Government’s performance as it relates to 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recent by-elections in Prince Albert-Duck Lake and Saskatoon-Sutherland most 
deservedly received much attention from the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. During the 
campaigns all three parties stressed their importance in relation to the next provincial election. And I 
notice the Member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) wants to step out, his party is stepping out to 
examine the result of this election. 
 
The Liberals said, the main issue in the by-election in Saskatoon was leadership, and I hope for the sake 
of their leader they were wrong. And from the standpoint of the Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. 
Allen) let me say his reputation, which was already on the line in that by-election in which his party 
received half the number of votes from last time, and that of his leader obviously were rejected by the 
people of Saskatoon Sutherland. The leader of the Liberal Party said the by-elections would determine 
which party would form the next government. I hope he was right but I think more definitely, it 
determined which party would not form the next government. The Premier and the NDP campaigners 
said the main issue was the resource policy, and told the people to stand up for Saskatchewan. That they 
did, Mr. Speaker; they stood up for Saskatchewan by electing two Progressive Conservatives, two 
outstanding individuals who share our vision of the future of Saskatchewan, a province that will 
challenge the spirit of our people, with governments based on the needs and aspirations of people. 
 
Many issues came to the surface during these two campaigns, not the least of which was the concern of 
many voters as to the state of our health and hospital services. And only today we heard the Minister of 
Health (Mr. Robbins) relate further statistical excuses for our health system that has gone awry, further 
statistical evidence, he says, to prove that we have a wonderful system, when the medical doctors, when 
the hospital workers and when the individual patients are saying otherwise. Statistics do not prove the 
case, Mr. Minister of Health. Statistics do not prove the case of the NDP Government. It is the people 
that determine the case and they are not being served by the present hospital system in the Province of 
Saskatchewan, and they let you know that in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and Saskatoon-Sutherland, and 
they are going to continue to let you know that until you make changes, until you see that the hospital 
system meets the needs of individual people in Saskatchewan, and doesn’t meet the needs of statistical 
data of the Minister of Health. People find it unbelievable that a Government which could afford to 
waste hundreds of millions of dollars to buy up existing industries and millions and millions more to 
build elaborate office buildings, cannot afford to maintain a high standard of health care. I think they 
sent you that message on the 2nd of March, and I hope you got it; but if the Minister of Health’s 
arguments today are any example I don’t think you did. I see that in the Budget that you have 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

780 
 

increased the allocation for health resources and that is good. I hope that increased allocation is more in 
relation to the health budget this year than the other increases this year. And I would suggest, if that 
increase this year is met with the determination of the Government opposite to provide a proper health 
care system then you will succeed where you have failed so miserably in the last two years. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Members of this Assembly will closely scrutinize the medical services of 
our province over the next two years to ensure that the people of this province receive nothing but the 
best in health care. The people of Saskatchewan are concerned as well about welfare. 
 
Many people in the province cannot work, and are forced to live in near poverty. We must ensure that 
those people as well as our working people with large families receive sufficient to live decent lives. 
Others on the welfare rolls who can work must be given the opportunity to work and earn a living for 
themselves. 
 
Many of our senior citizens have been forgotten. Progressive Conservatives believe that senior citizens’ 
benefits can be geared and should be geared to the minimum wage level as established by the province, 
thus whenever the cost of living forces the government to increase the minimum wage, senior citizens’ 
supplementary benefits would automatically rise accordingly, and senior citizens would not have to 
come hat in hand to government year after year begging for enough to survive. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are also concerned with the general quality of life in communities. They 
expect their municipal authorities to provide high quality services to their communities. Increases in the 
Neighbourhood Improvement Program are fine, but our municipalities have recently been faced with 
tremendous cost increases mainly brought on by the NDP Government. Large increases in power, 
telephones, natural gas, gasoline and diesel fuel will swallow up the $2 per capita grant increase and 
more. Our municipal councils will be left in even worse positions than last year and doubtlessly mill 
rates will be forced up even more this year just to provide the needed services. In the city of Regina, the 
increase is expected and reported to go as high as 17 mills. The $2 grant increase by the Provincial 
Government is worth about one mill to the ratepayers of Regina. Clearly, the Government is not 
fulfilling its responsibility to our municipal governments and to our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Progressive Conservative Party have advocated, for the last several years, that a 
formula must be established to have a greater revenue sharing plan with our municipalities and while it 
will not help our communities this year, we are pleased to hear in this Budget the Government’s 
intentions to undertake discussions with municipalities with a view to establishing a revenue sharing 
plan. We hope that the Government is serious in this spoken gesture towards this goal and hope that 
meaningful dialogue will result in a formula acceptable to all concerned. However, the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) in speaking to SUMA and in announcing this program spelled out 
some areas of distinct direction that the negotiations, so-called, must take. That is not meaningful 
dialogue and that is not the way to get communities on your side to determine a formula that will work. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

781 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have been concerned for some time that our citizens are seeing their Government 
becomes less and less responsive to their particular needs of the communities, our neighbourhoods and 
our families. This Conservative Party believes that citizens must have a meaningful input and influence 
over programs and policies which govern their daily lives. Thus, our basic policy is to emphasize a 
decentralization of government power and bring about economy and authority at the local level through 
locally elected and responsible officials. Revenue sharing discussions must be carried out with all of the 
organizations in Saskatchewan that are concerned about local government. Their input is absolutely vital 
to the success of any revenue-sharing scheme. While revenue sharing is fundamental to viable local 
government, along with it must come greater authority at the local level. Just as we expect the Federal 
Government to respect the authority of the Provincial Government, surely our municipal governments 
must be granted the same benefits and direction of the Province of Saskatchewan. It is not right that the 
Department of Municipal Affairs, situated in Regina, should have final authority over all community 
planning in our province. A locally elected council is in a much better position to assess and determine 
the planning requirements of the communities in which they live. The budgetary addition of 40 or 50 
more employees to the Department of Municipal Affairs will do little to enhance the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan communities or in fact to make municipal bodies in Saskatchewan believe that they are 
going to have authority over their local regions. Only through a real decentralization and redistribution 
of decision-making authority will our local level of government be rekindled to meet the needs and 
aspirations of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the Progressive Conservative Members of this Assembly were pleased to hear that after 
January 1st next year lease lands in the Land Bank will be available for purchase to tenants of five years. 
It would be a very interesting thing to understand, though, why the NDP Government refused to write 
this so-called right in the lease. It would be very interesting to find out why the Government won’t place 
that right in the legislation. We wonder whether it is lip service only. We wonder whether the 
Government doesn’t plan to set price levels so high and interest rates so high when the five years are up 
that no farmer, as a matter of fact, no individual in his right mind could ever possibly buy it, set the lease 
terms so low that the only possible way that the farmer could continue farming is to continue to lease 
through the Land Bank. We look forward to the terms and conditions of the sale and hope that the 
Government is sincere in this announcement. We also hope that the same consideration will be given to 
lease payments in the determination of the purchase price and that will remain to be seen as well. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Party has held for some time that there are better ways to assist farmers in 
the transfer of land than the present Land Bank structure but the NDP Government has consistently 
proven itself to be no friend of the family farm. The family farm does not start with lease land. The 
recent fuel increases at a time when net farm income is at a low ebb is further evidence of that. We 
would hope that this Government would offer Land Bank tenants agreements for sale consistent with the 
lease payments and/or assist these farmers to obtain low interest loans to pay for the land they farm if 
they so choose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the present depressed state of our beef 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

782 
 

industry in the province there is an obvious need for some attention to this problem. We welcome the 
forage insurance pilot program and await details of this program with great interest. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the beef producers of Saskatchewan, particularly those I visited within the Prince Albert-Duck Lake area 
want to be heard. Cattlemen know their business thoroughly and want to be involved directly in any 
government decision making as it effects their livelihood. Our beef producers feel that they have been 
manipulated for far too long with far too little to say. They are not going to accept, Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture, a beef marketing board simply because the Minister of Agriculture thinks it’s a good idea. 
Many of them feel that they are in the situation they are in today as a direct result of the Government’s 
raised beef program and campaign of a few years ago, along with the Federal Government’s import 
policies. The Progressive Conservative Party believes that producers must be involved in government 
agriculture policy and planning to a much greater degree than they are today. Bouncing from one 
stopgap solution to another is no way to help anyone plan his business. Producers and producer 
organizations must be invited by government to become a part of agricultural policy. Furthermore, we 
believe that no marketing boards should ever be established that are not producer initiated and producer 
controlled, not appointees of the Government but producer controlled. It is time that this Government 
and the Government at Ottawa realized that our agricultural producers expect help and assistance from 
them, not direction and control from them. We believe that the Saskatchewan family farm is the most 
efficient agricultural unit anywhere in the world. We believe that over the past generation it has proven 
itself far superior to any collective or commune-style operation. The Saskatchewan family farm is the 
very cornerstone of the quality of rural life in our province. It is the very breath of the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. The Progressive Conservative Party is not only committed to the preservation of the 
family farm but believes that in modern times it must be nourished, re-cultivated, reactivated to meet the 
demands of the future. To accomplish this in Saskatchewan a fundamental shift in political philosophy is 
required from the Government. It must become once again the servant, not the master. The family farm 
cannot survive government domination, direction and control. The basic institutions and fundamental 
values of Canadian society will not survive unless governments on all levels take on the supportive roles 
they were intended to play and abandon the authoritative roles that they have assumed. The Progressive 
Conservative Party believes in government as a servant of the people and I fear we are the only party 
that does. We believe that the concerns expressed to us as representatives should be the first concerns 
reflected by us as legislators. It is always our duty to listen and to respond as servants of the people. 
 
We hear a great many political people in our province talk. We listen to the people. It is one thing to 
listen; it is another thing to listen and to respond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the by-election campaigns the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) accused our 
Progressive Conservative candidates of cheap political gamesmanship in taking a firm stand on rising 
crime in Saskatchewan. He even made jokes about a TV series called, The Streets of Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don’t think the crime situation in our province is a joke and the 
people who live in Saskatoon let the NDP candidate in Saskatoon know that. Our party is deeply 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

783 
 

concerned about rising crime rates and the loss of respect for our judicial system. We are disturbed by 
the feeling among many of our citizens that hardened criminals are treated better than our prison guards 
and our peace officers. And let me say to the Minister of Social Services, who is the Minister 
responsible for the situation in Prince Albert, that when 24 years of service of a fine peace officer were 
negated every single peace officer in Saskatchewan believed that the Government was not behind them. 
Peace officers’ morale has deteriorated as a result and that doesn’t help, Mr. Minister of Social Services, 
in improving the crime situation in Saskatchewan and trying to bring the rising crime down. 
 
We are concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the permissive leniency pervading our courtrooms and our parole 
system. We are alarmed at the number of violent disturbances in our penal institutions. There must have 
been 100 people in Prince Albert who asked me this question: “Who is running the jails, the guards or 
the prisoners?” 
 
The people of Saskatchewan expect to be protected from habitual criminals. They expect their 
Government to back up their police officers. They want our judicial system to become modern and 
efficient. 
 
The backlog in our criminal courts is appalling; cases take months and months to be heard. A person 
charged with a criminal offence has a right to a speedy trial under due process of law. For the sake of 
our society and for his own sake, he should not be freed on bail or remanded into custody for prolonged 
periods of time. Yet all too often this does occur. We sincerely hope that the increases in staff and 
expenditures in the Attorney General’s department and particularly the larger increases for court 
services for the Magistrate’s Court, are a recognition of the problems that I have mentioned. 
 
Furthermore, we are very pleased to see increased funding in terms of police grants to our communities. 
We also hope that the Attorney General’s light-hearted attitude towards crime in our province is 
confined to by-elections, because this problem is serious and must be solved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada are governed by centralists, with 
centralist policy determined to control everything. The Federal Government under the Liberal banner 
has floundered from crisis to scandal to crisis for over a decade and still clings to power. Never, never, 
have the Canadian people felt the hand of government so heavy in their daily lives. Never has a 
government of Canada showed such determination to take all power unto itself at the expense of the 
provinces and at the expense of individual citizens. Mr. Speaker, the people of western Canada feel 
alienated and cut adrift by a government which has long since ceased to listen or respond. In this respect 
we share much the same frustration as the people of Quebec. 
 
The Liberal Government has long forgotten who is supposed to serve whom. The principle of 
government as the servant died shortly after the Diefenbaker Government; it was replaced by a principle 
that we know best - what is good for this country, and that is what the people are going to have whether 
they like it or not. I sincerely hope the Liberals in Saskatchewan continue to laugh at John Diefenbaker 
and continue to spell out 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

784 
 

that laughter over the next few months and they will continue to lose support as rapidly as they have in 
the last few months. “When we get into trouble, we will advertise,” they say, “we will advertise and we 
will go to picnics.” Like Quebecers, the people of western Canada felt the frustration of feeling that they 
have lost control, Mr. Speaker, lost control over their own destinies. 
 
For 100 years Canada was a strong united nation, but only in the last ten have the seeds of discontent 
been so well nourished; nourished to a point where our very survival as a nation is in jeopardy; 
threatened because people who feel they have lost control over their futures want it back at any price. 
 
For many people in Quebec, unfortunately, the price that is being considered is the break-up of our 
country. All of this is caused by a centralized insensitive government in Ottawa, out of touch with the 
needs and the wishes of the people of Canada, responsible to no one except to themselves and their 
political survival. 
 
I want to remind this Assembly of a brief statistic. In 1966 the current Prime Minister was not the main 
Minister of Justice and at that time the Separatist movement represented two per cent of the population 
of Quebec. For the next two years the Minister of Justice was responsible for Quebec and responsible for 
bringing that situation under control and the Separatists grew from two per cent to ten per cent. In 1968 
the Liberals assumed office under this Prime Minister in Ottawa and for the next four years the 
Separatist movement in Quebec grew from ten per cent to 25 per cent. In 1972 the present Government 
was re-elected in Ottawa and the Separatist movement grew in the next four years from 25 per cent to 40 
per cent and became the Government of the Province of Quebec. It grew from two per cent to 40 per 
cent in ten years and he is supposedly the saviour of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is no better as it relates to this Provincial Government. There is a general 
mistrust and a feeling of frustration among the people of Saskatchewan towards this Government in 
Regina. People feel alienated from the political process and it is no wonder. Their local officials, 
councils and boards have gradually been stripped of their powers. Even their MLA is relatively 
powerless against this centralized Regina Government. All decisions are made by the Cabinet, or some 
smaller portion of the Cabinet and carried out by a central planner of one sort or another in one office of 
government or another. Our citizens feel powerless against the central governmental bureaucratic 
management of the NDP in Regina. 
 
We were off on a wild scheme to take over the potash industry. Mr. Speaker, we were off on a wild 
scheme to take over the potash industry within a few months of the last provincial election, in which no 
mention was made to the people of the province of the proposed nationalization. The recent by-elections 
were in the words of the Premier, a test of this resource policy. Is that the Premier’s idea of a democratic 
process to introduce policies and actions which have huge and major consequences for our future 
generations and then test public opinion, once in a while, to see if he should speed up or slow down. 
That is not democracy and that is not how the people of Saskatchewan expect to be treated. 
 
The election of two Progressive Conservatives was proof that 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

785 
 

the people of this province are determined to restore government as the servant and not the master. This 
gives me great hope and confidence in our future. It is evident that the spirit of our forefathers is still 
with us today in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the people of our province will rise to 
the challenges we place before them, to build a free society in which we create a better quality of life for 
everyone; an opportunity for each individual - and I realize that word is harsh to the Government 
benches, individual, to feel his worth as such and reach out for his hopes and his aspirations as an 
individual. 
 
The God-given wealth of our province has been blessed with the strength of character of our people and 
it means that Saskatchewan can become an example for the other people in Canada to follow. A 
commonsense government based on serving the people will allow this province to attain a quality of life 
second to none in Canada, if individuals are given a chance. It would allow us to achieve social and 
economic benefits far superior to what we now enjoy or any other province enjoys. That is the type of 
government that the Progressive Conservative Party is offering to the people of Saskatchewan, to the 
individual people of Saskatchewan, commonsense representative government and a challenge to 
improve our way of life. 
 
We envisaged the day when the Progressive Conservative budget can more adequately meet the needs of 
our senior citizens and those others in our province who are forced to live near poverty. We envision the 
day when increased revenues from a revitalized economy can allow a government to reduce the heavy 
load that our individual citizens are now forced to bear through a maze of high taxes and higher taxes as 
a result of this Budget. 
 
We are confident that there will come a day in Saskatchewan when a PC budget can readily meet the 
needs of our people for the very best in essential services for our communities. We are confident that 
under a Progressive Conservative banner, Saskatchewan’s vast energies and resources can provide us 
with the best education, the best health and social services and individual opportunity of any province in 
Canada, yes, in fact, for the working men and women of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Budget presented to us last Thursday was both an admission of past failures and a 
dismal view of the coming year. I have already outlined the obvious liability that this Budget could 
create for the taxpayer and future taxpayers of Saskatchewan. In the next few days our Members will 
point out, in more detail, specific areas in specific departments, which need re-examination in terms of 
budgetary estimates. We will point out waste and extravagance wherever possible with the hope that this 
deficit Budget will not result in financial chaos for our province through continued misuse of public 
funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have known for some time that the people of Saskatchewan have lost control of the 
public purse. It is common knowledge that the Provincial Auditor’s office is too understaffed and 
inadequately financed to do a proper job of ensuring that the people’s money is not squandered. I think 
that it is clear to everyone in this Assembly that not only has this Government failed to provide the 
auditor with financial wherewithal to do this job, but this Government has illustrated its refusal to allow 
the auditor the independence he is supposed to have as a servant of this Assembly. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

786 
 

Members will recall that during the middle of the by-election campaigns, two or three weeks ago, a 
press release was issued out of the office of the Premier on behalf of the Provincial Auditor, in direct 
contradiction to the statements made by the auditor himself, to the Prince Albert Daily Herald. And as if 
this didn’t show enough contempt for this independent servant of the Assembly, the Premier himself 
read the news release to CKBI Radio. Then he had the gall to suggest that I should apologize to the 
auditor, which he quite often does whenever I suggest that the auditor should be given more support, 
independence and respect from this Government. 
 
I draw to the attention of the Members opposite, the fact that the provincial Auditor has, only yesterday, 
tabled a report to the Legislature outlining 21 different areas of government mismanagement and misuse 
of Government funds. And . . . 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— . . . misuse, where does it say. 
 
MR. COLLVER:— Listen to his comments then. Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Development Advance Account: “Failure to adhere to generally accepted accounting principles.” Is that 
not misuse? Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Supplies Account: “Uncertainty regarding inventory 
valuation.” Is that not misuse? Department of the Attorney General, Administration of Estates: “Inability 
to qualify trust liabilities and inconsistency in application of accounting principles.” Is that not misuse? 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources: Forest Protection Advance Account - “Failure to 
adhere to generally accepted accounting practice and principles.” Is that not misuse? “Uncertainty 
regarding outcome, failure to adhere to generally accepted auditing principles, inability to verify 
opening inventories, failure to record fixed assets acquired from the Department of Health.” And the 
gentlemen opposite request that I define, “misuse.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall in the Throne Speech we were advised to look at this new year with modest 
confidence. In this Budget we are told to look ahead with cautious optimism. I should like whoever is 
writing these speeches to know that my confidence in this Government is, indeed, modest and my 
optimism for the success of their budgeting grows more cautious every day. 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion before us but I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, I think that all Members of this 
Legislative Assembly are fully aware, along with a number of people who have listened to the debates in 
this Assembly, would be fully aware of the history of agreements that we have had in this Legislative 
Assembly when we debate Throne and Budget Speeches. 
 
In the last two years it has become common for those agreements to be broken along with statements of 
half-truths and the only thing that I can be thankful for, Mr. Speaker, is that this is all being aired over 
the radio so that the people of Saskatchewan can be made fully aware of how 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

787 
 

the Members of the Conservative Party, in particular the Member for Nipawin, the Leader of the 
Conservative Party, obliges himself to follow those agreements. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure today in participating in this Budget Debate, pleasure because 
Saskatchewan’s economy has undergone its finest year. The gross domestic product has increased by 
14.9 per cent; personal expenditures on consumer goods by 16.3 per cent and 14,000 additional jobs 
have been created. Construction investment and mineral development have been at all time highs during 
1976. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party who has just taken his seat, said during the 
course of his remarks that he does not like statistics and I think that we have to ask ourselves, as do the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, why does he not like statistics? 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan that he does not like statistics because 
any statistics that he can lay his hands on will show that Saskatchewan, in the last several years, has 
been the most progressive Government and province in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— He shakes his head, Mr. Mr. Speaker, he shakes his head in disbelief. 
 
Just let me turn to a Trade, Industry and Commerce magazine issued monthly across Canada, the month 
of February, an article entitled, “Records tumble in Saskatchewan.” I just want to quote several 
paragraphs from this magazine, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 
 

The building boom in Saskatchewan is making news across Canada. Even the Edmonton Journal, 
which usually saves its superlatives for the booming pace of development in the paper’s home 
city gave prominence to Saskatchewan’s record-breaking performance and the fact that the boom 
is drawing tradesmen from eastern Canada. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— It goes on and I quote: 
 

In 1975 in the province wheat, potash, uranium, coal, steel and paper passed the $1 billion mark 
for the first time in the total value of construction work. 

 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Communities have reported permit values double and triple the dollar values of 1975. 
 
And I close in quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

And the end of the boom is nowhere in sight. The only possible inhibiting factor could be the 
problem of recruiting sufficient skilled manpower to cope with the volume of work for 1977. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, that is why 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

788 
 

the Leader of the Conservative Party does not like statistics. You can look at any statistics you want to, 
exploration development of minerals, non-renewable resources in the province, housing, both 
commercial and private and statistics show that they are record-breaking, not only for the Province of 
Saskatchewan but in relation to other areas of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make one comment on another item that the Member for Nipawin related to in 
his speech and that was in regard to the Land Bank. He says that it is only now the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the New Democratic Government of Saskatchewan is prepared to sell land to farmers. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— You were dishonest from the start. 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, let me say to that Member that it was always the intent and it was clear 
in the legislation. It is clear in the records of this Legislative Assembly when I introduced that legislation 
as Minister of Agriculture, that after five years we would make that land available for sale to Land Bank 
farmers. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Conservative Party that he take caution in the 
statements that he makes in this House and outside of this House relating to half truths and mistruths 
about the legislation and the policy of this Government. And when he related to the Land Bank I know 
that farmers in Saskatchewan know this to be a good program and in the not too distant future he will 
find that out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes reviewing developments in 
mineral resources in this province. For 70 years governments in this province have wrestled with the 
problem of diversification of the economy. Great strides have been made since 1971 particularly in the 
expansion of mining in the province. Our province is no longer entirely dependent on the agricultural 
sector in order that our citizens maintain a reasonable standard of living. Revenues to the Government 
from non-renewable resources in 1971 were $33 million. In 1975-76, the last fiscal year, they reached a 
total of $337 million or more than ten times as much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— The New Democratic Party Governments of these years have developed policies 
which combine the best in mineral expansion balanced by a concern for realistic conservation and 
environmental practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has been the response to this most significant expansion in this province? In the past 
year Saskatchewan has undergone wholesale attacks on our policies by multinational corporations in the 
form of law suits, centralist interference by the Federal Government acting in concert with the resource 
companies, and an attempt by the United States authorities to apply their anti-trust laws 
extra-territorially. Attacks have also been made in Saskatchewan at the political level by both the 
Opposition parties that sit to your left, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals and the Conservatives. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

789 
 

The provincial Conservatives and Liberals have done nothing to defend Saskatchewan’s right to control 
resource development. The Member from Nipawin as quoted in the Leader-Post, January 22nd says and 
I quote: 
 

A PC Government would not repay all tax moneys collected from petroleum companies under 
Bill 42 because the oil companies do not wish to recoup all their back taxes. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) does not seem to understand that if Bill 42 is 
overturned the Government will be required to repay all taxes. The Conservatives seem to believe that 
they can simply retain whatever taxes the oil corporations do not want. I think we can be certain just 
how much that would be if the opportunity was given to them. 
 
The Member for Nipawin bemoaned the lot of oil companies in the province. He was further quoted in 
the Leader-Post of January 22nd as saying: 
 

Small companies such as CIGOL have nothing to lose by challenging the constitutionality of Bill 
42. 

 
As my colleague, the Minister of Education says, the party for the small man. This so-called small 
company CIGOL merged with Northern and Central Gas Corporation in 1974. They presently employ 
about 3,400 workers and acquired profits of $20.9 million in 1976. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this “small 
and struggling” company has nothing to lose, but the people of Saskatchewan do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— The Member for Nipawin’s defence of small business is totally false. Small 
businesses are not challenging Bill 42. It is Imperial Oil and the oil cartel which wishes to destroy this 
legislation. The Member for Nipawin takes every opportunity to distort this fact even though he is 
giggling in his chair at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resource policies of this Government are clear. The people of Saskatchewan deserve a 
proper share of the wealth accruing from the use of our natural resources, and the NDP stand firmly 
behind that commitment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Now what are the resource policies of the Opposition parties in this Legislature? The 
Liberals campaigned, in the last provincial election, on a platform that made clear where they stand - 
firmly on the side of the multinational resource companies and on the side of the wealthy and the 
privileged. 
 
The Conservatives have been more hesitant to make their stand clear, Mr. Speaker. Stealing a page from 
their federal leader’s book, the Member for Nipawin and his Tory caucus try to avoid the issues 
whenever possible. Mr. Collver says his party would form a joint stock company and sell the shares of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Through the efforts of this NDP Government the people of Saskatchewan will have an equal and 
equitable share in that ownership. Mr. Collver’s plan not only would again create 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

790 
 

inequality of ownership by concentrating control of the Potash Corporation in the hands of a few large 
shareholders, it will also be unnecessary since Saskatchewan people will already have control of the 
potash resource through this New Democratic Government’s action. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives opposed . . . 
 
MR. BAILEY:— Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. When making reference to a Member whether he 
be on the same side of the House or not is to refer to the Member from such a constituency and not to 
refer to him by his name. 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I will take note of the Hon. Member’s observation and refer to the 
Member as the Member for Nipawin. I know he is referred to many other things in the country in 
Saskatchewan and I’ll try not to refer to him in those terms in this Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Opposition has been reluctant to express its policy on resources 
with any clarity but fortunately for the people of this province we have plenty of examples of 
Conservative action across this country. Let me take you on a trip across this country while I examine 
the Conservative record on resource policy in other provinces. 
 
Let me begin in the Maritimes, Mr. Speaker. Two potash companies with mines in Saskatchewan, IMC 
and PCA are exploring for potash in Conservative New Brunswick. They have signed an agreement with 
the New Brunswick Government whereby the companies will pay the Government a very low royalty. In 
fact the royalty agreed to is six and one-quarter per cent of the gross value of total sales. This is a 
give-away. It is a give-away, Mr. Speaker. If we were to compare the revenue produced under this 
system with that produced under Saskatchewan’s legislation, we would estimate that in 1977-78 the 
value of potash sales for Saskatchewan would be in excess of $90 million. If Saskatchewan were to use 
the New Brunswick system, only $23 million would be obtained by the residents of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in other minerals in New Brunswick, royalties levied on existing mines are very low, so 
low that even the Conservatives in New Brunswick are getting embarrassed and have directed their 
officials to undertake to increase those levies. A higher new royalty using the principles expressed in 
Saskatchewan’s uranium royalty system is now being developed for that province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Though Saskatchewan is constantly criticized for heavy taxation, the other 
provinces, even the free enterprise Conservatives of New Brunswick, recognize that there is tax room in 
the mining industry and that obtaining a larger benefit for the people does not reduce performance of the 
industry. Despite the fact that the New Brunswick Conservatives are moving to increase royalties on 
other minerals, they seem to be contradicting themselves by offering potash companies unrealistically 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

791 
 

low royalties to develop their potash resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s move to Central Canada and examine the Conservative record in the Province of 
Ontario. In the mining industry, as in many types of business ventures, an important criterion in 
measuring profitability is return on investment. In Ontario, no attempt is made to recognize the greater 
return that an investment in a low-cost rich ore body has over a larger ore body which may produce 
more income but which required considerably larger investment. 
 
Taxation systems in most provinces now recognize this factor and adjust mining tax rates to take into 
account this return on investment. But in Conservative Ontario this is not the case. Bad management of 
their resources, Mr. Speaker, is not unlike the management performance of the Conservative leader here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s address ourselves for a moment to the Ontario Government’s misdirected attempts to deal with the 
oil situation; keeping in mind that Ontario, even though it is a minority government, is a Conservative 
Government. When the price of oil was increased and the rest of the country agreed upon a 45 day price 
freeze in order that inventories of the oil companies would be sold at the old price, the Conservatives of 
Ontario instituted a 90 day freeze. The effect of this was to remove exploration dollars from 
Saskatchewan by limiting the cash flow to the producers, and to encourage companies to raise their 
prices to the consumers in the rest of the country in excess of what was needed to offset their losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ontario Government argues that western Canadian crude oil should not be priced so 
high. The leader of the Conservative Party here in Saskatchewan argues that point. But do they make 
any effort to reduce the price of manufactured goods, farm machinery and automobiles that are used in 
the West? Have you ever heard this crusader for the small farmer ask that some undertaking be made to 
correct that inequality? No, Mr. Speaker, western Canadians pay more than world prices for 
commodities produced in Conservative Ontario, yet we are currently selling our oil to Central Canada 
for $3.50 a barrel below the world price. 
 
Now you would think the Ontario Government would at least recognize our contribution to national 
unity. But no again, the provincial Government in Ontario receives more revenue in sales tax on a barrel 
of western oil than Saskatchewan receives in royalties. Mr. Speaker, let me repeat that. The 
Conservative Government in Ontario which is so concerned about high energy costs levied more tax on 
a barrel of oil than we receive here in Saskatchewan by way of royalties. Shameful! But it is interesting. 
How often can we recollect the Premier of this province, when attending federal-provincial conferences 
on oil prices, listening to Ontario bemoan our attempts to obtain a price more closely reflecting market 
prices, only to know that Ontario regards Saskatchewan oil as an opportunity to raise revenue for the 
operation of its programs. Mr. Speaker, if the price of oil is too high in Ontario, why doesn’t the Ontario 
Government lower its sales tax on petroleum products? 
 
Is this the kind of gamesmanship the Tories in Saskatchewan advocate? Is this the way to preserve 
Canadian unity? It’s a contradictory position, Mr. Speaker, adopted by the Conservatives in Ontario, not 
unlike that of the Conservative leader in 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

792 
 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, he should answer to Saskatchewan people where he stands in this regard. 
And I can only suggest to the people of Saskatchewan that his silence would indicate that he is in 
support of that Ontario Conservative policy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s stop for a moment in Manitoba, where a resource policy based on expediency 
has already brought down a former Conservative Government some years ago. The people of Manitoba 
are still suffering from the loss of over $100 million at the Churchill Forest Industry complex in 
northwestern Manitoba. 
 
Former Conservative Premier Duff Roblin, in his inability to recognize a bad deal, allowed millions of 
dollars of taxpayers’ money to be paid out for the construction of a plant. The developer never had to 
operate that plant in order to make a profit. The profit was all made on building the complex, by giving 
lucrative contracts to subcontracting companies most of which were owned by the developer himself. Is 
this an example of the types of resource management the Conservatives would bring to Saskatchewan? 
This is not unlike the position on resource development advocated by the Leader of the Conservative 
Party, the Member for Nipawin. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have already experienced a similar resource management 
policy in this province, the policy under the former Liberal Government of Ross Thatcher. In 1971 when 
the New Democratic Party formed a new Government in Saskatchewan, we prevented a deal from going 
through which would have been a comparable fiasco to Churchill Forest Industries and I am sure all 
people in Saskatchewan can remember the proposed Doré Lake pulp mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look for a moment at our western neighbours, Alberta, who talk of free enterprise but 
yet who buy airline companies. Terribly socialistic, some people say. I wonder if the Member for 
Nipawin has ever undertaken to ask Premier Lougheed how many new jobs the purchase of Pacific 
Western Airlines created for the Province of Alberta. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— I wonder if he has ever undertaken to press for the transfer of the head offices of 
those companies or that company from the Province of British Columbia to the Province of Alberta. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, although they act as socialists on some fronts recognizing the importance of 
government ownership of the key sectors of the economy, the Alberta Government denies their residents 
the full benefits of their non-renewable resources. Against our repeated protests they lowered the price 
of a barrel of heavy oil by 30 cents. Did it increase demand? No. Some of our producers in 
Saskatchewan followed suit but no additional oil was sold. The Federal Liberal Government saw some 
taxing room, stepped in and raised the export tax on a barrel of exported heavy oil by 30 cents. The end 
result was a transfer of money from Saskatchewan and Alberta to the Federal Government. 
 
Bad resource management, setting the stage of the Federal Government to increase taxation at the 
expense of the provinces is not unlike the position of the Tory Leader in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one may ask, what are the policies of the 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

793 
 

Federal Tory Party? What does the Federal Tory Leader say? He spends most of his time travelling 
around the country saying nothing, determining how he can make the country safe for unfettered 
international capitalism. His statements on resource policy are scarce and without value. His latest 
pronouncement came last week at the Prospector’s and Developer’s Convention in Toronto. What did he 
say there? Only that when he became Prime Minister, something the Gallup Poll now says is very 
unlikely, he is going to take steps to ensure that the provinces all have the same royalty and tax levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s examine this suggestion. Is Mr. Clark advocating that we adopt the Ontario method of 
taxing mining companies which bears no relation to return on investment? Is he suggesting that we 
adopt the New Brunswick approach to potash royalties where a very low percentage of gross sales is 
taken as a royalty charge bearing no relation to costs on return on investment? I can only say to Mr. 
Clark, surely you jest, Sir! For a man who has been quoted widely as saying he will allow more freedom 
for the various regions of Canada to develop in their own way, to propose a uniform system of resource 
taxation throughout a country as diverse as ours is to show very little understanding or appreciation for 
the uniqueness of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Not only is the plan unworkable, it is clearly an infringement on provincial 
jurisdiction over resource management. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Such a plan would make for even greater federal-provincial conflict then is presently 
the case. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, he is a contradictory man; leading, I suggest, a contradictory party full of petty 
bickerers all going their own way at the same time. But then, the very name Progressive Conservative is 
a contradiction. 
 
There is no such thing as a Progressive Conservative. They are instead a collection of every possible 
attitude housed under one roof for the purpose of trying to attain power, a contradiction of the highest 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you about the contradiction which is represented by the Members who occupy the 
Conservative benches opposite, a walking, talking contradiction which we have seen manifest in the 
Conservative Governments in the Maritimes, in Ontario, in Alberta and copied by the Federal 
Conservative Leader. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the Conservatives would have you believe they stand for less government, more 
freedom for people, more government spending to allow municipalities to do their own thing, yet, Mr. 
Speaker, the so-called “Progressive Conservative Party” is going to accomplish all of this by lowering 
taxes - lowering taxes they say, Mr. Speaker, particularly for those unfortunate multinationals in the 
resource sector which have finally been asked to pay their fair share. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is an example of the Progressive Conservative policy. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
nonsense; the Tories 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

794 
 

should rename their party the “ridiculous contradiction party” and it would be more appropriate to their 
policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Leader or should I say the ridiculous 
contradiction leader, and his cohorts talked about people, not potash in the recent by-elections held in 
Saskatchewan - people, not potash, Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful for a party with its record of unbroken 
opposition to any policy designed to improve the conditions of ordinary people to have the uncommon 
audacity to adopt such a slogan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Shameful, Mr. Speaker, absolutely shameful! 
 
The Conservative Party in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada bitterly opposed the introduction of 
medicare. Now they have the audacity to claim they will make it better than the party which pioneered 
it; revitalized it after seven years of Ross Thatcher; and have now with this Budget reaffirmed the 
commitment to quality health care in a way no other province in Canada has been able to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance read to us statistics in his speech last week that 
indicate the level of commitment governments across this country have for medical care compared to the 
New Democratic Party Government in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask you to remember that it was an 
NDP Government in Saskatchewan which raised health care spending by 26 per cent in the last fiscal 
year and it will raise it by an additional $65 million or over 19 per cent in this new Budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me remind you of the figures the Minister of Finance read in this House last week. 
Conservatives, those champions of medical care in Ontario, have slashed their health services and 
limited their health budgets to ten per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, 4,500 jobs were eliminated in Ontario 
and 12 hospitals were closed. Families pay $384 per year in health premiums. In Saskatchewan, resource 
revenue and resource taxation pay those costs of health care that are now borne by the Ontario people in 
the form of health premiums. 
 
But those contradictory Tories tell us in Saskatchewan that people matter more than potash. 
 
In Alberta, that mecca of ridiculous contradiction, the Conservatives limited health spending to 11 per 
cent last year, and 7.5 per cent this year. Medical care premiums will rise to $169 annually. Yet, the 
same Conservative Government in concert with the Ontario Conservatives and the Federal Liberal 
Government were able to commit over $600 million to the Syncrude Project and they won’t even have 
the controlling interest. 
 
What does the Leader of the Conservatives in Saskatchewan say? People before potash, he says. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder than words and the people of Saskatchewan will not be fooled by that. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

795 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— It, in many ways, reminds me of an old time Conservative Government which 
pumped millions of taxpayer dollars in the CPR to build a railroad in exchange for a commitment for 
service instead of a share in ownership. We are seeing today the willingness of the CPR to fulfill its 
commitment of transportation service for the people of western Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— That, Mr. Speaker, was not an example of ‘ridiculous contradiction’, it was just plain 
ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you which party in this province puts people before anything else. The New 
Democratic Party Government puts people before potash companies, the New Democratic Party puts 
people before oil companies. It puts people first, always, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Now, Mr. Speaker, don’t let those walking contradictions led by the self-styled 
management consultant representing Nipawin constituency with head offices at Phoenix House in 
Saskatoon, born in the Tory Mecca of Alberta, fool you or the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Conservative slogan should read, “We’ll put potash, we’ll put oil people, we’ll put anyone else who is 
rich and privileged ahead of any of the ordinary people of Saskatchewan.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— That is their slogan. That is their motto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it is shameful for the Conservative Party to claim that it puts people before potash. The newly 
acquired Conservative Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) is not the Mr. Lane for Qu’Appelle 
who woke up only a few months ago to discover that he was a contradictory Conservative rather than a 
Liberal. The Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland was heard to say on a radio program during a recent 
by-election, that senior citizens don’t need a drug plan. Senior citizens don’t need a hearing aid program, 
or the Aids to Independent Living Programs which provide wheel chairs or other needed hardware to 
improve their lot in life. All senior citizens need, according to Mr. Lane of Saskatoon-Sutherland, is a 
pension tied to the cost of living. 
 
Before pensions can be seen as a means of fully providing for senior citizens in the current day, a 
considerably more generous Federal commitment to old age pensions is required. I wonder whether the 
new Member suggests that pensions need only be raised with future increases in the cost of living or 
does he recognize the very real hardship already being faced by many senior citizens. 
 
Is the Tory Member recommending the Federal Government provide for this increased commitment to 
pension levels or does he consider this to be a task that the province should undertake. If so where does 
he propose the money will come from since his caucus is opposed to our attempts to increase resource 
revenues? 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

796 
 

Does he, Mr. Speaker? We wait in anticipation. But is he to propose a significant raise in personal 
income tax and other taxes in this province? Does he suggest money alone will solve senior citizens’ 
problems? Does he suggest that to give them money and push them out to fare for themselves is the 
solution? Our programs allows our older people to structure services in a manner appropriate to their 
needs. No slight increase in pension levels alone can accomplish this objective. 
 
The Conservatives say we should be spending the money collected in the Energy Fund to build roads 
and provide even better medical care and hospital care. They say we could reduce taxes now and 
improve services at the same time. Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the Conservatives would get the money 
for these services when Saskatchewan oil runs out. I wonder where the money would come from when 
the potash companies tell the Government they do not plan on paying their taxes, or when they 
implement New Brunswick royalty rates as the Attorney General says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I told you that the Conservatives are contradictory. They tell us to use the Energy Fund to 
provide services today. Forget about how we will afford those same services tomorrow or five or ten 
years from now. Those selfsame Tories tell us the Energy Fund shouldn’t exist in the first place. It was 
mean and it was greedy of us to tax those oil companies so high. And we should withdraw Bill 42 and 
ask the companies how much of the money collected they would like us to give back. I’ll tell you how 
much they would like us to give back, Mr. Speaker. All of it! Is CIGOL and Imperial Oil asking for 
some of their money back in their court challenges against Bill 42? Of course not. They are asking for 
all of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is only human nature. Which one of us would voluntarily pay a significant amount of 
income tax if the Government were to ask us how much we would like to have paid back each year? It is 
ridiculous and contradictory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest contradiction in the Tory Party sits as their leader, the Member representing the 
Nipawin constituency. This so-called accountant says he would run the government according to 
generally accepted accounting principles. That sounds like a good idea, Mr. Speaker. In fact it is my 
impression that this Government is doing just that. In fact the Provincial Auditor, who is charged with 
the task of ensuring this is the case, has in his last reports on Crown corporations and Government 
departments indicated this to be the case. 
 
But the Member representing Nipawin claims the auditor didn’t do his job properly. He claims 27 
agencies never received audit reports. The Conservatives owe the auditor an apology. The Conservative 
Leader owes the public an apology as well. His party campaigned in the by-elections claiming these 
reports were not done when in fact the Attorney General of this province has listed where the reports on 
each and every one of these agencies can be found. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member representing Nipawin is misleading the people of Saskatchewan and he 
attempted to do that again today in his Budget address. But then, the Member for Nipawin has misled 
people before, and he is misleading people now. Mr. Speaker, when the Conservative Leader came to 
the province he brought nothing with him. It is his intention, Mr. Speaker, that when he leaves he will 
leave nothing behind. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

797 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, some Saskatchewan citizens unfortunately have already learned not to 
trust their financial well-being to the Member who represents Nipawin. The Saskatchewan people I 
suggest to you will not be long in coming to the same realization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will, as I believe you will be fully aware from my remarks, be supporting the Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon):— Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to speak in this far 
ranging debate, a very interesting debate filled with charges and counter-charges of who has made false 
statements and who has broken agreements. I would like to enter that discussion. But I think I shall leave 
the discussion on falsehoods and broken agreements to the experts in the field. Those who understand 
that field I will leave the discussion to and I will go on to other things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Budget for the year 1977 presented us with the fact that this Government has mismanaged its 
affairs. Last year, faced by the most buoyant economic conditions that this province has ever seen, we 
were faced with a deficit budget. This year when the downturn in our provincial economy is starting to 
be felt we will have even a larger deficit. 
 
This Government did not take advantage of our strong agricultural economy to build up our resource 
industry so that our provincial income would be diversified, and not so dependent on agricultural output. 
 
Because of this Government’s war on business and investment we have seen a sharp decline in our 
resource industries rather than an increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should look at the cause and reason for our deficit budget. Let us now look at the 
record of the NDP in regard to diversifying our economy from agriculture. 
 
In the oil industry we find that in 1968 production was at 92 million barrels; in 1975 it was at 59 million 
barrels; in 1968 there were 393 oil wells completed and in 1975, 105 wells completed. In 1968 there 
were 976 drilling licences issued and in 1975 there were 290 licences issued. 
 
If this Government had not, by their actions, stifled the oil industry we could have quite likely seen an 
unprecedented upsurge in oil exploration in this province . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDERSON:— . . . along with increased oil production and an increase in revenue to this 
province. 
 
MR. ALLEN:— . . . they’re up. 
 
MR. ANDERSON:— Certainly, because the Arabs raised their prices. The 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

798 
 

oil companies in Arabia raised their prices so they cover up your mismanagement bill. You’re lucky that 
accidents will happen. This could have averted the necessity of deficit budgeting for this year. 
 
In mineral development the record of this Government is just as dismal. In 1968 the value of metal 
production in this province was $47 million; by 1975 it had dropped to $32 million. It is too bad we 
don’t have some Arabs in the metal business, they would put the price up so your mismanagement 
wouldn’t show so badly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our recorded economic growth in this province was greatly due to the good crops and 
record grain prices. When crops are small because of climatic conditions or if world prices drop this 
province will follow the old boom or bust cycle, because of this Government’s mismanagement of our 
growth potential in other sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at what this Government proposed for agriculture producers in 1977. In 
face of the fact that unless we increase our milk production in this province we stand to have our 
provincial quota cut by the National Milk Marketing Board, what does this Government propose to do? 
In 1977 the grants to milk producers for the construction and improvement of facilities is discontinued. 
The grants to construct veterinary facilities are discontinued. Surely with a need to diversify our farm 
economy and create secondary agricultural enterprises this is a foolish move. This action shows the lack 
of understanding of rural needs and the lack of caring about the welfare of our farmers that this 
Government so characterizes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government says it will use deficit budgeting to put money into fields such as 
construction to prevent an increase in the jobless rate. It would seem poor planning and little research 
goes into anything this Government does. To increase construction work they propose to build more 
government office buildings which will be filled with civil servants pushing paper around. Such activity, 
while certainly pushing money into the economy, cannot and will not raise the productivity of this 
province and can only lead to inflation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem that this Government has difficulty in knowing the difference between 
service economics and production economics. They seem to feel that money collected by taxes and then 
re-spent by Government departments somehow magically increases the productivity in this province and 
causes an upsurge of prosperity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government speaks of developing the northern part of our province and budgets many 
millions into DNS. Their lack of economic sense shows in the results. Mineral development in the North 
is at a virtual standstill and because of this much-needed jobs are lost. Income to this province is lost. 
People of the North are dependent on welfare for existence. The people of the North want meaningful 
jobs not welfare handed out by an army of DNS employees. 
 
What is this Government’s record in the forest industry? This Government has shut down the small 
independent operator stating that he was inefficient and wasteful. In its place they have the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Marketing Corporation, a corporation that sustained a loss to the 
taxpayers of this 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

799 
 

province of $4 million in 1976 and of $2.3 million in 1975. This is further proof of this Government’s 
ability to take a profitable industry and turn it into a loser. 
 
The NDP in this Budget are continuing in their old practice of taking money from the people in this 
province by raising the provincial income tax, sales taxes, leases on provincial Crown lands, etc., and 
doling this money out in various programs to buy voters. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will 
see through this foolishness. The cattlemen in this province do not feel that this Government has much 
concern for their well-being when they receive a cow-calf grant one month and then pay the grant back 
the next month with a great increase in grazing fees. 
 
The people who work in construction of roads in the rural areas find small comfort in the fact that we are 
going to build government office buildings in the cities while we cut moneys for the building of roads in 
the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province find small comfort in an increase in health spending while at 
the same time they find it almost impossible to be admitted to hospitals because of lack of beds. 
 
The elderly people of this province find small comfort in receiving grants for recreation purposes while 
the list for admittance to nursing homes grows and grows as no room is available. Last month alone, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 51 people on the waiting list in the small town of Shaunavon to get into the nursing 
home; eleven of them were considered on the very urgent category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government in this Budget has shown that it has lost its concern for the needs of the 
people of this province. They have shown that socialism is more important to them than the welfare of 
their citizens. 
 
This Government says it has concerns for rural areas. It claims to want to help the family farm to 
survive. Its record of performance indicates that its wish is just the opposite. 
 
Our highway system so necessary to help farm life be viable is deteriorating. Small businessmen in their 
towns are harassed by regulations that cause them to spend more time keeping records for the 
Government than they do serving customers. Labour laws are enacted that make it virtually impossible 
to hire part-time help by students after school to help in the rush periods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can agree that this Budget may well be called a ‘red’ Budget. It is red in its philosophy. It 
is red in the fact that it is a deficit Budget. It will surely make the people of this province see red when 
they realize the full scope of this Government’s mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that this Budget does nothing towards solving the basic problems of this province, 
the fact being that we are still tied to a great degree to our agricultural economics. Therefore, I cannot 
support the Motion, but I will support the amendment. 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education):— Mr. Speaker, let me first of all in rising extend 
my congratulations, because I have been unable to do so yet in this 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

800 
 

Session, my congratulations to the two new Members recently elected in the by-elections, the Member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. H. Lane) and the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf). And 
in doing so, extend to them my best wishes for a good experience in this House, as the Minister of 
Finance said, for the short two-year stint that they are going to have here. I’m sure that they will find it 
worthwhile as I have in the five years or so that I have been here. 
 
I have been listening to some of the things that were said here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
say that I was most impressed with the things that the Member for Tisdale-Kelsey had to say, because I 
think he very clearly pointed out the true nature of some of the Members opposite and in particular the 
Conservative Party. 
 
I was also interested in hearing what the Member for Nipawin had to say, because it is well known in 
this House and it’s beginning to become well known throughout Saskatchewan, that what the Member 
for Nipawin and most of his colleagues have to say is usually very little. But one of the things that he 
talked about, which I was particularly interested in, was leadership. I found that so interesting because as 
an elected Member and as a member of the New Democratic Party, I did quite a bit of work in the 
by-election campaigns and I don’t mind admitting it. But I found a very interesting thing developing, 
and I wondered and I still wonder, why the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) who is so concerned 
about leadership was hidden so successfully and so well by his party in those by-election campaigns. Is 
it that they are becoming a little afraid? Is it that they are becoming just a little ashamed of exposing 
who the true leader of their party is and the kind of stands he really has? Is it that some of the true 
positions of that party are beginning to catch up with them, Mr. Speaker, throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
Now, the Member for Nipawin also made some comments about the good old days of the Right Hon. 
Mr. Diefenbaker. You know, Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised in Saskatchewan. I have spent all my 
life here and I know something about the politics of this province and the people of this province. I 
know that Mr. Diefenbaker is a man who has gained the respect of all the people of Saskatchewan. And 
I know that Mr. Diefenbaker was an honest man and he was respected and that his integrity was never 
questioned. Now, Mr. Speaker, for the Member for Nipawin to pretend to align himself with Mr. 
Diefenbaker in this Legislature, I think, is nothing short of an insult. Mr. Speaker, it was the people like 
Mr. Collver, the Member for Nipawin, I will try not to call him by his name, and the Dalton Camps of 
this world and of the Conservative Party that threw out that Mr. Diefenbaker when he was Leader of that 
Conservative Party. And the people of Saskatchewan know that only too well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Budget, like all the budgets presented in this Legislature by our Government 
since 1971, is a responsible Budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— It’s a Budget of which, we on this side of the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan, can be proud. It is a Budget which all can look upon as taking into consideration the 
important needs of Saskatchewan people, facing up to our economic realities and then making the right 
decisions to accommodate both. I commend 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

801 
 

the Minister of Finance, the Hon. Member for Regina North East for the marvellous job that he has done 
inputting this Budget together. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— The Member for Regina North East, our Minister of Finance, has, in the 
short term that he has held that position, developed a reputation of understanding, good management and 
good judgment. Besides that, he has developed a reputation as an important spokesman throughout all of 
Canada at federal-provincial conferences and in talking about issues affecting the people of 
Saskatchewan because of the actions of the Federal Government. 
 
Now the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, they may criticize and they may twist and they may turn 
statistics, and I know that the Leader of the Conservative Party, in particular, is especially talented at 
twisting statistics. 
 
MR. MESSER:— He tells us now he doesn’t like statistics. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— That’s because he’s a little afraid of them now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite, they even laugh, but if you listen carefully and if you look at the 
expression on their faces, it is very evident that those laughs are very nervous laughs, they seem to echo 
from the depths of a deep embarrassment. They seem to echo from the depths of some kind of a feeling 
of shamefulness and they are hollow like the kind of laughs that you would hear on the late, late movie 
at 2:00 o’clock in the morning, almost haunted. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one only has to look at the record of the former Liberal Government to understand 
why their expressions seem so strange in this House, as they respond to this Budget. That record of 
seven years of Liberal Government, as it related to the management of our economy of this province, 
was a record of bungling and sell-outs and taking from those who could pay the least, in order that they 
could give to those who needed nothing, in order that they could give away the resources of this 
province to the multinational corporations stationed outside this country, throughout the world, with 
none, or very little benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. If re-elected it should be known that they 
would again give away to the resource companies all the gains that we have made since 1971 and there 
is no question about that. You can be assured that once again this province would suffer economically 
like it did prior to 1972. In the Thatcher Liberals’ last year in office, this province collected some $32.5 
million in resource revenues. 
 
In NDP Saskatchewan in 1975-76, the province collected $337 million in resource revenue, over ten 
times as much. We will continue to assure that the development of our resources brings maximum 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. These efforts, it should be recalled by Saskatchewan people and 
this Legislature, have been completely and bitterly opposed by both Conservatives and Liberals. 
 
Now in his speech this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Nipawin made it clear that all of this 
would be given away. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

802 
 

He actually came right out and said so and if either of them, Mr. Speaker, were to be elected as a 
government of Saskatchewan, there is no doubt that the years of $32.5 million returns from our 
resources would return. And they have both made that more than clear in their statements and in their 
actions. A Liberal or a Conservative government would return these revenues to the resource companies 
and they would then be forced to increase taxes on people and at the same time cut services. 
 
We would, without any doubt, again have deterrent fees and the Conservatives have said so through Mr. 
Joe Clark, their National Leader, that they would do it. We would see the abolition of important 
recreation and cultural programs, programs like the Prescription Drug Plan, like the Hearing Aid Plan 
and the Dental Plan and there is no doubt about it. I was really rather surprised and shocked, because I 
thought that the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) would have learned. I was surprised when I 
heard him say in his speech the other day, I think it was yesterday, that we should consider users pay. He 
made it clear in this House and he put it on the record, Mr. Speaker, that he much like the Conservative 
Party, thinks that the user pay principle is a good principle to apply to sick people and to old people 
when they are in hospital. Well I want to say to the Member for Thunder Creek and I wish he was here, 
that we don’t believe in the law of the jungle in the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would do away with these types of programs because, having given the resource 
revenues back to the multinationals, we couldn’t afford them and secondly, because both Tories and 
Liberals have called these kinds of programs frills. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the people believe 
them to be frills and our Government doesn’t believe them to be frills. They are programs that benefit 
many people. They are programs that make Saskatchewan the best province in which to live in Canada 
and we will continue to put our priorities on people in the future, as we have in the past. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Now, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives over there, of course, haven’t been in 
government in Saskatchewan for many years, and looking at the Alberta and the Ontario and the BC 
examples, we can thank our lucky stars for that. But if you listen to them in this House, if you listen to 
them right now, it is obvious that they have a deep feeling of embarrassment and nervousness because 
they, too, have had their share, and continue to have their share of financial embarrassment. 
 
On behalf of my constituents, I am pleased to again acknowledge that this Budget places a high priority 
on health, education and social services. The Opposition says many of these programs are frills, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to join with the Minister of Finance and challenge the Conservatives, challenge the 
Liberals, to state which of these so-called ‘frills’ they would do away with. Because until they do, we 
can only assume and the people of Saskatchewan can only assume, that they would do away with most 
of them and that many of these programs would fall under the Liberal blade or the Conservative axe. 
And if you look at what is happening in other provinces, there is little doubt what the Conservative 
Members across the way believe. With the 11 per cent maximum increase for health care in 
Conservative Alberta in 1976, and limits of 7.5 per cent in 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

803 
 

1977, and premiums of $169 annually for a family, it is clear that Saskatchewan Conservatives would 
ruin our health care plan in no time at all. 
 
With Conservative Ontario’s health premium of $384 annually, and with limits on hospital budget 
increases to 10 per cent, and their closure of 12 hospitals it is clear that the Member for Nipawin and his 
colleagues would be so busy paying off their corporate friends that our hospital services would suffer the 
same fate. 
 
With the holding of hospital budget increases by the Conservative-inclined Government of British 
Columbia to 8.5 per cent and the 50 per cent increase to $225 annually per family for health premiums, 
it is clear that Saskatchewan Collver Conservatives would return this province’s health care services to a 
level worse than even the Liberals did during the Thatcher Government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives never talk about their policies and because they never talk about 
their policies, some people say that’s because they don’t have any, but I don’t completely agree with 
that. No, I don’t, because I think that they do, in fact, have some policies. Policies that they are afraid to 
talk about, policies like those in Ontario, in Alberta and in British Columbia. Policies that are so inclined 
to give our wealth away to multinational resource companies that the people have to pay with higher 
taxes and reduced people services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do we in Saskatchewan under an NDP Government, have such a high level of 
services, while taxes that people have to pay are reasonable? Why can we continue to provide the best 
health, education and social services in Canada and, at the same time, provide in this Budget a cut in 
income taxes for people at almost every level? Why are we able to have a Budget so that a family with 
an income of $15,000 will pay $146 less in income tax in 1977 than they paid in 1976? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP Government has increased revenues from our resources, resources that belong to our 
people, and, therefore, should benefit our people. 
 
And these revenues, Mr. Speaker, have enabled our Government to hold the line on most taxes, reduce 
others, and eliminate some altogether, such as hospitalization and medicare premiums and deterrent fees, 
while expanding services to people, like prescription drugs, and children’s dental care, aids to 
independent living, day care, universal kindergarten and community colleges. 
 
What would the Conservatives do, Mr. Speaker, I submit that they would do precisely the same as 
Conservatives do in British Columbia and Alberta and Ontario. 
 
Now the Budget in BC forecasts some major reductions in resource revenues and according to an article 
in a February edition of a Victoria newspaper, the following seems to come through. In 
Conservative-style governed BC, logging taxes will go down from $26 million to $10 million in 
1977-78 compared to 1976-77 Coal royalties will be reduced from $12.5 million to $5.3 million. Mining 
taxes down from $15 million to $10,800,000. Mineral land tax down from $15 million to $9 million. 
 
It is clear that that is the approach of the Collver Conservative Party. It is clear that the Collver 
Conservative 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

804 
 

Party would turn our resource revenues over to their friends, the corporations, who support them 
financially. Companies like Gulf Oil, which contributed $21,000 to the Progressive Conservative 
Canada Fund between 1974 and 1975. Companies like International Nickel, which gave $26,000. 
Companies like Algoma Steel, a CPR subsidiary, which gifted $25,000 to the Tories. Is it any wonder 
that Collver Tories support inland terminals and have not opposed rail line abandonment, and generally 
are afraid of stating what their policies really are? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Members in this House talk about individual independence and 
individual initiative and freedom of the individual. If you ask them what they mean by that, they’re very 
hard pressed to have an answer, but it’s a very good line. Well, I think it’s interesting to examine what 
that party, just as a Liberal Party, means by that particular line. 
 
They mean that the people of Saskatchewan will have to be answerable to the multinational resource 
companies. They mean that the farmers of Saskatchewan would have to be under the thumb and 
answerable to the multinational grain companies, such as Cargill Grain. And from the kinds of things 
that the Conservative Leader, the Member for Nipawin, has been heard to say, generalities without any 
specifics, without any definition, without any explanation, there is nothing else that we can conclude. He 
has made it clear, on behalf of his caucus, that a Conservative Government would give to the resource 
companies of this province a free hand. He has made it clear that a Conservative Government in this 
province would return the control of our resources, such as potash, such as oil and such as uranium, to 
the multinational resource companies. He has been heard to say that he would negotiate with the 
resource companies. 
 
What does that all mean, Mr. Speaker? It means very definitely, that every time a multinational resource 
company wanted to have a reduction in its taxation, it would simply say to the Conservative Leader, as it 
used to say to the Liberal Leader when they were in government, and to the party and his caucus, “Hey, 
I don’t like this tax, I don’t like this tax because we want to take more money out of Saskatchewan. We 
want to take more money to some other place in the world, so that we can invest it and make more 
money.” And they would say, “This tax is too high and we’re going to refuse to pay it, and furthermore 
we’re not going to expand our plant, we’re not going to do any exploration, we’re not going to expand 
our productive capacity,” as the potash companies tried to do with this Government. They would say, 
“Until you do what we tell you, until you lower this tax or change your system of the tax the way we 
want it changed, we are not going to co-operate with you.” 
 
And you know what Mr. Collver and his caucus and the Liberals do, you know what they would do? 
They would go politely to these resource companies, to New York, or to Bonn, or to Paris or to Chicago 
or wherever, and they would say, “Now, now, please, you understand, we need you. You pay our 
election expenses and you are the funding that keeps our party machine oiled; we’ve always been good 
to you, you know that; sure, we’ll reduce your tax, what do you want?” That’s negotiation. “We will 
make a compromise, we will give you more of that resource revenue so that you can take it out of 
Saskatchewan and make yourself more millions. Just expand your plant a little bit, a little token, so that 
we can go to the people of Saskatchewan and we can tell them - look at this development that’s taking 
place.” You know 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

805 
 

after all, the people of Saskatchewan, the Tories would say as the Liberals do, “They don’t fund our 
party, you, the oil companies and the resource companies and the banks, you fund the Conservative 
Party and we’ve got to look after you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— So, once again, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan would pay by lost 
revenues, and once again those resource companies, Mr. Speaker, under a Conservative Government as 
under a Liberal Government, would be taking millions and millions of dollars out of Saskatchewan and 
out of Canada every year. And, once again we would be facing the prospect of having our 
non-renewable resources depleted and exploited without a rightful fair share of those revenues 
benefiting the people of Saskatchewan and helping the development of this province for the future - not 
only for today but for the generations of the future. And when all those resources were gone, those 
multinational corporations would be laughing because they would have taken those revenues, and they 
would have reinvested them somewhere else in the world, and we would have been the losers and our 
children would have been the losers. 
 
There isn’t any doubt, Mr. Speaker, one can put it simply or one can complicate it with a lot of rhetoric, 
but there isn’t any doubt that this is the position of the Collver caucus in this Legislature and the 
Conservative Party. That is the position of the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the 
Conservative Party. After all there is no one who knows more about exploitation, it appears, than the 
Leader of the Conservative Party. Now this Government, Mr. Speaker, is not about to concede to that 
kind of blackmail. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— We believe that we have some responsibility as the representatives of the 
people of Saskatchewan to think about the next generation, to think about our children, to think about 
their children and the kind of future that they will have in Saskatchewan. It would be easy to spend like 
drunken sailors, as the Conservative Party has proposed, and as the Liberals have proposed. That’s the 
simplest and the most accurate way to define the things that they have been saying in the last several 
months. They have been saying to this Government and everyone else, “You should spend like drunken 
sailors, you should blow all your reserves, you should blow your Energy Fund right now. Don’t wait for 
tomorrow, blow it now. And those kids that are going to our schools today, let them find a way to solve 
their own problems of tomorrow.” That’s what the Liberal Party and the Collver Party are saying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That is not what the New Democratic Government of Allan Blakeney is saying. That is not what we are 
prepared to do. We are making sure that some of the revenue from our resources is re-invested in 
Saskatchewan so that this province can develop, and so that revenues from our resources can be assured 
in order that the services in health and education and social services, the construction of our roads, the 
operation of our municipalities; so that all of those things can be assured, not only for today, but for the 
future. The record of this Government since 1971 has been a record of good management 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

806 
 

and good planning. Cash carry forwards during good years are making it possible to maintain the highest 
level of programming and services without having to borrow money. Had there been a Liberal or a 
Collver Government, Mr. Speaker, they would have spent in a drunken binge and they clearly indicate 
they would have done that. Just imagine where we would be today without that cash carry forward of 
several millions of dollars. Just think about that. Just imagine where we would be today, Mr. Speaker, 
without the Energy Fund. And yet at every step of the way, the Liberals and the Conservatives have 
opposed Bill 42 and opposed the establishment of the Energy Fund. It’s only now, after it has been 
established, that they are saying and especially the Conservative Party is saying, depending on which 
part of the province they are, of course, you should spend it today, go on a big binge and have a ball, 
spend it today and we will let somebody else worry about it tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our resource policy is providing many services. It is providing revenues which have helped 
to develop, for example, a provincial library system which is the strongest and the largest and best 
supported in Canada. In terms of the quality and range of services provided by this agency, no other 
provincial library can compare. Support services such as reference, inter-library loan, cataloguing and 
consulting, are all operating at higher levels than other provinces. For example, and I think that this 
should be noted, the Provincial Library in Saskatchewan handles more inter-library traffic every six 
weeks than the Alberta agency processes in a whole year. Mr. Speaker, another example of Conservative 
efficiency as displayed by a Conservative Government in Alberta. 
 
Now this Budget provides a ten per cent increase in grants to regional and municipal libraries. The 
Government’s contribution to the operating costs of regional libraries now average 75 per cent of the 
total cost. Our Government continues to show leadership in the area of public library development, with 
Provincial Government appropriations for libraries showing a 276 per cent increase since 1971. 
 
Grants to Regina and Saskatoon public libraries in 1975 nearly exceeded, again it should be noted, the 
entire appropriation for library services provided by the Conservative Government of Alberta in the 
same year. That ratio still remains, Mr. Speaker. The support of the Provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan in terms of capital and operating grants and support services, particularly over the past 
five years, has been outstanding. 
 
The Capital Grant Program will be continued for this fiscal year. This program has resulted in over 200 
library renovation and construction projects in communities in the province and five bookmobiles have 
been added to regional library services. Our system of operation of libraries provides the highest level of 
local autonomy and local decision making possible. Regional and Municipal Library Boards in our 
province exercise almost complete autonomy over their respective operations. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the effect on this library system if Liberal and Collver policies on 
resources were ever implemented? They would have to cut back funds and force much heavier burdens 
on municipal governments. 
 
The Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) mentioned the other day something about library grants 
being reduced. I 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

807 
 

want to take this opportunity in talking about the funding for libraries in Saskatchewan to provide some 
information to the House and to him, as I am sure he will be interested. I want to take the Wheatland 
region, Mr. Speaker, and give to you and to this House and to put on the record, the assistance provided 
by this Government to the Wheatland Regional Library where the Member comes from, since 1971. In 
1971-72 the operating grants to Wheatland were $82,156; in 1972-73 they were $98,524; in 1973-74 
they were $106,704; in 1974-75 they were $169,745; in 1975-76 they were $286,418 and it goes on and 
on, Mr. Speaker, until this year the Budget provides $416,350 in operating grants. Mr. Speaker, since 
1971-72 an increase of 406.78 per cent. 
 
If one looks at the Conservative example in Alberta it is clear that our library system in Saskatchewan 
would be literally destroyed by a Conservative Government here - another reason why they refuse to talk 
about their policies; another reason why their contribution to the debates in this Legislature are equal to 
nothing. They are afraid to say what they truly believe and what they really think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on education. Over the years, since 1971, it has become clear 
that the philosophy of our Government is that educational expenditures are investments in human 
resources. Such expenditures should have a high priority for the benefit of both the community as a 
whole and the individuals in the educational process, whether student or teacher. An indication of the 
priority New Democrats have put on education is again reflected in this Budget. 
 
Total operating grants will increase by $17 million. This increase will maintain the province’s share of 
educational costs at the 1976 share of 58 per cent, the highest point in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
The rate of increase in costs of our elementary and secondary education can be expected to drop off 
substantially from the increase of 1976. The 1976 expenditures reflect the fact that that was a catch-up 
year for teacher salaries. We said, when the Federal Government announced its anti-inflation program, 
that its guidelines would not apply to some sectors in Saskatchewan where catch-up was needed in 
agreements. Saskatchewan teachers were one of those groups, and I am proud to be able to say that our 
commitment was made and our commitment was kept. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Mr. Speaker, teachers’ negotiators, trustees’ negotiators, and Government 
representatives all signed the 1976 agreement in good faith and it was a good settlement, agreed to by all 
concerned. 
 
It is known, of course, and teachers should know that Liberals and Conservatives did not think so, at 
least most them didn’t think so, publicly they said nothing, but across the province when they talked to 
certain people, they made it clear that they would not have allowed the catch-up which was necessary. 
 
In addition to direct grants to school boards, property improvement grants have helped reduce the net 
impact of property taxes on homes, farms and small businesses. If you take, for 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

808 
 

example, the Property Improvement Grant (PIG) into account, net school taxes are actually lower for the 
owner of an average home or a farm now, than they were in 1971. For example, Mr. Speaker, if you take 
property in Humboldt, with an assessed value of $4,500, the amount of net school tax in 1976 was only 
$45 after PIG was deducted, a reduction of $62 from 1971, when the net school tax was $107. A farmer 
near Young, Mr. Speaker, with three quarter sections of land, assessed at $6,000, paid a net education 
property tax of $164 in 1971. In 1976 he paid a net of only $94 after the PIG was rebated. And I know 
that the Member for Eastview (Mr. Penner) will be interested to know that in Saskatoon, property 
assessed at $6,150 paid $38 less 1976 education tax than in 1971. 
 
When you consider that education services have grown considerably during these years, and costs have 
increased from $161 million across the province in 1971 to $284 million in 1976, this is quite an 
accomplishment by this NDP Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party has had something to say 
about the two recent by-elections in his first remarks in this Debate. Of course he boasted about the Tory 
wins, and I don’t blame him for that. I think I would have done the same. The results of the by-elections 
are clear but I think more important, Mr. Speaker, is what those by-elections showed about the Collver 
Party of Saskatchewan. It was shown that the Tories cannot be trusted, that their approach to provincial 
politics is not honest and, in fact, dangerous to some of the freedoms that our people now enjoy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party and his colleagues have 
left the impression that all the teachers and all the trustees of Saskatchewan are not doing their job. Now 
it was indeed very disturbing to read and to hear the kind of information that was bandied around by 
those Members that are smiling over there and by the parties opposite about a lot of subjects but 
education, I think, in particular. It was particularly horrifying to note the germ of doubt that the Leader 
of the Tory Party tried to seed in people’s minds about the work of the Department of Education, about 
every teacher in Saskatchewan and about every trustee in Saskatchewan. Now how did he do that? Let 
me tell you how. In the January 20th edition of the Prince Albert Herald, the Member for Nipawin is 
quoted as saying, and I quote: “The education system is not moving forward.” He said no more and 
when he or his colleagues were asked what he meant, they had no answer and they still don’t have an 
answer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Now had they elaborated on what Mr. Collver said and I hope that they do, 
so that people could understand what they meant, maybe it would not have been quite so bad, but they 
simply used a broad general statement of this type, which points a finger at all those areas of education 
which I have mentioned, not only the department, because maybe that’s fair game, but every teacher and 
every trustee in Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

809 
 

It is a widely known fact, Mr. Speaker, that in the deliberations by that party in its committee of 
education, that that committee came to the conclusion that they really couldn’t find out how they could 
criticize education in Saskatchewan because of the fine job done by this New Democratic Party 
Government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that because of the doubt that they have tried to 
create, and the suspicion that they have tried to make, and the cloaked accusations that they seem to be 
making about our teachers and school trustees by making such generalized and unqualified statements, 
that that party over there and particularly its Leader, owes an apology to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Mr. Speaker, that party owes an apology because that kind of political 
manoeuvring ought to be unacceptable in the 1970s - political manoeuvring that cares not about the 
impression it leaves because it provides no substance to what is said and supports nothing it alleges. 
 
It’s sufficient to say, Mr. Speaker, that any party that can’t be trusted when it is in Opposition, surely 
can’t be trusted to be responsible and honest should it happen to become a government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— This NDP Government and our party has always given high priority to 
education and this Budget again reinforces that commitment. Everyone in Saskatchewan should be free 
to have a good education. 
 
Partisan politics should not interfere with the right to an education for our children. But the Tories have 
shown that they would not hesitate to play politics with our schools. Just listen, they laugh, Mr. Speaker. 
It was during the campaign that an advertisement appeared, authorized by the Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
Progressive Conservative Association, in the Prince Albert Herald. That ad reported a mock election that 
had taken place in a Grade Nine class on February 18 at Stobart High School in Duck Lake. 
 
Now these types of mock elections have always been carried out, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think there is 
anything wrong with them. If properly done, I think they can be helpful in teaching our democratic 
process and our democratic system to the students in our schools. The thing wrong in this issue was the 
actions of the Tory Party in interfering with our educational system and injecting their partisan politics 
into the school and into the classroom. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— One has to ask, Mr. Speaker, how far would they go? 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

810 
 

How many of the fundamental freedoms of our people would they interfere with? How much would they 
cause people to suffer in order to pay off their corporate friends? Mr. Speaker, that is the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say a few words about the Department of Culture and Youth and I’ll 
take only a minute or two to do that. I take a special pride in presenting, in this Budget to you, the 
Members of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan the programs and activities planned for 
1977-78 in the fields of culture, sports and recreation. Participation in such activities, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, is fast becoming part of our way of life rather than a special pursuit of the few. The 
demand for recreation and leisure time services continues to accelerate and this Budget meets this 
demand, because it helps local people to do the things they feel they need to do. 
 
The Estimates show that expenditures on these activities will increase substantially in 1977-78 over 
1976-77. But this, however, only tells part of the story. The more important point is that this expansion 
in funding will be in programs which react positively and equitably to the needs of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. Our objective is to provide equal access for all people, urban and rural, rich and poor, 
young and old, to programs and facilities which enable them to participate in sport, recreational, artistic, 
or cultural activity of their choice. This Budget is a major step forward in that objective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s Budget is estimated at some $11.6 million, up more than $4.7 million from last 
year. This compares to an expenditure of only $2.6 million in 1971-72 on similar programs. You will 
recall, Mr. Speaker, that in this Budget, my colleague the Minister of Finance announced that $4 million 
will be made available to Saskatchewan communities to assist in the construction and the renovation of 
cultural and recreational facilities. I spoke in some detail on this program during second reading of the 
Bill last night that I had the pleasure of introducing. 
 
This Budget, Mr. Speaker, provides increased assistance to the Saskatchewan Arts Board and the 
Western Development Museum, as well as amateur sport and recreation and general cultural programs. 
 
The professional arts in Saskatchewan are alive and growing and I want to commend the people 
involved in the arts for they have gained for our province national and, in fact, international recognition. 
Saskatoon’s Persephone Theatre, Regina’s Globe Theatre and the Regina Modern Dance Theatre, for 
example, played to appreciative audiences at the Olympics in Montreal last summer. Representatives 
from various multicultural organizations also displayed the wealth of our rich cultural heritage at the 
Olympics before an international audience. 
 
With the new focus on museums, history and heritage programming, we will provide more efficient 
service to the public, particularly those interested in the preservation of our heritage. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have spoken at some length about the programs of the Department of Culture and 
Youth in this Legislature on previous occasions and, no doubt, during Estimates another opportunity will 
present itself, so I’ll say no more at this time. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

811 
 

But I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this Budget, as I said at the outset, is one of which 
we can all be proud. I invite the Members opposite to put aside their partisan politics and stand up for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Mr. Speaker, I invite them to act as responsible elected Members in this 
Legislature and support this Budget as I intend to do in opposing the Amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G. T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour):— Mr. Speaker, I have a modest contribution to make to 
the Budget Debate and I rather suspect that words delivered by myself might be more favourably 
received on a full stomach. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might impose upon the House to call 
it 5:00 o’clock. I know that there are other Members that have obligations respecting a film to be shown 
depicting a life of a great Canadian and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it might be most appropriate that we 
adjourn until 7: 00. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:00 until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, when we called it 5:00 o’clock a matter of some two hours ago, I barely 
had the opportunity to take my feet. I trust that Members have had an opportunity to shore themselves 
over the last couple of hours and I trust also that Members opposite have had the opportunity to listen to 
some of the news that permeates the airways and receive the news that the red, white and blue Tory 
Government of New Brunswick has brought down a budget with a $200 million deficit, I believe. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, my first words during this Budget Debate this evening must be to 
welcome the two new Members of this Assembly who took their seats on Monday, March 7th. Like 
other Members, I trust that their contribution will be significant, objective and worthwhile. I say this 
sincerely, Mr. Speaker, because during the 17 years that I have spent in this House, there has never been 
an occasion when the need of a political party in Opposition was so obvious or so great. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, I also want to at this time congratulate the Minister of Finance for 
introducing another responsible Budget, one which shows a good deal of understanding in the handling 
of the business affairs of this province and at the same time, indicating a compassion for the legitimate 
needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, dependent as we are, to such a large extent on the economic fortunes of 
agriculture, I think it has to  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

812 
 

be said that it’s inevitable that provincial incomes will respond to the humps and the hollows associated 
with the world price of agricultural commodities. 
 
We have also been faced, Mr. Speaker, with increased costs related to the inflationary trend which no 
individual or government has been able to escape. This, Mr. Speaker, coupled with the unyielding and 
insensitive attitude of the Federal Government with relation to dominion-provincial fiscal arrangements 
and particularly cost-sharing agreements, has compounded our task. 
 
But in spite of these encumbrances, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will continue to enjoy the 
many advantages associated with living in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this Government is known for its 
sensible approach in the planning of responsible budgets. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— In 1973, Mr. Speaker, we said it made good sense for a government, like any good 
business enterprise, to plan for the future. We said it was no longer desirable for a government to be 
concerned only with revenues and spending over a one-year period. We recognized that our revenues in 
any one year depended largely on the buoyancy of the grain economy and that in some years we would 
have a considerable amount of money to spend, while in other years our revenues would be somewhat 
more limited. 
 
Now in an effort to stabilize these fluctuations in revenues, we brought in, of course, as you know, a 
different method of accounting referred to as cash carry forward, or long-term fiscal accounting. This 
method of accounting allows us, Mr. Speaker, of course, to put aside moneys left over in a good year 
and spend it on programs and services during the leaner years. 
 
Since 1973, some $111.6 million has been put aside in the form of cash carry forward for this purpose. 
This is an amount approximately three times as large as is required to cover a rather modest deficit 
which we anticipate in the coming year, unless, of course, Mr. Speaker, you use the technique employed 
by the Member for Nipawin, which is becoming popularly referred to as ‘Baltzan Mathematics’. 
 
This adoption, Mr. Speaker, of long-term fiscal accounting means that the financial statements of the 
province will more accurately reflect the longer term approach to fiscal planning. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I run the risk, for a few minutes this evening, in boring the Assembly by devoting 
some time to a resume of the activities of the Department of Labour during the last 12 months. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear. 
 
MR. SNYDER:— During this Session the Hon. Members have been asked to study a new Labour 
Standards Bill which seeks to further consolidate and protect the rights of working people in this 
province. 
 
As those of this Assembly have clearly seen, the policies of the Department are aimed at ensuring that 
those who work to produce goods and services will be guaranteed a fair share of 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

813 
 

the good life which they help to create. 
 
During the past almost six years, Mr. Speaker, this Government has, I believe, restored self-respect to 
our working people in many ways, not the least of which has been the creation and restoration of a 
number of very basic and very important labour standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we consider the target population served by the Department of Labour, the work 
force of this province, we are looking at some 390,000 people. Along with their families they represent 
the overwhelming majority of a growing population. I think it’s fair to say that there are very few 
households in this province, Mr. Speaker, who are not profoundly affected by the programs and by the 
legislation administered by the Department of Labour. 
 
We have been working towards such goals as providing workers with a reasonable measure of job 
security, a decent standard of living and their well-deserved share of leisure time. 
 
To this end, for example, Mr. Speaker, our labour standards inspectors have continued their efforts to 
provide a measure of wage protection for employees. During the last fiscal year, their regular and special 
inspections resulted in the collection of over $725,000 in wages owing to employees. 
 
We have seen fit to follow the recommendations of The Minimum Wage Board and have raised the 
minimum wage rate seven times since we took office in 1971, the most recent change being in January 
of this year. 
 
Another example is shown in the fact that this year in Saskatchewan a worker is entitled to three weeks 
annual vacation after one year of service and four after eleven. It will be four after ten in 1978 when the 
provision becomes fully operative. 
 
One of our most active programs over the last year has been the newly created women’s division, Mr. 
Speaker. Formed as an expansion of the former women’s bureau, this newest addition to the Department 
of Labour has a direct responsibility to promote equal opportunities for a growing number of women 
who are active in our labour force. At the present time the number of working women in this province is 
about 140,000. 
 
In addition to developing a wide variety of educational and informational programs for the public, this 
division has also the responsibility for investigating and identifying violations of equal pay and 
maternity leave sections of The Labour Standards Act. From April 1, 1976 to the end of February in 
1977, Mr. Speaker, the division staff has handled 168 equal pay and maternity leave cases, which have 
resulted in the collection of something in excess of $17,000 in retroactive pay. 
 
Working in conjunction with the women’s division is the new Advisory Council on the Status of 
Women which was appointed on the 2nd of November last year. 
 
The programs of the Occupational Health and Safety Division, Mr. Speaker, are also continuing to have 
a positive impact upon working conditions in this province. As you know, the Department of Labour has 
responsibility for a number of safety services such as the protection of the public from radiation 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

814 
 

hazards, the prevention of fires, the safe construction of boilers and elevators and electrical and gas 
appliances. Mine safety is also a responsibility of the Department. 
 
In addition to these inspection functions, the Occupational Health Division meets its responsibilities for 
worker protection by means of a system of joint employer-employee occupational health committees. 
These are established in places of work where there are ten or more employees. 
 
I am happy to note, Mr. Speaker, that this system and the resulting networks of communications and 
learning which we have developed amongst management, employees and the Government, are 
beginning to show definite signs of success insofar as better working conditions are concerned. 
Employers are telling us, Mr. Speaker, of better productivity, of better morale as a result of the 
development of such health related things as ventilation, of lighting and of thermal environment. I have 
to think that these kind of improvements might also contribute to other benefits which are pretty difficult 
to make here, Mr. Speaker, such as prolonged life, better hearing, less psychological stress and so on. 
 
In spite of the remark by Mark Twain, Mr. Speaker, that there are lies, damn lies and statistics, I think I 
should take a chance to point out a few facts that are beginning to emerge from recent Workers’ 
Compensation Board statistics. 
 
Although the total number of work-related accidents has not shown a great change, there has been a very 
reasonable decline in the proportion of very serious accidents compared to injuries which, for example, 
require only medical aid but no time lost on the job. Furthermore, there has also been a measurable 
decrease in the average days lost per case where there was a time-loss accident involved. I suppose 
another way to measure the severity of accidents is to look at the degree of resulting disability. In this 
respect, Workers’ Compensation Board figures revealed that in 1975 some 50 per cent of their disability 
cases resulted in less than a 10 per cent impairment. In 1976, the proportion of relatively minor 
accidents had risen to 54 per cent of the total. Looking at the figures in yet another way, Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you that the Workers’ Compensation Board pension awards for permanent disabilities in 1975, 
total $7 million for 640 cases. In 1976, however, for 736 cases the cost was $6.6 million. In other words 
the average cost of pensions fell from $10,942 to $8,970. I think the point is, Mr. Speaker, that while the 
total number of claims is still unacceptably high, some comfort can be taken from the fact that the 
severity of injuries appears to be less. This may be happening because the worst hazards are being 
reduced. We have to think, Mr. Speaker, that we are on the right track. 
 
Nevertheless, now is certainly not the time to rest on evidence of partial success. On the contrary, we in 
the department feel that the continued high accident rate may reflect inadequate legislation and we are 
dedicated to making changes in that connection. As a result of such concern, we will be proposing some 
amending legislation at a later date. 
 
Another active program is that of Apprenticeship and Tradesman Qualification, Mr. Speaker, and as the 
name implies, its purpose is to arrange for the training of skilled tradesmen and to establish the standards 
of qualifications in the various trades designated under The Apprenticeship Act. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

815 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Government is justifiably concerned that we must use our manpower resources 
effectively, that we must match the demand for labour with an adequate supply of skilled workers and, 
at the same time, we must provide the public with a high standard of workmanship. 
 
In recent years the rising prosperity in this province has also meant that there has been a rising demand 
for skilled tradesmen. In coping with this, the Apprenticeship Branch estimates a 23 per cent increase in 
the number of apprentices registered with the branch at the end of the current fiscal year as compared 
with one year ago. Hand in hand with this Mr. Speaker, goes a 27.2 per cent increase in the employment 
at the Provincial Training Institutes. 
 
In December of this past year, after careful consultations with employees and employers throughout the 
province, we instituted a system of compulsory apprenticeship for three designated trades, electrical, 
sheet metal and plumbing. Those who work in those trades, employers and workers alike, have indicated 
to me that they support such a concept and they are anxious to see that it works. This kind of close 
co-operation is essential, Mr. Speaker, because introducing such a program requires a considerable 
amount of adjustment in registration procedures and inspection. Once the system has proven effective, it 
is vital that the same principles and objectives can apply to the designated trades. In this way, the 
province I think, Mr. Speaker, can be assured of an adequate supply of properly trained, highly skilled 
tradesmen. At the same time, we will have the opportunity to afford members of the work force a greater 
opportunity to earn a more rewarding living. 
 
Turning to the subject of labour relations for a moment, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on the 
reorganized Industrial Relations Division of the Labour Department. This division, as many members 
will know, provides support staff to the Labour Relations Board. As a part of this support, I have 
recently appointed an executive officer whose main duty will be to help streamline the function of the 
Board, enabling it to carry on with its ever-increasing workload. The Industrial Relations Division also 
provides workers’ advocate services for people who have difficult claims before the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. In addition to these duties, Mr. Speaker, the division provides a voluntary 
conciliation service to employers and employees in resolving their disputes. And it should be noted, 
perhaps, in the last fiscal year, conciliation officers were called upon to help with some 58 disputes 
involving 516 employers and over 17,000 employees. 
 
In this connection, Mr. Speaker, I should like to comment for just a moment and indicate that work 
stoppages in Saskatchewan during 1976 involved fewer workers and a smaller number of man-days lost 
to the economy, a great deal less than were lost in 1975. I have no doubt that the continued positive 
contribution was made by our conciliation officers and this has been an immensely valuable component 
in this situation. 
 
Another facet of the work of the Department can be seen in our continuing effort to provide useful, 
factual information to those who must be actively involved in labour relations in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. In addition to the monthly labour report, for example, there are a number of sought after 
computer-based surveys which are proving extremely useful to the business communities and to 
negotiators as well. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

816 
 

The Pension Benefits Branch of the Department is also responsible for ensuring that employees’ 
financial interests in private pension plans are protected. To do this, the people in this branch monitor 
each plan to ensure that it meets the required investment, solvency, funding and vesting standards. In 
1976, some 34 new pension plans covering over 1,000 employees were registered, bringing the total 
number of active private pension plans in the province to 462, covering over 90,000 employee members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment or two to draw attention to a feature which is of exceeding 
importance to all of us in Saskatchewan in 1977. Since it is our view that the responsibility for care of 
the sick and injured lies with each and all of us as fellow human beings, we, therefore, concluded after 
the receipt of the Sickness and Accident Report under the Chairmanship of Judge Pope, that the 
Government should consider carefully the best means to provide coverage for those who are not 
receiving some coverage for sickness and accident. I think members will know that Workers’ 
Compensation covers many people on the job and you will know that the Government Insurance Plan 
covers them when they are on the road driving an automobile, but there are still a number of areas and 
conditions where coverage is non-existent or where benefits vary greatly and irrationally between 
programs. 
 
The Sickness and Accident Report recommended certain changes in the Workers’ Compensation and 
Automobile Insurance programs, but in addition to this it proposed that a third related program be set up 
to provide protection in areas other than at work and on the highway. 
 
At this present time, Mr. Speaker, the Government is taking a very close look at this proposed new plan, 
and we are studying all the alternatives in connection with sickness or accident coverage, costing these 
alternatives and considering how they might be funded. The Government will then be in a better position 
to make some final decisions on this important matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I can take some pardonable pride in the fact that many great strides have been taken 
since we became the Government in 1971. I want to assure the members of this Assembly that we will 
continue to keep our Legislative and Administrative programs under continuous review. We intend to 
ensure that working people in Saskatchewan continue to enjoy the prosperity which they themselves 
helped to create. 
 
This Budget deals with the short and long term needs and goals of my department in a realistic way, Mr. 
Speaker, and I suggest that this augurs well for those who choose to earn their living in Saskatchewan 
and make this province their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes today to deal with a matter which is, I believe to be, of deep 
and passionate interest to every Member on this side of the House, and I find it, Mr. Speaker, just a little 
more than ludicrous that some Members opposite are now attempting to portray themselves as the 
defenders of health services in this province. Now, one would almost believe, Mr. Speaker, that these 
creatures opposite were the inventors of the many services which they now claim to support. In effect, 
Mr. Speaker, the parties represented by those opposite waged a battle to the death to obstruct the 
programs they now claim to defend. 
 
I am proud, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has continued to follow its tradition as a leader in the field 
of health care. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

817 
 

We were leaders in 1947 when we set up the first hospital insurance program over the objection of 
Members opposite. We were leaders in 1962 when we carried on the fight for medicare, a program 
which was to be implemented in Ottawa a few years later. We were leaders in 1972 when we pioneered 
the most progressive occupational health and safety program in North America. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— We will continue to be leaders in pioneering new ideas and new concepts in health 
care like our dental program for children, like the prescription drug plan, like the hearing aid program, 
and others. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear 
 
MR. SNYDER:— In spite of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have suffered some growing pains in 
pioneering these new programs, our record of efficiency remains the envy of every other Canadian 
province. We have been able to offer more services, the best services in the country, at a cost which 
compares very favourably with any other province. 
 
We are good managers, Mr. Speaker, we are good managers and that is a fact that has been recognized 
by the New York Times when it called Saskatchewan the “Best managed region in North America.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have the most comprehensive and progressive health programs in North 
America. In the past few years we have pioneered many new programs, programs which have been 
studied and implemented by other provinces, by other countries and by other states in the United States. 
 
We have continued to keep our health standards and health programs better than any province. Last year 
our budgetary increases for health services amounted to an increase of some 26 per cent over 1975 
spending. 
 
Yet the Opposition parties say we don’t care about our health services and that we have suddenly 
developed a callous attitude towards sick people. I trust, Mr. Speaker, that Members will pardon some 
repetition in this regard. But it is necessary because Members opposite never seem to tire in their 
objective to misconstrue and misrepresent. You know there is a theory, that stock in trade of Members 
opposite, believed for many years, that a lie will go around the world twice while the truth is getting his 
running shoes on, and that is the theory that is proposed by Members opposite. 
 
Let’s have a look at how this “non-caring” province compares with the provinces that have Tory and 
Liberal Governments. And I think a little repetition is in order. 
 
Let’s take Alberta, one of the richest provinces in Canada, where a Tory Government places a direct 
charge of $5 a day. That is $5 a day on anyone entering a hospital and an additional $4 a day for all 
those who stay in hospital for more than 120 days. This is where a family pays $153 a year in medicare 
premiums, where the increase in health spending for 1976 came to 11 per cent compared to our 26 per 
cent, and where there is no drug plan or no dental plan. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

818 
 

How much does Tory Ontario care, Mr. Speaker? How much does Tory Ontario care? It cares enough to 
announce the closure of nine hospitals; Tory Ontario cares enough to charge every family $384 a year 
for medical care premiums. 
 
And where did Quebec stand, under those Liberals, Mr. Speaker, when Bourassa was the Premier of that 
Liberal province? They charged $125 per year for a family of four that was earning about $14,000. They 
had the lowest number of occupied beds per 1,000 per population in the country. They increased health 
spending in 1976 not by 10 per cent or 20 per cent but by a measly seven-tenths of one per cent. 
 
Opposition members are fond of slogans and are very frequently heard to say that they would put the 
care back into medicare. Now that has become sort of a favourite little slogan. Well, Opposition 
Members might be delighted to learn that the care came back into medicare in 1971 when this 
Government restored health care services to seven of the eleven towns and villages where the Liberals 
closed down their hospitals. Care came back in 1971 when we removed the deterrent fees, placed by 
Liberals, on sick people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Opposition may try to convince Saskatchewan people about a lot of things but I don’t 
think they will convince them that the New Democratic Party doesn’t care about medical care. Mr. 
Speaker, we had to fight that same Opposition, tooth and nail, to bring in medicare. We practically 
invented medicare in Canada, and as long as we are the Government of Saskatchewan, medicare will be 
safe from the attacks of the Tories, Liberals and their allies. 
 
The Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver), Mr. Speaker, the Member from Nipawin suggested that because 
of this Government’s attempts to restrain some health care spending, emergency cases are being refused 
admission to hospitals. He said that he knows of cases where this had happened. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
cannot find a single case. We have checked every alleged case and nowhere can we find facts that bear 
out his stories. We continue to challenge him to produce evidence for his allegations. Instead we have 
found that emergency services in our hospitals are operating as effectively as ever. 
 
Another rumour that we hear pretty regularly, Mr. Speaker, is that we are not giving our hospitals 
enough money to operate. I think here, the Member from Nipawin (Mr. Collver), has once again not 
done his homework or he would know more about the way in which operating budgets of large hospitals 
are determined. He would know that the Government, in consultation with the hospital boards, agree on 
a global budgeting figure for that hospital. And the hospital boards, not the Government, determine how 
that money will be spent. And if a case arises, as was the case in Saskatoon, where a hospital board feels 
its budget is not ample, the Government and the board will sit down again and discuss a settlement. 
 
If the Honourable Member had done some checking around he would know that a number of hospitals in 
this province have not been able to spend the amount of money allocated to them in their 1976 Budget. 
In Prince Albert, for example, Victoria Union Hospital got $1 million more in 1976 than it did in 1975. 
At the end of the year, they had a surplus of more than $100,000. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

819 
 

All three hospitals in Saskatoon turned up a surplus in their budget for 1976. Preliminary estimates show 
the following surpluses: 
 

City Hospital surplus $80,000 
St. Paul’s Hospital surplus $60,000 
University Hospital surplus $280,000 

 
Now that’s a total of more than $400,000, more than the hospitals in Saskatoon were able to spend. 
 
When the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. Collver) says we are not providing hospitals with 
enough money, he is wrong again, Mr. Speaker. But it is becoming rather normal practice for the Tories 
and their Leader to make claims that they can’t substantiate; misrepresent the figures that they do use in 
order to create the false illusion. They have learned well from the Liberals, this idea that a lie will travel 
around the world twice while the truth is getting its running shoes on. 
 
Now we can find people outside of this House, the friends and supporters of the Opposition parties, who 
are only too anxious to spread these false stories around the province. Now Liberals say that we are 
unfair. Liberals opposite are feeling pangs of remorse and they say we are unfair because we keep 
harping back to the late 1960s and what they did in Saskatchewan hospitals. Isn’t that an odious 
comparison? They don’t want us to mention the eleven hospitals that they closed in Quill Lake, Leroy, 
Willowbunch, Qu’Appelle, Neudorf, Prelate, Frontier, Hodgeville, Maryfield, Mossbank and Lashburn. 
And I don’t blame the Liberals for not wanting to talk about their sorry past. I don’t blame them for 
wanting to forget about those dismal, rotten Liberal years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— I would like to remind the Leader of the Opposition that people judge a government 
on the basis of what they have produced, the way that they have performed. It is perfectly reasonable for 
people to compare what they did when they were the Government, vis-à-vis what we are doing now 
when we are in government. People will judge us on our record and they will know that we set up 
community health and social centres in most of the 11 towns and villages where the Liberals denied 
these services and abandoned the people in these small communities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— But if the Liberals don’t want to compare records, Mr. Speaker, maybe they would 
rather compare promises, and they are better at promises than they are records. 
 
Prior to the election in 1964, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals put forth a party platform in true traditional 
Liberal style. This platform promised a number of changes in health care as well as a number of other 
areas. It promised to improve and expand the Medical Health Insurance Program and in the words of the 
Liberal Leader, at that time, promised to “take the politics out of medicare.” 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

820 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here is what the Liberals did take out of Medicare - they took away the right of sick 
people to visit their doctor without paying a direct charge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— There’s no charge under the NDP, and under the Liberals you paid $1.50 for every 
visit you made to your doctor. Here’s what they took out of Medicare - they took away from sick people 
the right to be hospitalized without a charge, when they posed a daily fee of $2.50 for every 30 days they 
spent in hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the sicker you were, the more you paid. If you were sick enough to 
stay in hospital for more than 30 days then you were sick enough to pay another $1.50 for every day 
thereafter. And if you were sick enough that your family doctor couldn’t cure you, then you were sick 
enough to pay another $1.50 to visit your specialist, or was it $2 that you paid to visit your Specialist? 
 
The Liberal platform also promised to set up a drug insurance program, Mr. Speaker, which was 
intended to care for major drug costs. And I remember Hammy McDonald stumping the constituency 
and telling the people of Saskatchewan how the Liberal Party would introduce a drug plan. But in seven 
years we didn’t get a drug plan under the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the price of drugs went up 
remarkably and people were paying more. So I think, Mr. Speaker, people will consider Liberal 
promises in the past and they will realize that Liberal promises buy nothing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— They will realize, Mr. Speaker, that Liberal promises don’t buy a hearing aid, they 
don’t buy a dental program for kids, nor do they buy a drug program. Liberal promises didn’t buy 
wheelchairs and braces and expensive artificial limbs for disabled people who needed them but couldn’t 
afford them. The Liberals didn’t provide more freedom and respect for the mentally ill people by taking 
them and placing them in the community where they could realize their full potential. They didn’t build 
new hospitals in places like Elrose, Lampman, or Climax or Biggar. They didn’t build hospitals and 
medical centres so that native people in the North could have adequate medical care. So much for 
Liberal promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is because we are concerned with building better health programs that this Government has 
implemented its resource policy, Mr. Speaker. We have better health programs precisely because of our 
resource policy. If we had followed Liberal and Tory advice, Mr. Speaker, we would have less resource 
revenue, we would have fewer health programs. 
 
The positive relationship between health and resources is not very difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker. 
It simply requires the ability and the willingness to think ahead beyond the immediate concerns of today 
and to consider the future of our province and its people and its children. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Our resource revenues are taking care, both of today and of the future, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

821 
 

A few years ago Members will recall when the price of oil was going up dramatically. We imposed a tax 
on oil companies so that the unearned windfall profits would come to the people of Saskatchewan rather 
than the oil companies. This was obviously opposed by Members opposite. A portion of the oil revenues 
is coming into the Budget and will help to pay for increases in health costs. This money is spent on 
increased grants to hospitals, on providing better emergency services, on our dental and drug programs 
and so on. 
 
Since 1973, in oil revenues alone, the Government has collected more than $600 million, of which more 
than $200 million has gone into general revenue to help pay for hospitals, roads, health care and what 
have you. But we didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We said, because oil was a depleting resource, royalty 
benefits would accrue to us only for a relatively short period of time and, therefore, we should take some 
of this revenue from oil and put it into an energy and resource development fund so that it could be 
invested for future generations. That’s what we did, Mr. Speaker, and we are proud of it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— We also invested some of that money into finding oil, new natural gas and to search 
for hard rock minerals and to buy some potash mines. We are going to buy some more. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— These resources, Mr. Speaker, oil, natural gas, nickel, potash, uranium, will provide 
dividends and development for generations yet unborn. We think our children and even the children of 
Members opposite will be pleased with the investments in their future, and with the good health care 
they are enjoying now and will enjoy in the future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— This Government, Mr. Speaker, will continue to invest for the future generations of 
this province. We know Opposition parties will continue to oppose these efforts just as they have in the 
past. They are very predictable. 
 
We know that the Conservative Leader will continue to oppose investments like Sask Oil’s purchase of 
Atlantic Richfield Canada, because as he said in the Leader Post, “What’s the point of buying existing 
assets with the people’s money?” Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose there is no point unless you are 
determined to ensure that assets stay in operation in Saskatchewan and that the profits from that 
operation are not shipped out of our province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, we have had some indication of how the Member for Nipawin (Mr. 
Collver) would handle this province’s future in the area of resources and, in a word, he would give away 
our resources to his affluent friends. It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that at the Progressive 
Conservative Convention last November, he told his supporters that if his party 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

822 
 

were ever elected to form a government, any government owned potash mine would be sold through 
public shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think my desk mate mentioned earlier today that every resident of Saskatchewan owns an 
equal share of our publicly owned potash mines now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— What the Member for Nipawin would do, would be to take those shares and 
redistribute them among the very small group of well-to-do people who could afford to buy them. The 
rest of us would get nothing and would receive no benefits from the development of our own potash. By 
what reasoning, Mr. Speaker, do you suppose the Member for Nipawin could possibly convince me to 
buy a share in a mine which I already own? Mr. Speaker, the answer must be that he wants the benefits 
and the profits to go to his own wealthy friends who supported his 1975 campaign so generously. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— You know, Mr. Speaker, with the Member for Nipawin’s proven record as a 
financial consultant and a captain of industry I would be moved to believe that this alone should serve as 
ample warning. He obviously doesn’t want the average working people, Mr. Speaker, the average 
working person in Saskatchewan to receive any benefits from our potash. This is the Tory idea of 
equality, of standing up for the little people in Saskatchewan. But in any event, Mr. Speaker, the 
rednecks in his own party rejected that idea as being too left wing. The rednecks want the public potash 
mines simply handed back to the multinationals. 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan):— Point of Order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— What’s the Point of Order? 
 
MR. LARTER:— The Member opposite doesn’t know what he is talking about. He is talking right 
through a hat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I think . . . order, order! I’m finding quite a bit of disregard for the 
generally held rules of decorum this evening and I want to caution both sides of the House about that. I 
want to encourage the Member for Estevan to distinguish between a Point of Order and a debating point. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Let me repeat once more, Mr. Speaker. The rednecks of this Tory Party have rejected 
that idea as being totally too far left wing and something too difficult for them to digest. I indicate to you 
and, I think they have indicated to the public of Saskatchewan, they want the potash mines simply 
turned back to the multinationals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the relationship between Saskatchewan’s resource policies and our ability to continue to 
provide a full range of 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

823 
 

people-oriented services to the people of Saskatchewan should be clear to everyone. The direct 
relationship to health services in Saskatchewan, in the years ahead, will be even more impressive. 
Political parties in our province, Mr. Speaker, that ignore this fact, do this to the disservice of those 
whom they claim to represent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Liberals are unable to fool anyone. Their 
performance with respect to health services is a matter of record. There won’t be an adult in this 
province who is not able to recall the outright hostility of the Liberals towards health services introduced 
by the CCF and by its successor the NDP. 
 
But Saskatchewan Tories, Mr. Speaker, they enjoy a somewhat more comfortable pew. However, 
anyone over 50 years of age will recall that they were such a complete disaster in office, that a sensitive 
electorate relegated them to the role of an extinct political dinosaur for over four decades. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, most political parties exhibit a conscious pride in their historic background. We, in 
our party, display a feeling of esteem and satisfaction for the many achievements for which we have 
been responsible . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— . . . and I think we display a feeling of satisfaction and esteem for those whom we 
have been fortunate to have as our leaders. 
 
Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the Member for Nipawin who clearly disassociates himself with any of 
his predecessors. When reminded of his party’s inelegant past, both federally and provincially, he draws 
himself up with stately dignity and he declares that he wasn’t even born in those days of depression and 
despair. The Member for Nipawin doesn’t want to discuss the distant past. He is inhibited further from 
discussing his own recent past and we hear very little about him concerning his prowess as a financial 
consultant and as a leader in the business community. You are pretty badly handicapped when you can’t 
talk about your distant past, when you can’t talk about your present, and the future is obviously very 
uncertain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be a senior citizen to accurately judge the Saskatchewan Tory in 1977. 
All that is needed, Mr. Speaker, is an ability to remember back to 1962, to the days of the medicare 
crisis and the three-week strike of Saskatchewan doctors in an attempt to prevent its birth, aided and 
abetted by the “Keep Our Doctors Committee”. And I ask Members opposite, I ask all Members of this 
Assembly to examine their own community. Have a close look at your own community. Pay particular 
attention to those who are now clasping Dick Collver to their bosom. Compile your own list in your own 
community and you will note a very impressive duplication of new Tories and the 1962 membership of 
that nefarious “Keep Our Doctors Committee”. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

824 
 

MR. SNYDER:— I can draw up a list, in my own constituency of Moose Jaw, of those who now 
profess to support the leader of the Conservatives who sat front row centre during the 1962 medicare 
crisis. The Member for Nipawin seems to believe that the passage of time brings respectability to those 
who have totally discredited themselves. But what I find most repugnant, Mr. Speaker, is that this same 
body of people now indulge in the brashest kind of hypocrisy in appearing to support a principle which 
they fought to the death in 1962. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER:— Mr. Speaker, these creatures opposite now attempt to take credit for a victory that 
was won in a battle which they lost. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget which continues a long-established tradition of providing a 
well-balanced level of services for our people. It is a budget which acknowledges the need for prudent 
money management and an element of practical fiscal restraint. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to associate 
myself with my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and those who sit on your right-hand in this House. I 
am pleased to support the Motion, and I shall obviously be opposing the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased this evening to stand and 
speak on this debate on the Budget. And I am very pleased, Sir, that you mentioned the word ‘decorum’ 
because I’m quite sure what I have to say tonight will probably produce some of the worst kind of 
decorum, if that’s possible, from the Members opposite. 
 
I should first like to welcome to this Assembly, and particularly to this caucus, our two new Members 
from Saskatoon-Sutherland and Prince Albert-Duck Lake. I am sure their purpose in being here this 
evening with us is something which we can observe from looking at the Members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I came to this Assembly on November 12, just somewhat over a year ago, I looked 
across at a very confident group of people who had recently been elected. The Ministers and the 
backbenchers included were very confident of their position and lately since the Session has opened this 
spring, I have noticed, as all Members have, including the press, a very nervous, tense group of people. 
The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is because no government of this province has ever been so edgy and 
ever been so concerned about its position of being a government as the Members opposite are at the 
present time. 
 
There is a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, there is a very good reason. We can talk in this House all we like 
and the speechwriters can get up and make all the statistics. I wish they would get some new 
speechwriters. I have heard the same ones since I was a kid. They can bring out all the statistics they 
like, Mr. Speaker, but the real jurors in Saskatchewan, are not the Members of the Opposition nor the 
Members sitting opposite, but the people of Saskatchewan. They are the ones who are going to hand 
down the verdict as to whether the Government has been successful or not. I would like to make 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

825 
 

mention of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that in the recent two by-elections the jury spoke. It came up with a 
verdict, and the verdict was very definitely dead against the Government. 
 
In 1948, Mr. Speaker, I had the occasion to have a conversation with the then Premier of Saskatchewan, 
Tommy Douglas, whom my family knew very well. I was trying my hand at that time at a little 
reporting. So one of the questions I remember asking him was to explain the success of the then CCF 
Government in Saskatchewan. I can remember his answer, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps the Members 
opposite should take note of this. He said: “We are talking about the CCF, the Opposition is talking 
about the CCF, so we are bound to stay in power”. Well, if we take that particular formula today, that 
particular form of reasoning, it is very obvious why the Government Members opposite are so edgy. It is 
very obvious that they don’t like to answer a question from this side of the House. It is very obvious in 
this day of the Budget Debate that everybody has gotten up and lambasted the Tory Party in 
Saskatchewan, one speech after the other, Mr. Speaker. So you see, Mr. Speaker, now that we have all 
of those Members over there converted, they are talking Progressive Conservative. That will be a lot less 
that we will have to do. 
 
I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that every speaker opposite has devoted practically 80 to 90 per 
cent of his speech in talking about the Progressive Conservatives. That does me a great deal of good, 
because you see the Member for Quill Lake (Mr. Koskie) when he made his famous speech in the 
House, he got his speech writer down town some place to write about Snow White and the Seven 
Dwarfs. Everybody remembers that, and how we were such an insignificant group of people sitting here 
and how we don’t know how to ask questions and how we don’t know how to do this, and yet all of a 
sudden since we returned and particularly in reply to the Budget Speech everybody is talking 
Progressive Conservative. I want to thank you very much for your contribution. 
 
I couldn’t help thinking, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) was speaking, talking 
about the $1.50 or $2.50 a day, the Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins) sits right behind him, if the 
Minister of Health could tell the Minister of Labour right this evening that there are probably 1,000 
people in Saskatchewan right now that would pay $10 a day just to get into a hospital. He knows that’s 
true; everybody in this province knows that’s true. You people can yell all you like. As I said, Mr. 
Speaker, the real jurors in Saskatchewan are the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention something about the condition of the highways in Saskatchewan. We 
can go to the Budget Speech; we can listen to all the claims about the percentage in highway 
construction, go to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan and ask them if there has been an 
improvement in our highways in the last five years. The answer categorically will be, No. You people 
know that as well as I do. It doesn’t matter what figures you want to throw out. It is the people who will 
be the judge. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Government says there has been no cutback in hospital care. I would 
challenge the Minister of Health to go to one of my towns in my constituency - go to the people of 
Rosetown and make that statement publicly that there have been no cutbacks in hospital care. The 
Minister of Health would not have the courage to do so and furthermore, Mr. Speaker, 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

826 
 

it would be highly unsafe for him to make that statement. Tell my neighbour who lives just across the 
road; tell my neighbour that there is no difficulty in getting a hospital bed where this lady has been 
waiting, and as far as I know is still waiting for over a period of six months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are very uneasy. I don’t blame them for being a little edgy. 
 
MR. ROBBINS:— I would just like to accept the challenge of the Member and be invited to Rosetown 
and get on the same platform with him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BAILEY:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I will extend that invitation to the Minister of Health. I’ll be in 
Rosetown on April 4th and 5th. There are two official openings there. I would like you to make that 
statement, and I’ll even provide transportation for you to get there. 
 
MR. MESSER:— How about telling us what they are opening! 
 
MR. BAILEY:— I’ll tell you it is not the wing of the hospital that was closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes they are uneasy, I don’t blame them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government opposite talks about how much they do for the little fellow. “Oh, we are 
the party of the people,” they say. And while north of Lethbridge they just finished a mammoth 
multi-million dollar irrigation project and where Saskatchewan has a means by which they can further 
develop irrigation, they have been sitting on their hands until a group of young farmers, Mr. Speaker, on 
the South Saskatchewan River, just south of Beechy and up towards Outlook have taken it upon 
themselves to go into irrigation projects. The Minister of Agriculture knows about this. They went into a 
lot of expense to develop irrigation on their own, with a sort of a promise that they would have some 
grants in order to fulfil this. What happened? Just like that, they received a letter that the grants weren’t 
forthcoming. Mr. Speaker, this Government opposite which couldn’t even poll a poor third in rural 
support in Saskatchewan, is now becoming uneasy even about matters as they apply to urban centres. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we had an announcement that was made about the Land Bank going to sell 
land. The Land Bank is going to sell the land back to the farmers. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
when you go to rural Saskatchewan, and I think you people should go to rural Saskatchewan, talk to the 
people who are dealing directly with this Government. Between the town of Elrose and the town of 
Eston there used to be the rural municipality of Fairview. It has since dissolved and part of that went to 
the R.M. of Snipe Lake and part went to the R.M. Monet. There is a ridge of hills in there, Mr. Speaker, 
not very wide, but there is a ridge of hills which is suitable for cattle raising only. Oh, there are parts of 
it that have been cultivated but not to any degree. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

827 
 

Now Mr. Speaker, in this range of hills we have some government land. I would like to take you now, 
particularly the Minister of Agriculture. I hope that you Members over there are listening very carefully 
because it will explain to you why you have lost the support in rural Saskatchewan. In 1967 a 
constituent of mine rented from the Lands Branch a half section of land, approximately 100 acres under 
cultivation. I want to tell you I visited this land the other day, and it needs a couple of days of rock 
picking. Now, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, if you will take down these figures perhaps we can get this 
straightened out. You can verify them, because I am sure they will be a source of embarrassment. He 
rented a half section of land from the Lands Branch for $176 plus the taxes. Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1967 
the cattle prices were pretty good. I remember that well. He continued renting this land at $176, plus 
taxes, until early last year, when the Lands Branch sent around an assessor. Well, what happened? The 
assessment and the rent went up. Until early this year the renter of this land was notified that he was to 
pay $388 plus taxes. He was willing to accept that, but later in 1976 only a few months later, Mr. 
Speaker, the Lands Branch turned this land over to the Land Bank. They had to have another 
assessment, and now, Mr. Speaker, I want you to listen to what happens. The price of wheat dropped. 
With the price of the cattle down, the Land Branch worried about the individual farmer. He has now 
been served notice that his lease will be $995 plus taxes - a 300 per cent increase in land rental in less 
than nine years. 
 
Little wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the people out in the boon docks in Saskatchewan, the people out in the 
rural areas, the people in the city are not really paying that much attention as to what is being said in this 
House. It is how the effect on an individual basis that people are going to judge the merits of the 
Government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) made some statements today, and 
I will be getting back to him. He made statements about the increase in grants. I have here a letter, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Parkland Regional Library in which they have indicated to me the grants that they 
have received. 1975 - $69,512; 1976 - $40,768; 1977 projected - $30,000 and 1978 projected - $20,000. 
I know the Minister is going to hurry around and get some of his colleagues busy and say these were 
operational grants or something but it really had nothing to do with this at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government over here takes its greatest pride in going out and preaching this gospel of 
being all for the small communities. We just have to keep them alive and keep them going. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to tell you that in the constituency which I proudly serve, that is not the case when it 
comes to dealing with small communities at all. This Government has the attitude, “go away; don’t 
bother me. You are too small to have any significance.” Again the people of Saskatchewan will be the 
jurors. 
 
Outside of Rosetown, when you drive down No. 15 highway, you take your life in your hands, Mr. 
Speaker. If the Minister of Health is coming to Rosetown I would invite the Minister of Highways to 
come out and tell the people who live on the highway, and must commute between Rosetown and 
Milden, about the wonderful new highway project. We don’t have to worry about a speed limit on that 
highway, Mr. Speaker, because at 50 mph you are not safe. Now we have the village of Sovereign which 
took 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

828 
 

the initiative, Mr. Speaker, to put in a sewage system in the village. This was done in 1975. I have had 
so much correspondence with these people because the Government to this date has not honoured their 
promise to them in the way of grants. I have a letter which was written to the department and also a note 
stating, “this work was done in 1975 and we have nothing but problems ever since trying to get the 
grant.” Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will be the jurors, not the fancy statistics, not the 
speechwriters, but the people of Saskatchewan. I dare say that less than 2 per cent of them are going to 
bother their heads with the statistics that go back and forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education today prompted me to say a few words about that particular 
department. I think there are some statements made by the Minister of Education in talking about the 
figures in this Budget that are misleading. When he is talking about an overall 10 per cent increase, he 
leaves the impression, I am sure, to the media at least, that it is a 10 per cent increase in the total cost of 
the plant in its operation. What he is really talking about is a 10 per cent of 60 per cent of the cost of 
operation. Just to say 10 per cent of the overall costs of operation, of course, is far from true. 
 
Even though, Mr. Speaker, we have these statements going back and forth on both sides of the House 
again, it will be the people of Saskatchewan that are the jurors. It will be they who will decide. 
 
I want to get back to some of the grants in just a moment, Mr. Speaker. I want to say something about 
the nerve centre, and what the Members seem to be very uncomfortable with. The Minister of Education 
inherited a very important portfolio. I think he realizes this. I think, too, he realizes that there is 
something else going on within the Department which is kind of unique to Saskatchewan. Nobody 
quarrels with a Minister taking a portfolio, goodness knows half of the Government opposite now have 
portfolios. We have doubled the number of Ministers, you might say, in the last 20 years but it is natural 
and it has been an accepted practice that we select the deputy minister. But in the Department of 
Education, Mr. Speaker, where there is a great deal of unrest and I want to suggest morale problems, 
they have gone one step further. We have to get a third tier of people in here. We have to have a third 
level of officials now in the Department of Education. You can’t bid for these positions. The senior 
officials can’t bid for them. People who have been in the department for 15 or 20 years can’t bid for 
them. Now we have this third level politically appointed by Order in Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t been necessary in the past and I see no reason why it is necessary now. These 
who have been in the department 15 or 20 years are going to take their orders now, you might say, from 
the Orders in Council people - these appointees. Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
knows what I am talking about. Appointments are made by Order in Council where senior members of 
the Department of Education don’t have a chance to bid on them. Let me give you an example, Mr. 
Speaker. In the Province of Saskatchewan, we have 22 school units that have a band program, that’s not 
counting the number of band programs that are in the city system. In the province we have one with the 
Department of Education. We have one consultant for the use of these people for band programs. 
Rumours that I have heard are that he has to go because we can’t 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

829 
 

have this. But instead of that, we could employ some people who are going to go through text books to 
make certain that there is no discrimination, checking whether the little girls have dresses or skirts on or 
whether the mother is seen in the kitchen or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to go out to the rural communities and to the cities - pretty hard to take over there isn’t it - 
you go to the communities and you find this. Let’s go to the Rosetown School unit. This Government 
can brag all it likes about this increase today, 9 mills Mr. Speaker, last year, and it is possible that they 
could even have to go that much higher this year to maintain operation. Now of course you say, “well 
it’s the Board’s fault,” very carefully concealing any responsibilities on the Government. By the way, 
Mr. Speaker, in preparing my own budget, I find the increase in grants is not 10 per cent; it is not 9 per 
cent; it is not 8 per cent; it is not even 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Where does this 10 per cent come from? 
It is a lousy 6.9 and we, in turn, are going to have to go for another 6 mill increase. You go to the people 
of Saskatchewan and tell them that this is what the Government is doing. We’re increasing all of this 
and yet we see the taxes to local governments continuing higher and higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a little over a year ago we hit a real nerve centre in talking about the community colleges 
in the Province of Saskatchewan. I see that we have a new Minister in charge of community colleges 
and to refresh his memory I will say the same thing as I said then; that the community colleges will 
never be as successful as they should be as long as the community colleges are used as a spot or a place 
for political patronage. I will make that same statement again tonight, Mr. Speaker, because it has 
become very obvious to the Minister and it has become very obvious across Saskatchewan that it will, in 
fact, never become successful as long as it is used in the manner in which it is being used now. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the Government did not take the advice of not only the Members of this 
Opposition but they refused to take the advice of other sources outside this House, in at least having half 
of the members of the board elected. Oh no, they wouldn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. We will appoint them 
and then we will get ourselves a principal to the community college. And in order that we can watch 
what the principal is doing, we will appoint a fieldman, so that we then have three levels of 
communication. Mr. Speaker, I had a call not too long ago not from just one, but three community 
college principals, who were very, very concerned about their position because they felt they weren’t the 
chief executive officers but some appointee who was planted and able to feed the communication back 
directly over their heads to the Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talked about this, the Government became very angry, very angry indeed. But the 
people of Saskatchewan again will be the jurors. We are not condemning community colleges. I spoke 
with the Minister on several occasions, but you cannot run a school system, you cannot run a university 
and you cannot run the community colleges in Saskatchewan on political appointments. It never will be 
successful on that basis. 
 
You know what we have right now, Mr. Speaker. I see we have a former community college principal. I 
see him in the buildings here. That’s fine; we have another community college principal who will be 
principal only until the federal election 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

830 
 

is called. Then he will run off to be a candidate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the way in which you operate in bringing services to the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have become a government in Saskatchewan of not being able to control the purse 
strings of this province. This Government, in the last five years, has had more money to spend in the 
way of revenue than in any previous ten-year period. And still we come up with a deficit budget; and 
still we have people looking at a 20 and 25 increase in mill rate. Go and tell the people of Saskatchewan 
that you are doing all these wonderful things for them and, of course, the results of the two by-elections 
simply means that they will not believe you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have the report of the provincial auditor. I don’t know if this has been mentioned 
before in the House but there are a couple of items that I should like to make reference to at this 
particular time. 
 
Saskatchewan’s forest products as I understand as announced by the Minister, lost a fair amount of 
money. I see in the auditor’s report here where it says, “Failure to report certain costs borne by parent 
corporation.” But the one that I was really interested in was the last one, Mr. Speaker, the Teacher 
Superannuation Fund. 
 
MR. KOSKIE:— Which one? 
 
MR. BAILEY:— The Teacher Superannuation Fund. Tell the Member for Quill Lakes when he wants 
his speech written to run out and get his speechwriter and let him write. He should exercise the decorum 
which the Speaker was talking about and not demonstrate his ignorance in such a manner. 
 
Teacher’s Superannuation Fund - “inability to verify liability for teachers contributions” . . . 
 
MR. ALLEN:— What page are you on? 
 
MR. BAILEY:— What page am I on? Page 4. You got it now? You can read it the same as I am. I am 
sure that that particular statement would in fact bring some comments from the teachers across this 
province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, jurors of the province, the people of the province, the people of this Assembly have 
noticed the uneasiness of the Members opposite. I don’t blame them for being uneasy. I don’t blame 
them at all for being uneasy. I would like to suggest to them that the deficit budgeting, the programming, 
the bureaucracy, the increase in the number of civil servants is not meeting the approval of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Motion but I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
MR. J. L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North):— Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to take part in this 
Budget Debate this evening and make reference to a number of issues which I consider to be of some 
importance. 
 
We have just heard from the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

831 
 

and I might tell him that last Sunday in the city of Moose Jaw, the Minister of Finance attended an open 
public meeting with about 100 people being present, those people gave him a resounding vote of 
confidence in the Budget that had been presented . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— Those people realized he happened to be a Minister in a government that could be 
trusted and a government that would bring about a budget that was recognized for the benefit of the 
people. Unfortunately, I wish he had stayed just for a moment or two, in order that he could correct any 
statement that he might have said in his few remarks. Unfortunately he suggested that the Parkland 
Regional Library received only $30,000 total in grants. Anyone has at his disposal and at his command 
the provincial operating grants to regional libraries. If the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose had the 
intestinal fortitude to read that and tell the truth for a change, he would find out that in 1971-72, 
Parkland received $119,706. We go down the line to the next years, $121,725; for 1973-74, $159,393; 
for 1974-75, $243,746; for 1975-76, $302,212; for 1976-77, $390,690; and the 1977-78 estimate, 
$429,760. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— I would suggest that the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose that he come back in 
and correct the misstatements that he has made to this House at this time. When you realize that there 
has been an increase percentage wise of grants of 259.1 per cent from 1971 to this year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— The second point that I should like to refer to, Mr. Speaker, is when he referred to 
the community colleges and referred to the political appointments. I invite the Hon. Member for 
Rosetown-Elrose to go to Moose Jaw. I would like him to talk to the Coteau Range people that belong to 
that community college. I would like him to find out positively whether or not they are in agreement 
with the Coteau Range Community College and whether or not they believe that that college is not 
doing service for the people of that community. We will find out exactly the same as we did with 
regional libraries, he is not telling the truth in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— The last point deals with what the Hon. Member spoke about dealing with the 
Land Bank and telling about his great expose of what he found in his constituency. 
 
It so happens that I well know many, many hundreds of people in the Dinsmore, Lucky Lake, Wiseton, 
Beechy area and there are more young people in that area now going back to the farm than any place in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— If this Government had not provided grants through the 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

832 
 

Land Bank, if the young people had not been able to take advantage of the Land Bank provision for 
investing thousands upon thousands of dollars in land, they never would have been able to go back on 
the land and would not have any idea what to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— I would also like to take a few moments in regard to the Dr. John Archer Report, a 
report of the Rural Development Advisory Group. As I see one or two of the Liberals and some of the 
Conservatives in the House, I should like to refer specifically, as he referred to, inland terminal 
elevators. I will quote: 
 

Dr. Archer and his Committee concluded this: 
 

The concept of inland terminal elevators while related to grain transportation and truck hauls is 
not yet clearly seen as a very real and powerful threat to rural society that it presents. When one 
envisages a network of 20 to 30 such terminals covering the agricultural sector of the province, 
one must realize that this presents a new concept of the grain gathering process and one that will 
radically alter present modes. There will be longer hauls for farmers, there will be larger trucks, a 
fact which adds to farm capitalization costs. Bigger trucks and more traffic mean more wear and 
tear on roads. And the municipal roads will bear the major share. 

 
Inland terminals mean that railway branch lines can be abandoned with less furore than at 
present. All the above costs are a direct shifting of a burden borne today by all consumers onto 
the backs of local taxpayers. 

 
Mr. speaker, those people opposite agree one hundred per cent with the inland terminal elevators and 
they have made their point very, very clear many times. Dr. Archer had this to say: 
 

One hears of a Saskatchewan option . . . 
 
And I believe I have heard the Members opposite talk about a Saskatchewan option being other than the 
New Democratic Party, but Dr. Archer says this: 
 

One hears of a Saskatchewan option to live in rural Saskatchewan far from the nagging problems 
of big city existence. If inland terminals cover the face of Saskatchewan, it is our opinion that 
this will strike the death blow to scores of towns and villages. It is obvious that much trade will 
be diverted to centres where the terminals are located. As business facilities close other services 
will falter and young people will move. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all I am suggesting to you is exactly what is suggested in this report when it said that such 
inducements are temporary measures. Multinational concerns, directed from afar, do not hand out 
favours unless these aid in a gain for the big concerns. And if those opposite believe and are prepared to 
support inland elevators and then purport to represent the small areas in Saskatchewan, then they are not 
again being truthful in this House. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

833 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— Mr. Speaker, as a Member for one of the constituencies in Moose Jaw, I can assure 
you that it is a pleasure to be associated with my colleague from Moose Jaw South. I think this evening 
well demonstrated the capabilities that are available and have been available to the working people of 
this province insofar as the labour movement is concerned, insofar as the protection of those people and 
the small businessmen are concerned in this province. It is a distinct pleasure for me to associate myself 
with my Hon. colleague from Moose Jaw South. 
 
I might mention just a few of the areas in Moose Jaw that I am more than pleased that our Government, 
the New Democratic Party, has seen fit to give grants to in our city of Moose Jaw. There are many 
grants, I will not go through many of them at this time. But in the Community Capital Fund, there has 
been a total final grant of $706,815 for one small project called the Creighton Park Indoor Ice Arena; 
upgrading street facilities in the city of Moose Jaw, another $31,366. We look at some of the hospitals 
and we hear talk about the hospitals and about how we should only listen to some people and not the 
public as to whether or not we should have hospitals. But in Moose Jaw proper, we have two main 
hospitals. The Moose Jaw Providence has received $50,000; the Moose Jaw Union $1.2 million to 
supply some of the facilities necessary in capital improvements; special care homes, another $150,000; 
St. Anthony’s Home, another $75,280; Ina Grafton Home, a partial payment of $l7,985; a construction 
grant for the Senior Citizens’ Activity Centre of $380 and that is only 20 per cent of a grant that will be 
made available to them. 
 
We have seen provincial winter works grants that cover a wide area of activities in the city of Moose 
Jaw. We see in Moose Jaw alone that the YMCA and YWCA have received a grant of $47,777 and 
received another $10,000 not too long ago. The Saskatchewan Technical Institute, which is of prime 
concern to the city of Moose Jaw and to the young people that attend there to gain their knowledge, has 
received another $7.9 million, $435,000, and $79,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have another complex that we are very pleased about in Moose Jaw, the Moose Jaw 
District Recreational Complex, which when completed will be one of the best parks in western Canada 
if not in the entire country. They have spent up to date $225,000 and I am pleased that the Minister had 
indicated that there will be some further sums available to complete the project and continue on with 
that project. We know about the Co-op Housing Building Program, the public housing program - people 
in Moose Jaw can tell you about things this Government has done for them and will continue to do. 
 
Another area of great concern for everyone is Zion United Church, a $10,000 grant was made on 
February 11, 1977. The amount of $10,000 was applied against expenditures incurred in regard to the 
preservation of that church. Last year a grant of $6,665 was made to the same organization in order to 
preserve that particular church. 
 
We see other areas - we see in fact a tremendous assistance to the Chamber of Commerce, a grant of 
$14,825 in order to bring tourist facilities to the city of Moose Jaw and improve that facility as it may 
deem advisable. Another grant in last August 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

834 
 

of $3,966 was made to the Chamber of Commerce for a convention bureau. A further grant of $400 to 
assist in administrative cost of that particular facility. 
 
We have a provincial grant for the Peacock Gym. We have the provincial grant to the Moose Jaw Senior 
Citizens Assistance Program of $113,696. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that there are many, many 
more grants which I will not go into this evening. But it is certain that this Government is concerned 
about those areas and those organizations that need assistance at this time. 
 
When we listen to those opposite argue and continually attack the civil servants, we actually have to 
wonder where they receive their information as to the number of civil servants per capita. The Hon. 
Member for Thunder Creek yesterday referred to an individual in the Leader-Post, a James Roe, whom I 
believe most of us know and have some respect for. He has been one of the greatest Leader-Post 
editorial writers that they have ever seen. I believe that if we go back a short time in history we will find 
out that a former government hired that same gentleman and provided a position for him in order that he 
could be on the public payroll. Now of course I presume that is why there has been some recognition of 
his talents in the position he finds himself in now. However, I might suggest that if we looked at a 
comparison of the civil servants in Canada, province by province, I think that you will find that those 
accusations by the Opposition are not correct. 
 
If we look at Tory Alberta, the percentage of civil servants is 2.4059 per cent of the population estimated 
at 1,850,000; we look at New Brunswick, 3.4566 per cent; Nova Scotia, 2.319 per cent; Newfoundland, 
2.176 per cent; Prince Edward Island, 3.54; another is the Yukon, which is of course a different situation 
entirely, which is comparatively high. Saskatchewan, at the time of October 1, 1976, the percentage of 
civil servants was, with a population at that time estimated at 941,000, 1.891 per cent. Mr. Speaker, once 
again that position of the Opposition in suggesting that there is a massive civil servant bureaucracy in 
Saskatchewan, is again a position that they take in trying to attack the working man and the civil 
servants of this province. We in this party say that is not right and, of course, it is very characteristic of 
those that want to make points against those people that cannot defend themselves. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG:— Of course, I would imagine that the Liberals opposite are very pleased today with 
the announcement that almost one million people in Canada are out of work. I would imagine that is a 
clear example of what they suggest is good economic planning by the Federal Government; it is a clear 
example, as far as they are concerned, of leadership in a time when leadership is needed, but I would 
like to suggest to them when the statistics came out this morning they said that Saskatchewan has the 
lowest unemployment rate in the whole of Canada compared to the highest in other provinces. I am 
suggesting, the leadership is very carefully spelled out and that happens to be in Saskatchewan with a 
policy that is acceptable to all concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our party and this Government believe in both political and economical democracy. We 
must have political democracy to ensure the people of this province are guaranteed a people 
representation and their voices and needs be heard by 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

835 
 

a responsive elected government. I am suggesting that this Government has proven it is responsible, it is 
responsive and responsible to the people of this province and is prepared to listen wherever and 
whenever people want to contact Ministers or any of the people having to do with the business of this 
Government. 
 
I say that we must, at the same time, effect economic democracy to keep in line the incomes and the 
expenditures dependent on the lows and highs of the variables which all of us are very well aware of. 
And what is the position and policy of that party, the party opposite, called the Progressive Conservative 
Party led by one Member for Nipawin? 
 
That Leader talks and acts as though economics is the only concern of that party. He swings and sways 
in an attempt to meet the most popular position on any particular day which best suits his needs. Under 
his leadership there would be no input from the ordinary people of this province, the input would only 
be accepted from the multinationals and the wealthy. The people of this province should be aware of the 
dangers inherent in the support of any Conservative, at any time, at any place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all of us have facts available to us that we can well refer to and I will refer to 
just three points that we have here. These are the people who I am suggesting would be very well 
represented by either the Conservatives or the Liberals, but as we look into the statistics that we have, 
one per cent of the super rich individuals, families and their corporations and foundations own 50 per 
cent of non-stated industrial capital stocks. Two and one half per cent of the also rich individuals own 
the remaining 30 per cent of total industrial stock properties. Three to five per cent are relatively rich 
individuals of families who own all the remaining 20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is some 92 per cent of the wage earners at the present time working in industry that 
own no productive capital stocks of any appreciable kind. Now this explains without any question, 
whatsoever, why, we on this side of the House would rather represent that 92 per cent and represent 
them fairly and equitably than represent those people that those opposite represent and have no 
hesitation in doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also hear a lot from the Conservatives and even the Liberals about their tremendous 
resource management provided by the Lougheed Tories of Alberta. We hear a lot about their Heritage 
Savings Trust Fund, but really we have to ask what is the real purpose behind this gimmick. We should 
not lose sight of the fact that the Heritage Trust Fund is mostly a public relation exercise. It sounds fine; 
it is a logical step of clear necessity. One can practically hear the platitudes tripping off the Tory 
Members’ tongues opposite and even the Liberals as we heard yesterday from the Hon. Member for 
Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher). 
 
The Trust Fund when it was established late last year, will total $1.5 billion and thereafter 30 per cent of 
annual revenue from non-renewable resources, such as oil, gas, coal, etc. will be allocated to the fund. 
The trust fund will grow to over $10 billion in 1986, that is a tidy sum even allowing for the recent 
prediction that an average home in Edmonton will cost $100,000 by then and require an annual income 
of $72,000 to make purchase available. However, there are a number of questions we 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

836 
 

have to ask about this fund. First, and foremost, is it necessary? Secondly, what will it cost the people of 
Alberta? Thirdly, who will be the ultimate beneficiaries? 
 
The simple answer to the first question is, no. Governments in Alberta have, in the past, accumulated 
considerable financial reserves; more than ten years ago, accumulating a reserve of over $650 million. 
Having an accumulation of reserves of the order of several millions is not something that a government 
normally would find embarrassing. We could certainly manage without the Trust Fund. 
 
There is, however, one thing that Government does find a little embarrassing and that is the fact that 
there isn’t much left of oil and gas. Not only that, the people don’t really realize how much is shown for 
or if they had been considered in this entire expenditure. The profits went south with the oil and gas; the 
present exploitation of our resources by private interests, with their criminal support of successive 
governments over the past 30 years, is coming home to roost, but with a little public relations the Trust 
Fund in Alberta can be made to work and no doubt they will convince many people that is the proper 
way. 
 
The answer to the second question is that the cost to Albertans will be plenty. It has already been costly. 
At a time when essential social programs like health, education and aid to municipalities are savagely 
being cut back, the Government is hoarding money for the so-called future benefits of Albertans. The 
point here, of course, Mr. Speaker, is that the 30 per cent figure of revenue to be allocated to the Trust 
Fund is quite arbitrary. It could equally be 20 or 25 per cent. The figure was just taken out of thin air 
without rationalization. And so to protect this arbitrary quota, essential services are granted insufficient 
funds. This was dramatically highlighted during the discussion on funding for education and that is 
available for all to see. An example is the cutbacks in university appropriations. We know about the 
libraries in Alberta because that has been well brought out by one of the previous speakers. 
 
On the third question - who will benefit - Albertans should realize from the outset that it won’t be them. 
Much of the money will go to the so-called diversification of the economy, which for the Tory 
Government almost certainly means handing out money in $500 million packets as incentives for 
multinational corporations to come and exploit us again. So having practically given the oil and gas 
away, the Government is now busily planning to give away the comparatively meagre royalties that they 
produced to the same corporate monopolies and, no doubt, adding insult to injury, to some of the self 
same companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government does not plan on giving away those royalties; they plan on returning those 
royalties for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan in order to bring about the plans that we have 
seen. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I should just like to say one short word on the anti-inflation program. I 
commend the Minister for now stating that they will attempt to start getting out of the Public Sector 
Prices and Compensation Program by March 30th and then no longer than next September. We well 
know that the labour people of this country and of this province have been the ones that have been 
hoodwinked into accepting the control 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

837 
 

that was meant only to control the wage earner and small income people. We know that The Citizen and 
many other papers as the Leader-Post, all the way down the line, say that the AIB is backed by wage 
controls only; AIB cards stacked against weak firms. We know that the professionals were never 
controlled, particularly the lawyers in this province and across Canada, but we know that it was only 
meant to hoodwink and play a mean hoax upon the working people. 
 
I commend the Minister for saying that we are going to get out of it and I urge the Minister, however, to 
try and bring about an earlier end that has been announced at this time and in so doing, get back to the 
free collective bargaining table in such a way that that freedom of democracy can work in the collective 
bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will be supporting the 
Motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. H. ROLFES:— Mr. Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to participate in the Budget Debate. I 
should like to join with my colleagues and others in this House in welcoming the two new Members for 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf) and the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane). Let me say, 
Mr. Speaker, although I welcome the two individuals I also agree with the Minister of Finance that 
probably they will have one of the shortest lived lives in the Legislature and I hope they make good use 
of it in the next two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was looking forward to a new challenge from the present Member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland because he had told me in 1975 that he would be back in 1979, but I think he 
found the road a little too rough to hoe in 1975 so he looked for greener pastures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having made those few remarks let me, however, say that in 1975, during the campaign, I 
had a lot of respect for the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. There were a number of times during the 
election where we did manage to get together and discuss some of the items and some of the topics. I 
always felt that he was a straight-forward and honest individual. And until the last by-election I still held 
that high opinion of him, but some of the advertisements that they ran, and now I recognize that he 
probably had very little to say about the advertisements, some of them certainly did not represent the 
views of the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland especially the ones that referred to welfare. I am very 
disappointed that he lined himself up with the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) who loves to take a 
slap at the poor and the disadvantaged at every opportunity that he can and will take whatever 
opportunity he has to misrepresent the facts of the people of this province. 
 
Later on in my speech, Mr. Speaker, I will try to correct some of those statements that the Members 
opposite have taken opportunities of making in the two by-elections. 
 
In my speech tonight, Mr. Speaker, I will concern myself mainly with the Department of Social Services 
because there are a number of areas that I would like to talk about. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

838 
 

First of all, let me turn to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. This, Mr. Speaker, is the major expenditure 
item in the Department of Social Services’ budget and has in the past, unfortunately, been the subject of 
major criticism from Members sitting opposite. The area of social assistance has been surrounded by 
myths often perpetrated by people who know better, but use it for their own political interests. The 
public is often confused by misleading and erroneous information that is put out by Members opposite. I 
should like to take a few moments to try and dispel some of those myths surrounding this area. 
 
It is particularly true in a period of economic constraint that the people of Saskatchewan would like to 
examine carefully the expenditures of their Government. Historically, social assistance payments, 
commonly termed welfare programs, have been the object of public concern especially during these 
restrained times. Some people have expressed hostility towards families and individuals who require 
social assistance payments. This hostility has been fostered by a mythology of welfare handouts and 
welfare bums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to take this opportunity to examine this Government’s expenditure in the field 
of public assistance. I want to deal with three questions which the public has a right to answers: 
 

1. Who are the people who are receiving public assistance? 
2. On what basis can people obtain public assistance? 
3. Why have the costs for public assistance increased in the past few years? 

 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, who receives welfare in this province? Our Government . . . 
 
MR. MERCHANT:— Anybody. 
 
MR. ROLFES:— That’s exactly it, the Member for Regina Wascana says, “anybody”, that is the kind 
of falsehood that they like to have people believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government is proud of its record in spending in public assistance. The total number 
of people receiving assistance has continued to decline year by year since this Government took office. 
Our Annual Report will show that since taking office as a government in 1971, the number of people 
receiving public assistance has been reduced by over 18,000 which is over 34 per cent. However, this 
still leaves approximately 19,000 families and unattached individuals in receipt of assistance. Who are 
these people? The myth is that they are lay-abouts or bums or transients and people who contribute 
nothing to society. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 60 per cent of these people are either the aged, those in 
ill health, the disabled, the mentally retarded or children outside of their parental homes. Another 18 per 
cent consists mainly of deserted mothers who have no job and whose children require their full parental 
attention and care. These are the ones that Members opposite call bums, or transients or lay-abouts. Mr. 
Speaker, the remainder of these families and unattached individuals, 22 per cent of the caseload, are 
receiving assistance because the head of the family has either not enough income from his job to support 
his family, or is only able to find part time employment or seasonal employment, or is totally 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

839 
 

unemployed . . . 
 
MR. PENNER:— Or lazy. 
 
MR. ROLFES:— As the Member for Eastview says, “or lazy,” that is the way they like to characterize 
these people. That is common, that is what they were doing in the by-elections, going from house to 
house saying that the aged and the ill and the mentally retarded were lazy. That is exactly what you 
people are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fully employable person, the person who could work, if work was available, amounts 
to only five per cent of the total number of families and individuals receiving public assistance. Mr. 
Speaker, only five per cent; this is contrasted with the figure of 14 per cent of the families and 
individuals being fully employable when this Government took office in 1971. A nine per cent 
reduction! This decrease is a result of a number of factors including a significant improvement in the 
economic conditions of our province since 1971. At the same time, however, we have developed 
specific programs such as the Employment Support Program, which has provided jobs for those persons 
who find themselves on public assistance because they cannot find a job in the regular labour market. 
 
While the number of employable persons on assistance has fallen, the number of individuals in receipt 
of public assistance in special care homes and institutions for the mentally retarded has increased over 
100 per cent in the last five years. This is due to the increasing number of elderly and a greater need of 
the handicapped. In fact, Mr. Speaker, and I want the Members opposite to listen, especially the Member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) about 40 per cent of our SAP expenditures goes to the elderly in 
special care homes and the mentally retarded. Those are the people that you were criticizing in your ad; 
those were the people that you were convincing in Saskatoon-Sutherland that shouldn’t be on SAP 
expenditures. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is hypocrisy of the highest order and I think the Members 
opposite owe an apology to these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second question that I asked was: how do people qualify for public assistance? The 
myth, again, is that the public assistance is paid out for any reason, to anyone who comes along looking 
for a handout, and who can give the social worker a sob story. The fact of the matter is that the head of 
the family must make a written application and produce evidence that he or she has explored, within the 
limits of his or her ability, every possibility, and I wish to emphasize that, every possibility for 
self-support, rehabilitation and re-establishment. A person seeking public assistance must indicate that 
he is unable to work due to physical or mental handicap or the need to care for his children in his home; 
or they can’t find work and have registered with Canada Manpower and are actively seeking work with 
all employers. He must have tried to avail himself of any other assistance, such as unemployment 
insurance, old age security, the Family Income Plan, or Workers’ Compensation, etc. The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan is the last resort that a family has to support itself when all other avenues for 
self-support or for insurance are not available. 
 
The third question, Mr. Speaker, I asked was: why has the cost of public assistance increased? Mr. 
Speaker, the cost of public assistance has risen from a total of $41 million in 1971-72 to an expected 
expenditure of $75 million for 1977-78. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

840 
 

I am sure again, Mr. Speaker, that this is the figure that the Members opposite will bandy around in the 
public and tell people that all those bums are getting $75 million. The truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is 
that much of this goes toward the senior citizens and the mentally retarded. Secondly, why it has 
increased is that the average cost of assistance has more than doubled since this Government took office. 
This increase is due to the greatly increased costs faced by people who require the services of a special 
care home or an institution for the mentally retarded. As I’ve indicated previously, Mr. Speaker, 
payments to persons in special care homes or in institutions for the mentally retarded amount to 40 per 
cent of all assistance paid, or about $40 million this year. That’s for the people in special care homes and 
the mentally retarded. The payment for assistance for persons receiving care and maintenance in a 
special care home or an institution for the mentally retarded has grown from $650,000 per month in 
1972 to $2.9 million per month in the next fiscal year. This is an increase, Mr. Speaker, that the people 
of Saskatchewan should be proud of. They should be proud of the high standards of care and support 
that they have provided to those people who are aged and infirm and require special care homes, and for 
those people who are mentally handicapped and need the care and support of a residential facility. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, while the expenditures on the institutions for the retarded and for the special 
care homes have increased over 540 per cent, the expenditure for all other persons on public assistance 
has increased only 25 per cent since 1972. These are the ones that they should be referring to, or should 
carve out as on public assistance. I would like to make this very clear, Mr. Speaker, that if we subtract 
from the dollars allocated to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, expenditures on special care homes and 
on the retarded, the expenditure under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan would have only increased by 
25 per cent. Therefore, when I say that this Government is proud of the fact that public expenditure has 
increased $41 million in 1971-72 to $75 million in 1977-78 it is because the benefits of this increase 
have gone substantially to upgrade and improve the level of care provided to the aged and infirm, and 
the mentally retarded persons in this province. This is a record that we should be justly proud of. 
Having, I hope, Mr. Speaker, dispelled the myths about public assistance, I should like to turn to another 
welfare system in Canada. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Canada operates two welfare systems. The first is the visible one that I 
spoke about and which is usually condemned by Members opposite, that provides highly visible 
assistance to the poor, the elderly, the disabled and the sick who are unable to provide for themselves. 
 
The second system is the ‘hidden’ welfare system composed of special exemptions, fast write-offs, tax 
loop-holes and other provisions in the income tax system that allow the wealthy to avoid paying their 
fair share of taxes. Unlike the visible welfare system, in which the benefits went to the poor, the 
‘hidden’ welfare system benefits the rich and powerful in this country. 
 
The second welfare system, the ‘hidden’ welfare system that Members opposite don’t like to talk about, 
is just as real as public assistance. While the visible system costs about $1.6 billion throughout Canada 
in 1975, the invisible system, supported by Members opposite, will cost the Canadian taxpayer, 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

841 
 

in the same period of time, over $6 billion. Let me give you just a couple of examples of this invisible 
welfare system. The figures are for 1974 because they are the last complete figures that are available to 
us. In that year, the Federal Government wrote off $513 million in taxes because of contributions made 
to the Registered Retirement Savings Plan. Who benefited from that? The low income wage earner 
either can’t afford to purchase the Registered Retirement Savings Plan or can afford to pay only a few 
dollars in such a plan. He has too much difficulty just in making ends meet, and yet he continues to pay 
his income tax. Yet this year the Liberal and Conservative Members of Parliament voted to increase the 
exemption for Registered Retirement Savings Plans from $2,500 to $3,500 for those who were 
participating in other pension plans, and to $5,000 for those who did not participate in company pension 
plans. In 1974, the Federal Government also lost $546 million in revenue because of the interest income 
deduction. Of the total contributions to RRSP over 57 per cent were made by people with incomes 
greater than $20,000. Persons with less than $10,000 a year income were able to put away only seven 
per cent of the total. Again, you can only ask which group in society has the savings that allows them to 
take advantage of this type of tax write-off - certainly not the low income people. It is interesting to 
note, Mr. Speaker, that of this $6.4 billion, 33 per cent of it or over $2 million, went to the 11 per cent of 
Canadians earning the highest income. This, I call the hidden welfare for the rich. This does not include 
the grants paid to corporations and the write-offs permitted to the poverty stricken oil companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Members of the Opposition want to attack welfare, let them attack the real welfare, 
the welfare provided to the rich created by a tax system designed to help the rich get richer and the poor 
remain poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Government continues to be concerned about providing alternatives to public 
assistance. We believe that where it is practical and possible, both the individual concerned and society, 
are better off with the individual working than receiving an assistance allowance. We have attempted to 
devise programs and incentives to provide this. Too often in the past, some of the disadvantaged were 
written off simply because they had a particular mental or physical handicap. These people then felt they 
had been pushed aside by society as useless and unable to contribute. We have been able to provide 
work opportunities and training for many who would previously have been ignored. 
 
This affliction was also felt by some who had no real mental or physical handicap, but who for social 
reasons were unemployed. We have developed a number of programs to assist in this regard. We make 
use of training on the job. We have work preparation centres and work activity programs. We also 
developed an entirely new concept in the Employment Support Program. The Employment Support 
Program has gone further to destroy the myth fostered by the Members opposite concerning those on 
public assistance than has any other program. The Employment Support Program has proven, that given 
a chance, people on assistance prefer to work if work is available for them. 
 
Even during periods of buoyancy in the economy, the private sector does not create the number and type 
of jobs needed for some of the people on public assistance. The marginally employable are always the 
last to be hired and the first to be fired. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

842 
 

It should also be noted that federal economic and manpower policies have not been effective in this 
regard. Indeed, the announced restrictions on unemployment insurance benefits will create even greater 
hardships for the under-employed, and will place a heavier burden on the resources of my department. 
The success of the Employment Support Program is apparent to everyone. 
 
In 1974, 602 people received employment through this temporary program. Eighteen months after the 
projects were terminated, 80 per cent of these had not returned to public assistance. In 1975, 756 were 
employed through this program, and nine months after the termination of their projects, over 85 per cent 
had not returned to public assistance. 
 
As you will understand, Mr. Speaker, statistics are not yet complete for the following year. It is clear, 
however, that the program has provided a start for many people to get out of the public assistance 
stream. This results, not only in substantial savings to the province in public assistance costs, but is of 
immense social benefit to the individuals themselves. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, we intend to 
continue and expand the Employment Support Program in the coming year. 
 
We frequently hear that the establishment economists say that a certain level of unemployment is not 
only acceptable, but desirable. The reasoning is simple; as unemployment goes down, instead of 
individuals competing for a specific job, various jobs compete for an employee. The free market system 
then works for the employee and not the employer, forcing wages up. It also forces the hiring of less 
skilled or trained and therefore less productive employees. 
 
According to these economists business interests are better served with a pool of unemployed. We 
believe that for social and economic reasons governments should work towards a goal of full 
employment, even if this upsets the normal marketplace relationships. We have consistently pressured 
the Federal Government to work with us in the development of a permanent employment program, 
rather than the present hit and miss programs instituted when unemployment reaches crisis proportions. 
We believe that this is socially desirable. If we believe that work is preferred to public assistance then 
we should be in a position to guarantee that work is available. Those who believe that unemployment is 
necessary must be willing to pay the price. For example, our research indicates that an increase in the 
unemployment rate in Saskatchewan, from the present three per cent to six per cent, will increase the 
public assistance payments by almost $400,000 per month. This is a lot of money. But then, if our 
economic system demands unemployment, we cannot avoid our responsibility. Those who criticize 
expenditures on public assistance should recognize that they are directly related to the level of 
unemployment. Would they prefer that we maintain a pool of unemployed for the benefit of industry and 
then provide even greater hardships for the individuals by forcing them to live on starvation rates? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a few moments to the field of corrections. This is an area that 
frequently hits the headlines when events of a sensational nature take place. It is probably also an area 
about which there is less knowledge by most people than any other field. 
 
Under agreement between the Federal Government and the 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

843 
 

provinces at the present time, the Provincial Government is responsible for all those convicted for a 
period of up to two years less a day. Those convicted of offences and sentenced to two years or more 
come under the responsibility of the Federal Government. We operate in Saskatchewan three provincial 
correctional centres, one in Regina for men, and two in Prince Albert, one for men and one for women. 
I’ll have more to say about these centres a little later. 
 
In recent years, Saskatchewan has provided a good deal of leadership in innovative programming for 
criminal offenders. Our major concern, of course, has been for the safety of society. Since we are 
responsible only for those sentenced to less than two years, we recognize that the long-term safety of 
society depends on rehabilitation. It has, therefore, been our goal to attempt to develop those programs 
which would assist the offender to be reintegrated into society as a meaningful and contributing member 
of that society. Keeping people out of jail, wherever possible, also brings the benefit of reduced costs in 
the long run. We have been able, for example, to expand and develop a community training residence 
program. We now have five such residences. Inmates from a correctional centre can be moved to a 
community training residence prior to their normal release date. Or, in some cases, minor offenders are 
sent directly to a community training residence. While in the residence, staff assist them in finding work 
and in becoming reintegrated into society. During the period April 1, 1976 to December 31, 1976 our 
five residences accommodated 234 participants. During that period these inmates earned a total of about 
$221,000. Out of this they paid $40,000 in board and room, about $17,000 to dependants for their 
support, almost $20,000 in income tax, $2,500 unemployment insurance and $2,400 to Canada Pension 
Plan. They also, through their earnings, were able to pay out $2,300 in fines and restitution and $5,300 
in debts. Mr. Speaker, had these inmates simply been kept in a normal correctional centre their families 
would have been totally dependent on public assistance. The community training residence program 
makes not only good social sense, but good economic sense. 
 
We have also been able to develop a new program called FLEX, or Farm Life Experience. Through this 
program a few carefully selected farm families take incarcerated people and probationers into their 
homes. Without altering their own living habits these farm families have taken inmates into their homes, 
found a place for them, and have become the vehicle that has facilitated significant growth and 
individual change. By living with the farm family, the offender is relieved of negative peer pressure and 
the inmate code which could have affected him in the institution. This program is still in its early stages, 
but we believe it has been worthwhile. 
 
The largest of the non-institutional services, of course, is probation. At the present time we have some 
45 probation officers and supervisors, along with one coordinator for volunteer services. At the end of 
December of 1976 the probation caseload was 2,187 cases. This is an increase of almost 65 per cent 
since 1971. This indicates a growing use by the courts of the probation alternative. 
 
In the fall of 1975 a new position was created, the position of coordinator of volunteers. It was our belief 
that it was time to involve the community more closely in the probation system. The coordinator’s job 
was to recruit, train and supervise volunteers who would be looking after adult probationers. The 
attempt was to involve the community in a meaningful 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

844 
 

way in the correctional process. This experiment was launched in Saskatoon. We now have 
approximately 50 volunteers either working or being trained and supervising 35 probationers. In the next 
few months we will be evaluating the effectiveness of this program which has just completed a year of 
operation. 
 
A new emphasis has been the increasing interest in the concept of restitution. This is an attempt, of 
course, to assist offenders to learn responsible behaviour. As of September 30th of last year, a check of 
our records indicates that $68,000 in restitution has been ordered on those probation cases being 
supervised by our staff. It is estimated that the actual amount is higher than this, but in some cases was 
unknown at the time the restitution order was issued, and, therefore, was not placed on the computer. 
Restitution makes eminent sense, it is of little value to the victims of a crime if a fine is paid to the 
Government. 
 
One of the most innovative programs developed by our Government was the Fine Option Program, 
which is completing its second year of operation. For some time we have been concerned about the 
number of people being placed in correctional centres only because they could not afford to pay the fine 
which had been levied against them. If they had been wealthy they would have paid the fine and gone 
home, but because they were not wealthy and could not afford to pay the fine, they were incarcerated. 
We decided to attempt to do something about this. 
 
The Fine Option Program allows offenders to work off the value of the fine in community service 
activity. In the current fiscal year it is estimated that in excess of 3,000 people will take advantage of 
this method of payment resulting in a reduction of 35 to 40 per cent in admissions to correctional 
institutions for default of fines. Urban and rural municipalities and nonprofit organizations and Indian 
Reserves will receive an estimated $250,000 in community service work from Fine Option Program 
participants. 
 
Besides this, however, there have been many side benefits. A number of offenders have been given 
employment in their community as a result of their participation in the Fine Option Program. 
Community awareness to the problem of poverty and crime has been increased, resulting in co-operation 
of local agencies to initiate such things, as alcohol rehabilitation programs, employment programs and 
educational workshops on the criminal justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will be interested to know that the Fine Option Program continues to generate a great 
deal of interest, not only from other provinces, but also from other countries. We have received, Mr. 
Speaker, 700 requests for copies of the Fine Option Program Review Committee Report which was 
released in March of last year. Two provinces, Alberta and New Brunswick have already patterned their 
Fine Option Program after the Saskatchewan model - another first for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES:— Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that I should like to say a few additional words concerning 
our institutions. Although we believe in community corrections and development of alternatives to 
institutionalization, we recognize that there will always be a need for some institutional services. Over 
the past few years, 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

845 
 

we have been looking closely at the present institutions serving this purpose. The Women’s Correctional 
Centre in Prince Albert is 10 years old and, although it has certain limitations, is able to provide 
adequate levels of custody and care to the inmates residing there. In fact, various national and 
international correction study groups and task forces have commented favourably about the amazingly 
positive relationship between the staff and inmates within that centre. 
 
The two men’s correctional centres are less fortunate. Their large size creates problems and, especially 
in the case of the Prince Albert Correctional Centre, the outmoded physical design and deteriorated 
condition of the building make it extremely difficult to provide the kind of care required in a modern 
correctional system. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, our Government has decided to replace the Prince 
Albert Correctional Centre with a more modern and efficient unit, taking into consideration the best 
possible professional advice available on this subject today. The Regina Correctional Centre underwent 
a $4.5 million renovation approximately 15 years ago, and thus will not be replaced in the immediate 
future. 
 
The 60-year-old correctional centre at Prince Albert will be replaced with a new 100 bed facility in 
Prince Albert. A new remand unit with a capacity of 20 will be constructed adjacent to the correctional 
centre in Prince Albert. The location of a second new 104 bed correctional facility and a 25 bed remand 
have not yet been finalized. The design for the correctional centres and remand centres have been 
awarded to a Saskatoon architectural firm, Holliday-Scott and M. Desmond Paine. Design is expected to 
be completed by the summer of 1978 and construction completed by 1980. Although firm costs will not 
be available until design is completed it is estimated to be in the $15 million range in terms of 1976 
dollars. 
 
The new correctional centres will be designed so as to better meet the objectives of correctional centres 
which are to provide custody as directed by the courts and to provide opportunities for inmates to learn 
and practise responsible behaviour. By having inmates reside in smaller 13-man units there will be more 
opportunities to separate various groups of offenders, young, first time or chronic repeaters. From a staff 
perspective the smaller living units will enable staff to get to know each inmate in his unit as an 
individual. This will permit staff to provide necessary counselling to those inmates who want it and to 
observe other inmates who may create problems. 
 
While the combined capacity of the two new correctional centres and remand units will be 245, as 
compared to the stated capacity of 300 at the existing Prince Albert Correctional Centre, it must be 
borne in mind that the present capacity of the centre includes up to 90 inmates who are actually held 
within various correction care. The capacity of 245 for the new centre does not include those inmates to 
be kept in correctional camps. The Government has considered a number of options regarding the size of 
the new prisons and has concluded that the 245 capacity of the new facilities will be adequate to meet 
the requirements for traditional security. Additional capacity will result from additional correctional 
camps and community training residences which require little or no capital construction and where 
inmates residing therein can work in real work situations, where they can have the opportunity to 
support themselves and their dependents as well as paying board and room during their period 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

846 
 

of incarceration. 
 
Inmates placed in community correctional facilities will have been carefully screened to ensure 
community safety or may be placed directly by the courts, if the courts feel that the security provided in 
the conventional prison is unnecessary in specific situations. For example, there are on any one day over 
100 individuals in our Saskatchewan correctional centres whose offences are directly related to the use 
of alcohol and a motor vehicle. In such situations there are less expensive and, hopefully, more effective 
methods of meeting the requirements of a prison sentence as determined by our Canadian law then our 
current ones. A program would separate such individuals from access to alcohol and from the operation 
of a motor vehicle, while at the same time providing a meaningful work experience and perhaps 
treatment for alcoholism or mandatory participation in courses dealing with impaired driving is 
envisaged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to an area that is of particular concern and interest to me, that of our senior 
citizens. Early in our first term of office this Government made a very serious commitment to do all 
within its power to improve the lives of our senior citizens. We made this commitment for a number of 
reasons. In the first place, we look upon our senior citizens as the pioneers who established and built this 
province. Many of them came here in the very early days when life was very difficult, they battled the 
elements and fought their way through a depression to lay the foundation of a society which now 
benefits each one of us. We, therefore, in a very real sense owe a debt to our senior citizens, their spirit 
of dedication, commitment, perseverance and co-operation has indeed benefited the whole of our great 
nation. We then saw it was our responsibility to take some of the fruits which they had provided to us 
and use them for the improvement of life for our pioneers. We also recognize that many of our retired 
people were suffering from a lack of economic viability. They were living on a fixed income during a 
period of rising inflation. We believe that steps needed to be taken to assist in this regard, either by 
providing the senior citizens with additional services or with the income with which to purchase 
additional services. We also in our commitment recognize something which is more nebulous. We saw 
around us, as I am sure all Members will recognize, an increasing impersonality in society at large. 
While this has difficulties for all of us, we believe that it created some particular problems for senior 
citizens, it increased the feelings of aloneness and loneliness and even of alienation from society. 
 
Finally, we looked at the record of seven years of Liberal Government in Saskatchewan and could only 
conclude that senior citizens appeared to be the most neglected segment of society during that seven 
years. There was then a need for a catch-up, Mr. Speaker. We recognized then that a great deal had to be 
done; we recognized also that everything could not be done all at once. There were those items on which 
we could move fairly quickly, there were others that would take some planning and research. Our 
records indicate that our commitment has been translated into action. 
 
As Members opposite will remember, our first act, of course, was to remove the medical and hospital 
deterrent fees. This provided an immediate benefit to all citizens, but in particular to senior citizens who 
are the largest users of these services. We then removed the premiums for health care insurance; this 
also was of particular benefit to those on fixed incomes. We 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

847 
 

then developed a program of community services which relates primarily to needs of our senior citizens 
through community service grants, we assisted with the provision of Meals on Wheels, special 
transportation services, home care, homemaker and other items of needed service. Through these same 
grants we have assisted in the development of 251 senior citizen centres throughout Saskatchewan. 
These centres, probably more than anything else, assist our senior citizens in overcoming the feeling of 
aloneness and alienation that is so real in our society. They provide opportunity for companionship, 
recreation and a sharing of interest and concern. 
 
During this same period we introduced the first subsidies to patients in nursing homes to relieve a 
greater degree of this financial burden. We also changed the regulations under the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan so that a couple did not find all of their savings obliterated before they could receive 
assistance for the one member of the family who entered a nursing home, as had been the case under the 
previous Liberal Government. The fact is that in my department alone an estimated $40 million in 
1976-77 was spent towards the services and care of senior citizens and in the coming fiscal year we 
estimate that we will spend an estimated $49 million. This means, Mr. Speaker, that over 25 per cent of 
my department’s budget goes towards the services and care of senior citizens. We believe this is a 
significant fact to bear in mind when my department is criticized for not providing for senior citizens. 
 
Let’s look for a moment at the cost of nursing home care for senior citizens. In 1971-72 the average cost 
for a level III bed to the senior citizen was $310 per month. The combined old age security and 
guaranteed income supplement for that senior citizen was $135 per month, leaving the senior citizen to 
pay the balance out of savings of $175 per month. At the present time the average cost of the same bed 
is about $775 per month. Taking into consideration increases in old age security, plus $20 from the 
Provincial Government’s Senior Citizens’ Supplement, and for the coming year a grant of $398, it 
leaves the same senior citizen to pay $115 per month out of his savings. Mr. Speaker, that is a decrease 
of $60 per month, since 1971. I recognize, Mr. Speaker, that there will be increases in the rates of 
nursing homes for this coming year and they have not been taken into consideration in my calculation. 
Mr. Speaker, the subsidy grant for patients in level II will also be increased effective April 1 to $133 per 
month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nursing homes alone are not, of course, the answer to the needs of senior citizens. I have 
already indicated some of the other steps which have been taken to assist, but there are more. The Senior 
Citizens’ Home Repair Program has assisted many senior citizens to maintain their houses and to remain 
living at home for a longer period of time. Programs like the Hearing Aid Plan, and Saskatchewan Aids 
to Independent Living and the Drug Plan have been of particular benefit to our senior citizens, along 
with programs such as Low Rental Housing and Property Improvement Grants. During this same period 
of time, in order to assess the real needs of senior citizens, we established a senior citizens’ commission 
and as a result of that, a permanent Senior Citizens’ Provincial Council. Information we have received 
from these bodies has been clear and unequivocal, we must further develop alternatives to 
institutionalization. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

848 
 

Our studies indicate that the vast majority of our senior citizens want to continue living at home as long 
as it is humanly possible. It, therefore, becomes our responsibility to assist in this regard. Some action 
has already been taken, both by the Department of Health and the Department of Social Services, in 
developing programs such as home care nursing, homemaking, Meals-on-Wheels and like programs. For 
some months now, the Department of Health and the Department of Social Services have been engaged 
in the difficult task of developing the broad parameters for a more comprehensive and integrated home 
care program. While it will be available to all citizens who have need of it, it will be of particular benefit 
to our senior citizens. You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the Budget provided an additional $2 million for 
the development of this program in its first year; this along with funds already available will bring the 
total to about $6.3 million. The discussions and the negotiations need to take place with agencies 
presently involved in the services and with local municipal governments as to how they can and will 
assist us in the design and implementation of the home care program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take all these services that we have provided for senior citizens - I won’t go through 
those again -this year the Provincial Government will spend approximately $79 million for senior 
citizens in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES:— Mr. Speaker, the last area which I should like to discuss before I take my seat, is the 
area of day care. Mr. Speaker, in February 1974, the Day Care Program was formally launched in 
Saskatchewan. Prior to this time, some day care centres were in existence but on an entirely ad hoc 
basis. Following a study, the Government of the day realized the need for increased and improved day 
care services. We recognized that there were a number of one-parent families with a parent working or 
two-parent families where both parents needed to work and where financial assistance was necessary to 
provide for the care of the child or children. At the same time we made the conscious decision not to 
introduce universally free day care. We did this because we could see no good reason for low income 
tax payers to subsidize the care of children for high income earners. We also made the conscious 
decision to place day care under Social Services rather than the Department of Education since we saw 
the program being designed to meet the social, emotional and physical care needs of children rather than 
the simple extension of the educational system. The Day Care Program introduced facilitates the 
development and provision of a range of day care services including neighbourhood day care and family 
day care services. We believe that the Day Care Program ensures that there are adequate standards of 
health, safety and care of children. 
 
When we introduced the program we were convinced that parents are primarily responsible for their 
children and we insisted that day care boards be parent-controlled so that the type of programming and 
staffing would meet the needs and requirements of the parents having children in the centre. We want 
this to continue to be an essential ingredient in the Day Care Program. However, we now have under 
review a recommendation to broaden day care boards to allow non-profit community organizations to 
sponsor day care centres. We will only move in this direction if we are assured that community 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

849 
 

boards guarantee strong parental involvement. 
 
To assist with the development or expansion of day care centres we have provided $200 per child space 
start-up grant and for renovations to existing centres up to $100 per child space. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have come under attack in the past year for not providing a maintenance grant to day 
care centres for the purpose of assisting them in their operating costs. We have reviewed this method of 
funding very carefully and have come to the conclusion that we should continue to provide direct funds 
to families that most require support through the provision of a subsidy, rather than providing grants to 
day care centres which indirectly subsidize all families equally, regardless of income. We believe that 
subsidies are the best choice because they do not give money to those that can well afford day care 
services. We also believe that a maintenance grant is the first step towards a universal day care service, a 
direction that will prove to be extremely expensive. 
 
We are also aware that there are day care centres that are in financial difficulty. However, it is our 
contention that the financial difficulty can be alleviated by increasing their fees. We understand that this 
will be difficult; therefore, to offset this factor we will be introducing one of the richest subsidy 
programs in Canada. 
 
The subsidy structure we are proposing would allow a maximum subsidy equivalent to 90 per cent of the 
cost of care per child with a ceiling payment of $140 per child. Families with an adjusted income of less 
than $825 per month would receive maximum subsidy. The maximum subsidy is reduced by 33.3 cents 
for each dollar of income over $825, adjusted with the break even point being $1,200 adjusted salary per 
month. 
 
This is a substantial subsidy increase from 1976-77. The present subsidy structure only allows a 
maximum subsidy equivalent to 80 per cent of the cost of day care to a maximum of $100 per child. It 
allows that families with an adjusted income of less than $450 per month receive the maximum subsidy. 
The maximum subsidy is currently being reduced by 25 cents for each dollar of income over $450 with 
the break even point being $800 per month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me provide you with a couple of examples to show you what the new subsidy will do. 
 
Example No. 1: A family with two children with one in a day care, where the day care rate is $140 per 
month and whose employment income is $900 a month adjusted, will receive a subsidy of $112. This 
same family would receive only $37.71 in subsidy under the old structure. 
 
Example No. 2: A family with three children with two in day care where the day care rate is $140 and 
whose employment income is $1,000 per month adjusted, will receive a subsidy of $225 under the new 
structure. This same family would have received $139 under the old structure. 
 
We are also proposing to raise the subsidy for families who have children in family day care homes. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that we can continue to meet the 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

850 
 

needs for day care in Saskatchewan. We have adopted a program which provides for universal 
accessibility to day care services rather than one which provides for universal free day care. The use of 
the income test is our subsidy program allows us to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the words that I have spoken tonight, you know that I will not support the amendment 
but I will support the main Motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I join Members on this side of 
the House in supporting this Budget. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, an interesting attitude has developed across the way since this Budget was first 
handed down very ably by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. 
 
You know, if a newcomer to the province happened to wander into the public gallery when Members 
opposite were on their feet, they would almost get the impression that as a province, Saskatchewan was 
on the brink of economic and social collapse. 
 
The doom and gloom which has been heard from Members opposite would almost convince anyone, not 
familiar with the facts, that Saskatchewan was on the rocks, that we were going under, that the 
Government had failed. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that such a tactic only works on people who do not 
understand the realities of this province. That tactic only works, Mr. Speaker, on those who deliberately 
choose to mislead. However, Mr. Speaker, that tactic does not work on the majority of Saskatchewan 
people and one would think that the old-line parties would soon figure that out. 
 
Their response to this Budget has been predictably negative. And again they have sidestepped their 
responsibility to take a positive look at these fiscal proposals with the views of providing the people of 
Saskatchewan with the benefit of an alternative. However, Mr. Speaker, on both counts they have failed 
and they have failed miserably. The financial critic for the Liberal Party had a particularly difficult time 
in understanding what this Budget is all about, and is not in a position to offer the people of 
Saskatchewan a choice. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, his strategy was quite simple. He felt that if he spoke 
long enough and loud enough and threw in the old 18th Century, ‘red under the bed’ scare, the people 
would overlook the fact that the Liberal Party does not have an alternative policy. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it is easy to criticize. Members opposite are masters at that trade. But the real 
test comes in the ability to propose concise alternatives to a particular proposal which the Government 
brings forward. The Liberal Party has obviously failed to grasp the significance of their diminishing role 
in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker. On one hand, they say that they are the only alternative; they say they 
are the true spokesman for anyone against the Government. Well, I am perfectly willing to let the 
Liberals and Conservatives fight it out to see who emerges as the real Opposition in this Legislature, 
however, I must warn Members opposite that their performance to date almost assures them a long and 
well deserved future across the way. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

851 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— I say this, Mr. Speaker, because to me it is obvious that the people of Saskatchewan 
are not going to take a chance on a party which can only say, “Let us govern; give us the reins of 
government and once we form the government, then we’ll decide what we can do.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not good enough and the people of Saskatchewan will never accept that because the 
issues are too important and the stakes are too high. Already the death rattle of the Liberal Party can be 
heard. All one has to do is read the recent editorial in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, which says: 
 

Following three months with Ted Malone as the new Leader, all is not well within the Liberal 
Party. 
Tom Townsend, another strong Merchant supporter, said in a telephone interview he is fed up 
with the Liberal Party and has stopped working for it altogether. Sounding disenchanted and 
somewhat bitter, Townsend said after spending eight years working in the Liberal Party, ‘I’m not 
there any more.’ He pointed to the results of the leadership contest as a sign that old, established 
Liberals will continue to be the motivating force behind the party and that it will not shed its 
self-appreciative fat cat image. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this might sound like bad news for the Liberals and it might sound like good news for the 
Conservatives, however, based on what we have seen so far, I do not see the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan as the answer either. 
 
Faced, Mr. Speaker, with the chance of asserting themselves in a positive manner, they too have chosen 
to remain critical and evasive. Recently, former Prime Minister John Diefenbaker said the Conservative 
Party should have as its motto, ‘me too.’ 
 
In referring to the position of Leader Joe Clark and his refusal to announce specific Conservative policy, 
choosing rather to say, “elect us and then we will tell you what we will do,” Mr. Diefenbaker correctly 
stated that this was not good enough, Mr. Speaker. It was not good enough. The Member for Nipawin 
might be well advised to listen to his former Conservative Leader. When the Member for Nipawin and 
his small caucus first entered the Legislature in 1975 all Members, Mr. Speaker, were fully prepared to 
accept their initial difficulties in coming to grips with the legislative process. However, surely it is not 
unreasonable to expect that now, after two years in their seats, they have had a chance to learn the 
system. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Members opposite can only agree on how to disagree. Collectively they oppose this 
Government. Their approach is similar, their philosophy is similar and if given a chance they would run 
this province in a similar fashion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— I say, Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to let that happen. Only now are we beginning 
to fully recover from those seven years of Liberal rule in which the economic and social fabric of this 
province and its people was worn dangerously thin. 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

852 
 

Mr. Speaker, by any and every economic yardstick, Saskatchewan’s economy boasts confidence. 
Granted, the last two years have noted growth which is normally foreign to our economy, however, the 
gains achieved can be reflected as part of the initiative of this New Democratic Party Government. 
 
When things go badly for Saskatchewan people, the Government is the first place where the blame is 
placed, so perhaps we should also accept the credit when things are going well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— However, Mr. Speaker, rather than sit back and accept that credit, we choose rather to 
spend our energies developing new policies and programs for the people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— It is an interesting situation. If you remember, last year we brought down a budget 
which reflected responsible restraint. As a partner in confederation we were fully prepared and willing to 
join in the national fight against inflation. Our budget reflected this co-operation. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
Opposition Members, one would have thought, should have been willing to join in the fight as well. 
During the debate they were particularly critical of the budget saying we were spending far too much 
money. Yet almost daily, motions would appear on the Order Paper pleading with us to spend thousands 
on this program and millions on that program. Now, Mr. Speaker, they wanted it both ways. 
 
Then came this year’s Budget. The Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) you well remember, says 
there is absolutely nothing wrong with deficit financing, nothing wrong whatever, except when this 
Government chooses that route. Then it is wrong. He says we shouldn’t be spending so much. He says 
there are too many people in the civil service but we shouldn’t cut any positions. He says we aren’t 
doing enough to fight inflation, but we should eliminate the sales tax. He says we should cut the Health 
budget, but retain the level of service. And he finally announced that the Liberal policy on health is, by 
stating in this Legislature, that the users of our hospital beds should pay for their service. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I thank the Member for Thunder Creek for finally coming out of the bushes and telling the 
people of Saskatchewan that the Liberals would bring back deterrent fees, if ever given the chance to 
form the government. The Member for Thunder Creek made it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that deterrent 
fees are the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear to the Legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan that Members 
of this New Democratic Party Government reject outright this position. Deterrent fees are not the 
answer. They are a vicious and unjust tax on the sick and we will never allow them to be considered as 
long as we are the Government of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— This Budget is a good budget. It comes at a time when there is a levelling off in terms 
of the unprecedented growth recorded 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

853 
 

over the past two years. In Saskatchewan we have become accustomed to economic cycles. The ups and 
downs of the economy are part of our way of life. 
 
One of our commitments, when forming the Government in 1971, was to develop policies and programs 
which would make us less vulnerable to these outside influences. In many instances our efforts have 
been successful. The ability or inability of any government to plan for the future goes a long way in 
determining whether or not a province can indeed dictate the success of its economic planning. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, look at the record. We have the record of the lowest unemployment in Canada, we 
have a double A credit rating, we have unprecedented investment, regular population growth, more jobs, 
more housing, greater disposable income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these things just don’t happen. Members opposite don’t like talking about it, but it is true. 
Our policies are having a positive effect. They are working and we are having success in developing the 
kind of economic and social program which ensures that the public is getting the best possible deal for 
the money invested. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear. 
 
MR. PEPPER:— Our commitment is not restricted to any one sector of the economy. We all recall the 
preoccupation of the former Liberal Government with its pet project, ‘economic development’. Do you 
remember, Mr. Speaker, what they said about bringing Saskatchewan 80,000 new jobs? Do you 
remember what they were going to do about helping Saskatchewan realize its full economic and 
industrial potential? Yes, Mr. Speaker, we remember well. Empty promises, onerous taxation, and 
callous disregard for the individual are trademarks of seven years of Liberal rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps it is unfair to zero in on the Liberals too much, but it is difficult to be too specific 
with respect to the Conservatives because, Mr. Speaker, not only do we not know, but I do not think 
they even know where they stand in terms of specific policies and programs for this province. The 
Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) will only say that a Conservative Government will restore 
Saskatchewan to its rightful place in Confederation. That’s what he says . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— I think the Members should refrain from making loud personal remarks about the 
person speaking. I know I want an opportunity to hear the Member and I am sure some Members over 
there do too. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear. 
 
MR. PEPPER:— The Member for Nipawin will only say that a Conservative Government will restore 
Saskatchewan to its rightful place in Confederation. He says that under a Conservative Government, 
Saskatchewan will stand out as a ‘sparkling jewel’. Now, Mr. Speaker, how could anybody argue with 
that? The only thing that we question is how are we going to make that jewel sparkle? We’re trying I can 
assure you. Anybody knows it takes a lot of polishing and a lot of elbow grease to get a jewel to sparkle. 
Well, we are doing our part, but what are Members opposite doing? 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

854 
 

I say rather than pitching in, they choose the easy route. They sit back and they criticize and fail to offer 
the kind of positive direction which is their responsibility. Mr. Speaker, by any yardstick whatever, this 
Budget is a responsible Budget - in health, in education, in social services, in northern development, in 
resources, in municipal services. It’s all there, Mr. Speaker, a record of accomplishment. 
 
A moment ago I talked about economic cycles. Then there are political cycles. The latest being, the 
hysterical outcry, Mr. Speaker, from the Members opposite in respect to our resource policies as they 
relate to potash. Before dealing with that however let’s review the record. 
 
A few years ago it was medicare, remember the outcry. Well now Members opposite support medicare. 
Then it was the Land Bank Commission. They said it was ‘a communist plot’. I think that is the term 
they used, I think that was it. Well, they slowly got tired of opposing a program which had support of 
most people so they quietly died away on that issue. Then it was Bill 42. I well remember that. They 
again got very emotional about this issue claiming our legislation was going to literally destroy the oil 
industry in Saskatchewan. Well, again, Mr. Speaker, history has shown that they were wrong and they 
quietly have backed away from that debate. Now comes the potash and they are at it again. Somehow, 
they cannot, Mr. Speaker, they cannot seem to grasp the significance of what we are doing. Somehow, 
they feel it is still publicly acceptable to allow the multinational corporations to come in and enjoy a 
field day with our non-renewable resources and then leave with most of the money. They somehow do 
not think it is a good idea for the Government to get involved. They say it doesn’t make sense. They say 
Government has no right in the potash business, the oil business, the timber business and the uranium 
business. They somehow think that morally or economically it is wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again their consistency and their batting average remains intact, again they are wrong. 
Other speakers in this debate have, and other speakers in the future will, I am sure, detail the 
commitment we have in terms of these resources, so my remarks on this topic will end here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at the outset of his remarks on Budget Day, the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) 
noted the cautious optimism we feel in terms of the next 12 month period of time. He pinpointed the 
strengths while noting the dangers which exist. I feel his budgetary approach to the affairs of 
Saskatchewan were indeed positive and responsible. We have been able to retain the vast majority of 
services and programs that we currently have in place while, at the same time, devoting further money 
and energy towards new policies for the future. It would have been easy to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, “Look, the Federal Liberal Government has reduced its funding for cost-shared programs 
so we are going to have to reduce some services or increase taxation.” That would have been the Liberal 
way or the Conservative way, but we said, No. Because of past fiscal responsibility we have been able to 
retain what we have and improve on what we have. We are not saying that the next two years are going 
to be easy for Saskatchewan. We are not immune to the fluctuations of the international market place 
and we have certainly no control over the weatherman. But I say, Mr. Speaker, what is important is this - 
it is important for this Government to take hold of those areas we can influence and do 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

855 
 

whatever possible to ensure that no stone remains unturned in our ongoing commitment to build a better 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER:— You know, Mr. Speaker, at times I find myself at odds with my usual easygoing 
temperament, my frustration I guess brought on by my unqualified faith in mankind. I believe in this 
province and its potential. We have not been blessed with some of the natural advantages found in other 
provinces, but we have much to be thankful for. Our potential is great and I find myself willing and 
enthusiastic to do whatever I can, as a Member of this Assembly, to offer a positive contribution to the 
affairs which dictate the future of this province. 
 
It is the obligation of each of us, I says Mr. Speaker, to do our part. We share a common responsibility. 
That responsibility is to build a better Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is a task which needs the support of 
not 38 Members, not 40 Members and not 55 Members, it takes the dedication and commitment of each 
Member of the House. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, it is not happening. There are destructive forces about and I don’t have to look too 
far to find the source. It troubles me, Mr. Speaker, and I sincerely hope, that, in the not too distant 
future, we can expect some form of new commitment from Members opposite in terms of their 
responsibility. We are on the threshold of shedding the image of a ‘have-not province’. It is going to 
take collective effort to push us the rest of the way. I know Members on this side of the House are lined 
up to do their part. I wonder when we can expect some positive effort and assistance from Members 
across the floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this Budget will add to the growth of the economic and social fabric of this 
province and because it is the kind of a budget which maximizes our strengths and minimizes our 
weaknesses, I offer you and Members of this Assembly my unqualified support for this important 
Budget. You can take from my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I support the Budget and I oppose the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair):— Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this Budget, I would like 
to congratulate the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf) and the Member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) on their recent election to the Legislature. I would also like to 
congratulate the Minister of Finance on his very responsible Budget in a series of responsible budgets 
that the New Democratic Party has given to this Legislature and the type of responsible budgets that the 
people in Saskatchewan are accustomed to seeing when the New Democratic Party is in power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DYCK:— The Budget, Mr. Speaker, in my view, is again a very progressive Budget and it is a 
progressive Budget because it contains a number of new programs that are important. It provides 
additional funds for existing programs that are much needed. I am particularly impressed and pleased 
that we will 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

856 
 

be providing a comprehensive Home-nursing Program which will allow the elderly and the handicapped 
to remain in their homes. Certainly this is most desirable and exactly what these groups of people want. 
 
The Family Court is certainly a step in the right direction where families can find solutions to their 
problems in less formal and more understanding situations. 
 
I am happy, Mr. Speaker, also that our Government does not anticipate that there will be any controls on 
contracts settled on or after September 30th, 1977. 
 
I would like to turn for a moment to health care, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has the best health care 
system in all of Canada and I challenge anyone to dispute that statement and I challenge you now. 
 
Nevertheless, there are a number of things that can be done to improve the health delivery system. As 
with any system, it can always be improved and in order to accomplish this we are going to require, in 
the years ahead, close co-operation between the consumers, the Department of Health and the health 
professions and administrators in the field of health. I want to emphasize that it cannot be done by the 
Provincial Department of Health alone. To summarize in this area, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that a 
number of things can be done to make our health delivery system even better than it already is. In my 
view, through the use of para-professional or para-medical people, through more medical clinics, 
through better out-patient health services, through preventative medicine and through shorter stays in the 
hospital including the process of doing surgery, we can accomplish a more effective system. These are 
certainly techniques that should be studied in the years ahead. 
 
But, you know, in the two by-elections we heard some of the most hypocritical statements emanating 
from the Conservative Party. They talked about putting care back into Medicare. I say, Mr. Speaker, this 
is the height of all hypocrisies because these same people, these same Tories and these same Grits back 
in 1962 joined forces with all kinds of groups around this province in order to stop the implementation 
of the Medical Care Insurance Program, a program that is now accepted by every provincial jurisdiction 
in this country. Now actions about putting the care back into Medicare, in my view, were the most 
reprehensible in those two by-elections campaigns. For example the Member for Swift Current (Mr. 
Ham), speaking to a meeting in Saskatoon in October of 1974, said that he was personally in favour of 
re-introducing deterrent fees. These same people, Mr. Speaker, are now saying, “put the care back into 
Medicare.” Now, Mr. Speaker, the question is can these people be trusted? Can they be trusted? Some 
Conservatives support deterrent fees and if they say put the care back into Medicare, the question is, can 
they be trusted?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the recent two by-elections the Conservatives expressed real concern about the alleged 
increase in crime, the declining level of public morality and a greater need for Christianity in our society 
but they never did quite say what they are going to do about it. Of course they don’t say what they are 
going to about much of anything these days. They might start another, ‘back to the bible’ broadcast or 
something like that; I’m not sure. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when you 
  



 
March 15, 1977 

 

857 
 

have large disparities of income, when you have poverty amidst affluence, then you are going to have 
unrest and we have poverty in Canada. You are going to have social unrest and you only need to look at 
the United States and many of the underdeveloped countries of the world including South America, to 
determine this. 
 
In this context, Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer to a report recently prepared by the National Council 
of Welfare and allow me to quote: 
 

Wealthy Canadians are receiving billions of dollars in hidden welfare, according to a report by 
the National Council of Welfare. High income tax payers receive the greatest benefit from 17 tax 
subsidies which cost the Federal Government some $16.4 billion to 1974. There are about 40 
additional tax subsidies that run into additional billions of dollars but the exact amount of these 
subsidies will never be known because no records are kept. 

 
Says this report. This 21 member Council is a Government funded advisory body to the Federal Health 
and Welfare Department. The report says: 
 

Persons earning less that $5,000 per year receive an average of $244 from the 17 tax subsidies 
since 1974 but those with incomes of more than $50,000 save a total of $4,000. One example of 
a tax subsidy that benefits the rich more than the poor is the Registered Home and Ownership 
Savings Plan. Persons earning $5,000 to $10,000 a year can receive $264.93 by placing $1,000 in 
a savings plan assuming that they can save $1,000 for that purpose. A person making $15,000 or 
$20,000 will save $385 under this plan. 

 
The report states that no taxes at all were paid by 252 persons who made more than $50,000 in 1974 
including 17 persons who made more than $200,000, Mr. Speaker. High-income persons and managerial 
and professional positions for example, can often set up dummy companies whose only real purpose is 
to assist them in avoiding taxes. 
 
There are in fact, two welfare systems in Canada, one for the poor and one for everyone else. 
 
The Income Tax Act conceals millions of dollars in government spending, the spending which makes up 
Canada’s welfare system for the non-poor. Ordinary citizens, middle income, and low income tax 
payers, are almost totally unaware of its existence. Ordinary citizens are also unaware that it is they who 
bear the greatest burden of the costs, while it is the wealthy who reap the greatest benefits. And I am 
suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the answer to this problem lies in a more progressive tax structure with a 
much higher exemption level, so that larger amounts of federal tax revenue come from the higher 
income. And I am pleased that the Province of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan has 
taken some concrete action in this direction. 
 
You know, if there was a stigma which sometime comes from receiving social assistance, receipt of tax 
benefits is seen as the mark of the judicious organization of one’s personal financial affairs. Maximizing 
benefits, received through these benefits are never described as an abuse. In fact, it is viewed 
  



 
March 15, 1977 
 

858 
 

as a rationale by at least the uninformed. Moreover admiration is bestowed upon the astute company 
lawyer who by some sophisticated scheme obtains a tax subsidy for his clients. Even the unlawful 
evasion of taxes is regarded by many only as a slight transgression. While obtaining Social Assistance, 
when one is not entitled to it, is viewed as a grave offence. 
 
Finally, and perhaps this explains some of their unique characteristics, the tax subsidies to the greatest 
extent help the well-to-do. Certainly, there are no benefits whatsoever to those who are outside the tax 
system, because their income is too low. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in summary, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, because to a large extent, 
of an unfair federal tax system. And I submit to you, that in a society where there are large disparities of 
income you will not have a healthy society. There will be crime. There will be social unrest and in the 
long term these kinds of societies will, in fact, threaten the process of democracy itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Opposition Parties are suddenly interested in crime in the streets, but I say that that 
concern of theirs is nothing less than a cheap sham, because their political history proves that they have 
done virtually nothing to eradicate poverty in this country. And poverty is one of the root causes of a 
good deal of social unrest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Tories and the Grits are today, as they have been in the past, fighting against our policy on resource 
development and we can understand why they fight against those policies. 
 
Allow me to repeat for a moment some of the information about where these political parties derive their 
campaign funds. Very recently in New Brunswick, for example, it has been shown that local government 
members there, on the Conservative side of the House, have been receiving regular kickbacks from 
people in industry in that province. Now, this does not surprise me because these two parties have been 
receiving this sort of financial assistance for years and this is why they owe their allegiance and their 
soul to the large corporations. 
 
I will not go over the list of the contributors given in this House last autumn, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Member for Biggar. Certainly those figures demonstrate who supports the Conservative Party. And 
while the Tories say they are for the little guy, the fact remains that they are deeply in hock to the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will, as you can conclude, be opposing the amendment and supporting the motion. 
However, since I have a few more words to say, I should like to beg leave of this House to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:07 o’clock p.m. 
 


