




















































Hansard: April 12, 1977


1922 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Tuesday, April 12, 1977. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

MEMORANDUM BY SIR BARNETT COCKS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Pursuant to a recommendation of the Third Report of the Special Committee on 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly I now lay on the table a Memorandum by Sir Barnett 

Cocks which in his view, if adopted, will be a sound investment in parliamentary democracy. 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, in just following up the recommendation and the 

report that you have now laid on the table, I would like to move, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse) that: 

 

The memorandum by Sir Barnett Cocks dealing with the duties and role of the Clerks at the Table and 

the Legislative Assembly Office be referred to the Select Special Committee on the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly for consideration and recommendations thereon and that this 

Select Special Committee be further instructed to submit its report on this matter to the Assembly with 

all convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to the Assembly 

14 cubs and scouts seated in the Speaker’s Gallery from the first Pilot Butte Cubs and Scouts Troup. 

Pilot Butte I might add is one of Saskatchewan’s fastest growing communities and participation of the 

leaders and chaperons, Janet Johnson and Carol Clark, is indicative of the growing community spirit in 

the community of Pilot Butte. I welcome them to the Assembly. I hope that their afternoon is 

entertaining and interesting. I will join them for photographs and drinks later and we wish them a safe 

journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

PURCHASE OF LICENCE PLATES 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a series of 

questions to the Minister in charge of SGIO and the issuance of licences in Saskatchewan. I would like 

first of all to ask the Minister if he has been aware of the persistent and very long line-ups of people 

trying to obtain licences particularly in Saskatoon and Regina, some of the duration of one hour or one 

hour and a half? Some people with great inconvenience to themselves have been going back three and 

four times and still 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1923 

 

not able to obtain a licence plate. With the introduction of the new system, has the Minister or the 

Department done anything to provide extraordinary assistance or emergency service in this period of 

time which is such an inconvenience to the person trying to buy a licence? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Yes, we have and I would like to tell the 

Hon. Member that I think the length of the line-up and the time that it takes is an exaggeration because 

we have been checking it out and I don’t think it is as long — anybody that has lived in Regina knows 

that there has been a line-up at this time of the year for plates. I am sure that the time that it takes has 

been cut by 75 per cent from what it was in the first week or so. We’ve been checking it out. I can give 

you names of people who were down there for three-quarters of an hour or half an hour. It depends on 

the time of day that you go and that sort of thing. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary question. I may have a comment to make on that remark of 

the Minister. How about the delays in getting the plates mailed out? Can the Minister inform the House 

as to the status of applications that have been sent by mail. Some people have complained to members of 

our caucus that people have sent in their application with their cheque in the first week and still have not 

received their driver’s licence and their plates. Can you tell us what is the status and how far out of date 

they are and what kind of additional staff might have been put on for this purpose? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — As I have pointed out over and over again, we are trying to change 720,000 

registrations to a monthly renewal basis. We are trying also at the same time to register something like 

520,000 vehicle operators. This is the only time it will be done in the next five years. It is a difficult 

procedure; we know that; we have been talking to the people that have been handling the licensing. We 

have been rearranging some of the procedures to cut down on the time that is being spent. We are 

meeting the people that are handling the licensing. We are doing everything that we possibly can. We 

anticipated this when it was set up. It happened this way when it was organized in the Province of 

Manitoba and it happened in other jurisdictions. I would like to advise the House and I am sure that the 

Hon. Members are interested that when you renew a licence plate now in Manitoba it takes about five 

minutes to do so, but the first time around it took just as long as it is taking here in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Exactly the same consultants that handled it in Manitoba are handling it in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Another supplementary. Well I think it is a monumental mess, Mr. Minister, 

and I think the department has some responsibility to plan it. Could the Minister tell me if all the 

renewal forms have been put in the mail? Some people have also reported that they have not received 

their renewal forms for licence and for driver’s licence. Can the Minister tell me if all the citizens of all 

the licensees have had their renewal applications forwarded in the mail at this time or are there still some 

to come? 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1924 

 

MR. WHELAN: — The people who are waiting for their new plates still can drive their vehicles until 

the end of April. If you drive around the city of Regina you will find that beginning with my own 

vehicle they have a last year’s licence plate on it. I am sure that the problem will be solved by the end of 

the month and I am sure that it is an easy thing to sit back and criticize the civil servants and give them a 

bad time before the Orders of the Day, but we knew that this situation was going to happen. We fully 

anticipated it, but we thought that the people opposite would be more understanding. 

 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN CORY LIMITED 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — In the absence of the Minister of the Potash Corporation, I 

direct my question to the Minister of everything and the part-time Attorney General. 

 

I noticed in the most recent issue of the Saskatchewan Gazette, that Potash Corporation Saskatchewan 

Cory Limited is in the process of changing its name and indicates that its registered head office is the 

third floor, Bank of Canada Building, rather than Saskatoon, Can you explain that to the House? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I will take notice. 

 

SHUT DOWN OF FERTILIZER PLANTS 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Premier. 

 

In the last weekend edition of the Toronto Globe and Mail we have a quotation from Kenneth Neilson, 

who is the chairman of the fertilizer industry of Canada as well as the chief executive officer of Western 

Co-op Fertilizer. In his article he states, in regards to the industry, that there is every indication that the 

producers at this particular time are facing a prospect of moving to shut down plants and could well be 

shut down for a considerable length of time. In view of this study that has been made and the 

announcement that has been made, Mr. Premier, I wonder if you would care to comment upon the 

further acquisition of potash mines as being a sound investment for Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I assume that Mr. Neilson was talking 

about the plants in which he is involved — that is nitrogen plants — and I assume also that whether or 

not nitrogen fertilizer is consumed on the Prairies will have relatively little to do with whether or not 

potash is consumed. I think that all of us know that comparatively little potash is consumed in western 

Canada. On the other hand major consumers of nitrogen and phosphates are in western Canada and it is 

entirely possible to have a significant drop in market for nitrogen and phosphate fertilizers without 

having any drop in the market for potash. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The report goes on to say, Mr. Premier, that 

at the present time there is a tremendous buildup or stockpiling of fertilizers including the plants in 

western Canada. The complaint, of course, was that of the tremendous amount of investment in the 

stockpiles. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1925 

 

In view of the overall report, which includes our own production here in Saskatchewan, would you not 

consider that the investment, even within the stockpiles and the forecast which the president of the 

Canadian Fertilizer Plant is making, is not a serious threat to our position or to the Government’s 

position, of acquisition at this time? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will take the next question. 

 

MOTORCYCLE INSTRUCTIONS — SAFETY ’77 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — I’d like to direct a question to the Minister responsible for the 

Highway Traffic Board, regarding Safety ’77. Your department as well as the SGIO provides grants to 

the Saskatchewan Safety Council which will contribute immensely to the success of Safety ’77. The 

Saskatchewan Safety Council embarks on April 18th, on a series of motorcycle instruction courses, but 

due to a high enrolment and a lack of training area, I understand that all they have at this point is the 

parking lot in the Balfour Tech School, a great number of new operators are going to be on the streets 

and the highways without proper riding instructions. Has your department taken any steps to correct this 

problem before April 18th; if so what are they? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to take notice of 

the question. I don’t have the answer in my mind. 

 

GOVERNMENT PENSION POLICY 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I’d like to direct a question to the Minister in charge 

of the Public Service Superannuation Board. I understand he has just returned from a conference. The 

Minister last year indicated that the province had paid out, I believe, $2.4 million, to subsidize 

superannuates. What will the cost be to the province this year, for the payment to the superannuates? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I’ve got the question 

entirely. You’re talking about the Public Service of Saskatchewan — the total payments? It is in the 

range of $6 million. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Would the Minister agree that the superannuates would have been far better off 

had they had a funded, a fully funded program in the first place, rather than having the money over the 

years, put directly into general revenues and held in the manner that it was as a supposed debt? Would 

the Minister agree that the people now drawing pensions, after having worked for the Government 

would have been better off had they been better treated in the past? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, I’ve been saying that for years. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Final. Would the Minister not also agree that in essence, what the Government 

is doing now with the pensions policy 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1926 

 

regarding public servants, is that the employees are receiving the promise of a pension which would run 

about half a billion dollars in the hole if all of the employees stayed on to pick up their pensions and 

that, in fact, what you are doing is either conning the taxpayers or conning the workers? Either the 

taxpayers will pick up an overwhelming load that they don’t anticipate and that your Government is not 

warning them about, or in the alternative people who believe they are getting pensions will, in fact, quit 

their jobs and you’re conning the workers into thinking that they are receiving a pension that they, in 

fact, will not receive? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the situation is no different for the public service employees than it is 

for any of the private or public employees across Canada who are participating in 15,853 pension plans, 

which cover 3,426,245 people and not 20 per cent of them will end up with reasonable pensions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. In view of the fact that several of my friends and neighbors who are engaged in the agricultural 

industry in Saskatchewan and I’m sure several farmers all over Saskatchewan have in recent weeks been 

ticketed for being one or two hundred pounds overweight on the front axle of their grain truck, while 

still staying within the gross vehicle weight limits and in view of the fact that most farmers do not have 

scales on their farms, would the Minister and his department consider a change in this policy to allow, 

perhaps a ten per cent fudge factor for a particular axle providing they stay within the gross vehicle 

weight limits? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, there has been no change 

in the load limit policy of the Government. It is true that we made some proposals with respect to 

municipal load limits, but there has not been any change. What the Highway Traffic Board officers are 

presently carrying out are the regulations which are now in effect. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I agree with all that. What I’m asking is, would the 

Minister consider a change in policy to allow for a fudge factor on one axle within the existing limits? 

To clarify, Mr. Speaker, the tickets are being issued for being overweight just one or two hundred 

pounds on one axle while still being within the gross vehicle weight. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — We have not considered to this point any change in the existing policy. 

 

IS CHAIRMAN OF WESTERN DEVELOPMENT MUSEUM ON GOVERNMENT PAYROLL 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — A question to the Attorney General. Are you aware 

whether there has been any correspondence received within the 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1927 

 

last few days from the city of Saskatoon with regard to the recent dismissal of Mr. Wilson from the 

WDM and the subsequent resignation of Mr. Unrau? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I have received no information. It may be possible that some other Minister has. 

 

MR. PENNER: — If such correspondence were to come forward does the Attorney General have any 

opinion whether or not, if for example, an inquiry were to be asked for, whether the Government would 

carry one forward? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I’ll take the next question. I’ll take the Member for Swift Current. 

 

CONSIDERATION OF CLOSURE OF SWIFT CURRENT POWER AND GENERATING 

STATION 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Is it true Mr. Minister that SPC plans to close the Swift Current 

generating, Swift Current Power and Generating Station? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — I believe that SPC is aware that at some 

point in time in the future there may have to be consideration given in regard to whether or not it is 

economically feasible to continue the operation of that generating station. There is no decision that has 

been made at this point in time. 

 

MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If this is the case, Mr. Minister, will the people whose jobs 

will be affected be moved from the city or will they be offered jobs in the area? 

 

MR. MESSER: — As has been the practice and the policy of the past where generating stations or the 

like operations have been phased out of operation by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to be joined 

into the overall provincial grid, the jobs that have been in those places have always been absorbed into 

the SPC system with as little inconvenience as possible. 

 

MR. HAM: — When do you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, expect a final decision in this regard? 

 

MR. MESSER: — I think that that is too hypothetical of a question to really address ourselves to. It is 

always under constant review. I am not aware of any final decision coming in the near future. 

 

IS SPC CORY A SUBSIDIARY OF PCS 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I ask a question of the Attorney General as a 

member of the Board of Directors of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Was PCS Cory Limited 

incorporated as a subsidiary 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1928 

 

of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? If so why is it in the process of changing its name and do 

you intend to incorporate additional subsidiaries? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I said I would take notice of the first 

question and I am going to take notice of this question in the same category. 

 

GRANTS IN LIEU TO MUNICIPALITIES 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. RMs 

are now required to supply increased services, such as roads, schools, hospitals, recreational facilities, an 

increased police force as a direct result of Crown corporations involvement in our area and other areas. 

With this reduced tax base it is a less than fair and equitable arrangement. Will the Government take 

steps to change these formulas wherever Sask Power moves into an area — Estevan? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think the Hon. Member 

is referring to a policy of grants in lieu. I might report to the Hon. Member that this whole issue of 

grants in lieu is under consideration by the Government. As a matter of fact the Hon. Member will recall 

the appointment of the former Deputy Minister of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Walters, as a special advisor 

on municipal financing. He is looking at this whole issue of grants in lieu. As yet we do not have a 

clearly defined policy to announce. 

 

MR. LARTER: — A final supplementary. Could the Minister tell us approximately when these studies 

will be done, when we will hear something on this? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I am sorry I can’t give a specific time. 

 

LICENCE PLATE PAINT 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I would once again like to direct a question to the Minister in 

charge of licence plates. Could the Minister inform the House if he has had any complaints about the 

legibility of the paint on the licence plates? Some people have indicated and I have noticed myself you 

almost have to have perfect vision or be right on top of someone in order to see the licence plate 

number. Has the Minister had any complaints? Could he tell me who the consultant was who gave him 

the recommendation of the color? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — I haven’t had any complaints of that sort. I have had lots of others, but not one of 

those. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Has the Minister made a decision yet as to whether or not he is going to 

increase the fees paid or the remuneration of licence issuers in Saskatchewan so that at least they can 

hire more staff to try to look after the administrative horror . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Next question. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1929 

 

TABLE RICHARD THOMAS REPORT 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. The recent 

dismissal or firing if you like of Gordon Wilson at the Saskatoon Western Development Museum and 

close on the heels of that, the protest resignation of Unrau has been of some concern to the citizens of 

Saskatoon and people of Saskatchewan. In light of the fact that this followed very closely on the heels of 

a report done by your government called the Richard Thomas Report, I would ask if you would be 

prepared to table that report in this Assembly so that we can have a look at it and see what the 

involvement of the Government was? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I have no knowledge of the Richard Thomas Report. I will take notice of the 

question. 

 

IS CHAIRMAN OF WESTERN DEVELOPMENT MUSEUM ON GOVERNMENT PAYROLL 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, is it correct that the chairman of the 

WDM is on the payroll or paid in any way whatsoever by the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The question is, is the chairman of the Western Development Museum Board — 

I cannot answer the question, I will have to take notice. 

 

MR. PENNER: — A final supplementary. Would the Premier in taking notice of the question also 

indicate whether or not it isn’t in his view, a conflict of interest or inappropriate to have the chairman of 

an independent body being paid also by the Government of Saskatchewan, and that the firing in fact of 

Mr. Wilson was not really anything more than something perpetrated by the Government of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the question presupposes that the answer to the previous question 

was in the affirmative. If the question is in the affirmative then obviously I will need to consider that in 

the answer. I do not know the answer to the first question, as I made clear. I will therefore take notice of 

the second one. 

 

WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON MUNICIPAL ROADS 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — A question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Some 

time ago the Minister in a speech to the SARM convention introduced some proposals to the changing 

of the weight restrictions on municipal roads. Some time has gone by on this and now there is a very 

eerie silence that prevails over the entire situation. I would like to ask the Minister when he will clarify 

his Government’s position. In essence when you made your speech it was Government policy; it is now 

a resolution. When will you clear the air for the truckers of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I will be clarifying the proposal as 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1930 

 

soon as I have at least an opportunity to sit down with the executive of SARM. We have been in contact 

with one another with respect to a possible meeting. I understand that they, the directors and the 

executive, are now in the country attending RM meetings and banquets where this topic is being 

discussed. I am sure they will want to complete that circuit before they get back to me with respect to 

the position they wish to take. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. One evening when I was slumming, 

Mr. Minister, I noticed the Commonwealth in which it indicated this was Government policy not a 

resolution. Would the Minister tell me if the official organ of his party was speaking for the Government 

or whether it was not. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Next question. 

 

RICHARD THOMAS REPORT 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has already taken notice of the 

business of the Richard Thomas Report. I would ask if he would be prepared at the same time he is 

looking at the other information to ascertain why the person most directly interested in the outcome of 

the Report, i.e. Gordon Wilson was not shown a copy of the Report and was, in fact, refused to have a 

look at the Report; if he could provide us with that information. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I very much doubt that the question has anything to do with the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I very much doubt it. Accordingly I will take note of that, but I would be very surprised 

if it were the Government of Saskatchewan involved. 

 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN CORY LIMITED 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I will see if I can draw some information from the Premier that I 

can’t seem to get from the Attorney General. Why is the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Cory 

Limited in its notice in the Saskatchewan Gazette, last edition shown as having its head office, registered 

head office situated at 300 Bank of Canada Building, Regina, an address which I am sure is well known 

to you since that is your former law firm. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of that. I suspect that the answer is what he well 

knows. When companies are first organized it is very common not only to name the members of the firm 

as the directors, but also the law office as the head office. Very frequently this is all changed when the 

beneficial owners take over. It is not uncommon at all. 

 

STATEMENTS 

 

STUDENT BURSARY PLAN 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Continuing Education): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce an 

increase in the bursary assistance through the Saskatchewan Student Bursary Plan. The maximum 

bursary available under the Plan has been raised to $1,800 from $1,000 a year, an increase of $800 a 

year. Up to $3,600 a year in combined bursary and loans will be available to 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1931 

 

post secondary students in Saskatchewan who require financial assistance. The Bursary Plan is operated 

in conjunction with the Saskatchewan Student Loan Plan and the Canada Student Loan Plan. Both loans 

and bursaries are awarded on a need basis. All loan applications are automatically evaluated for bursary 

eligibility. The first $1,000 of assistance will be provided for in the form of a loan in the most cases 

guaranteed by the Federal Government. Students requiring additional assistance will receive half in the 

form of a provincial non-repayable bursary and half in guaranteed loan. Any assistance in excess of 

$2,600 will be provided entirely by non-repayable bursary. 

 

I would like to point out that the Plan has been designed for most assistance to those students with the 

greatest need. Last year 3,657 students received a total of $1.7 million on provincial non-repayable 

bursaries. Application forms are available from the Department of Continuing Education, universities, 

technical institutes and community colleges. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, if I may be permitted to comment, I am 

sure that all people who will want bursaries next year will be pleased to see that there has been an 

increase in the amount. I want to say, however, Mr. Speaker, at the same time that I am sure that the 

Minister is just as aware as the members of our caucus of the concerns that have been expressed on the 

Regina Campus and on the Saskatoon Campus of the fee increases next year that are going to be 

substantial in order for students to continue with university. I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

one of the major concerns that has been voiced by students in addition to the availability of dollars 

themselves has been related to the qualifications that have been there for students when they wanted to 

apply for a loan. I submit, as I did during Estimates, that the amount of money that a father or a mother 

happens to make has absolutely nothing to do with the need of a particular student to get money. 

Students themselves will have indicated to the Minister and to officials in his department that many of 

them are on their own. They want to get money on their own and not based on whether their father or 

their mother has a certain amount of money for them. I would have hoped that the Minister would have 

something to say, too, about that particular aspect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the statement 

made by the Minister. I think first of all that the Minister and his department should be congratulated for 

bringing the loans more in line with the cost of university education today. I think the Minister would 

agree that it is probably about 18 months to two years behind, but nevertheless I am pleased and I know 

that many, many young people in Saskatchewan will be pleased not so much on the tuition increase, Mr. 

Minister, but the cost of locating living accommodation either within Regina or Saskatoon and in some 

cases, Moose Jaw. 

 

I think that the Minister is quite correct in that there should be some guidelines as to the need of the 

student. I disagree with my colleague from Saskatoon who has just spoken on this subject. Regardless of 

the parental position or financial position, I think this is money coming from the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and I think it wise to have some 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1932 

 

guidelines to the recipients as to the financial status. I am not saying that that should be the sole criteria, 

but I believe in the way in which the control is laid out by the Federal Government as well as the 

Provincial Government it gives some control. I am pleased that the Minister has made this 

announcement and I am sure that the young people of Saskatchewan will be pleased to hear that they 

will be able to look after their financial needs, particularly those in the low income families, for the next 

year. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 

 

RETURN NO. 17 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current) moved, seconded by Mr. Birkbeck (Moosomin) that an Order of the 

Assembly do issue for Return No. 17 showing: 

 

(1) The number of highway construction projects in Saskatchewan in each of the years 1973, 1974, 

1975 and 1976 to date. 

(2) The number of miles in each project in each of the years 1973, 1974, 1975 and 1976 to date. 

(3) The names of the tenders for each project and the bids for each project in each of the years 1973, 

1974, 1975 and 1976 to date. 

(4) The name of the successful tender for each project in each of the years 1973, 1974, 1975 and 1976 

to date. 

(5) Whether there were contracts awarded without tender in 1973. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, speaking to my Motion on a series of highways questions, it is hard for me to 

understand why simple, relevant information such as this is not available without hesitation. The logical 

conclusion in the department and the Minister’s reluctance can only be taken as fear, fear of the 

mismanagement, excessive expenditures and political favoritism. If Saskatchewan, as boasted by the 

Members opposite has a super highway system, the information I requested should be proudly presented, 

not conveniently withheld. 

 

In the 1975-1976 Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation Annual Report the Minister states, 

“Saskatchewan continues to have more miles of highway per capita than any other area.” I don’t 

question that fact, it’s possible, Mr. Speaker. Our costs are higher than any other area comparatively and 

that’s an argument one must suggest to this statement. 

 

It also states in the Annual Report under the goals of the department, “To provide and maintain a 

highway transportation system that will give maximum levels of service at reasonable cost to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan.” Why then the concern about information requested or are these costs 

excessive? They must be. Could the well known problems that exist in PC constituencies such as 

Nipawin and Estevan be contributing factors? The Minister after repeated requests, last year, did not 

make himself available for meetings with concerned groups in the Nipawin area. Was he afraid to face 

the facts? Are these areas mismanaged or poorly planned? The Minister said in the last session that 1976 

was a record year insofar as weather was concerned with respect to building. The weather is normally a 

contributing factor to poor road construction. Yet some areas with projects underway were not 

completed. Shortly, Mr. Speaker, 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1933 

 

we will hear the Minister defend and commend his department. That being the case the Minister has 

nothing to hide. The Members of this Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to the 

information I have requested. 

 

I now move this Motion. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I am surprised and disappointed that the 

delinquent Member for Swift Current would come in here a month late, after he had placed the question. 

The only thing that was wrong was that he didn’t have the good sense to prepare the question and phrase 

the question in a sensible manner. There is no such thing as successful tenders. The only thing that is 

lacking in his Motion, is the fact that it should read “successful bidder”. That was my only question. But 

he waited a month; he spent a month sunning himself in the Bahamas while we’re waiting for this 

question to be amended. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I don’t know that sunning in the Bahamas has anything to do with this 

order. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Suffice it to say that he was sunning himself somewhere other than in this House. I 

don’t think the Member is honest when he comes in here and accuses me of not answering a question 

when the question was worded improperly. I can now, at this point in time word it properly so that it can 

be answered correctly. If he had been here during the last month to move his Motion, it would have been 

done and he would have had his answer. The rest of his inane remarks fall into the same category as not 

making sense, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan takes second place to none, in producing highways for fewer 

dollars. So I move the rewording of this Motion and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to table it. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 29 

 

MR. HAM (Swift Current) moved, seconded by Mr. Birkbeck (Moosomin) that an Order of the 

Assembly do issue for a Return No. 29 showing: 

 

(1) The total printing and binding costs of producing the annual government report brochures that are 

required to be tabled in the 1976-77 Session. 

(2) The total cost of printing and binding the 1977 Budget Speech as tabled in the 1976-77 Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, being a Member for the sunny south west, the city of Swift Current, where the sun 

always shines and we can always boast of tans, I will speak on this Motion. The inability or reluctance 

of the Government to make available this information is baffling to say the least. The taxpayers through 

their elected Members are entitled to know how wisely or unwisely their tax money is spent. I assume 

this is one of the reasons that we’re elected. One can only conclude the cost of the publications 

questioned are extravagant and wasteful. I suggest they’re entirely unnecessary in many cases. Of course 

the expense of three or four dozen annual reports is meaningless in comparison to the potash takeover. It 

is not strange, Mr. Speaker, 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1934 

 

that there is some analogy between this Motion and the potash expropriation. This Motion refers to 

paper production costs and that is all that the 272 odd million dollars bought the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, paper deeds. The only significant difference would be that there may be a possibility the 

potash corporation may produce a profit. The annual reports however, will always be an expense. Mr. 

Speaker, all levels of government were elected to lead, to set an example, to spend the taxpayers’ money 

wisely. At any time in history, but especially now, the nation is faced with inflation and unemployment. 

When this province is faced with an economic slump, the savings of all levels of government would be 

indirectly beneficial to all. As usual, the Government holds true to its course of government secrecy and 

centralized control. These brochure expenditures must be expensive, excessive and embarrassing. 

Hopefully the approach in succeeding years will become more conservative in relation to these 

expenses. 

 

I now move this Motion. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, we have just heard the Hon. Member 

give this House some of the most blatant misrepresentations. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member asks why is 

the Government refusing to answer this question. 

 

Let me tell the Hon. Member, for three successive weeks this question has been stood by the Opposition 

because the Hon. Member wasn’t here to move this Motion. That’s right, two Tuesdays in a row the 

Motion was called and he was not here to move it. Don’t accuse this Government for your own failures. 

You were elected to represent the people that you are supposed to rather than to stay away from the 

House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member doesn’t even know how to prepare the question and 

yet he tells us that we are refusing to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of shabby treatment that this House is subjected to by Members from the 

Conservative Party, the cheapest nonsense that I have heard since 1964. What has this question got to do 

with potash expenditure? The Member has asked what are the costs of certain documents to be tabled. 

We are prepared to provide that information. But let the Hon. Member also ask the question in a way 

that it can be answered. I don’t know what he means by brochures. I don’t know what he means by 

leaflets that might be circulated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to provide the answer to this House on the basis that it can be answered. I 

am going to move an amendment. I am prepared to provide the Member for Swift Current with a copy of 

the amendment that I am going to move. 

 

I move that Return No. 29 be amended by changing all words after the word “showing” and the 

following substituted therefore: 

 

(1) A list of those government departments that are required to table a formal annual report in the 

1976-77 Session. 

(2) The total cost of printing and binding each of these reports. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1935 

 

(3) The total cost of printing and binding the 1977 budget Speech. 

 

This, I think, is what the Hon. Member really wants. I don’t know how to answer his question on 

brochures. There are many brochures that are circulated here that are not required to be tabled. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 40 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South) moved, seconded by Mr. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview) that an 

Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 40 showing: 

 

The number of trials conducted in Saskatchewan on criminal charges in each of: (a) the Magistrate’s 

Court (b) the District Court (c) the Queen’s Bench Court, in each of the years 1971 to 1976, both 

inclusive. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this and a series of questions following are asked with this background in mind. 

 

Two things. One is as Mr. Speaker will know, that we have been concerned for some period of time 

about the delays in the court system in Saskatchewan. It isn’t a phenomenon which is restricted to 

Saskatchewan. It is a country wide phenomenon. Now people are wondering in many ways what can be 

done with respect to it. We have from time to time made some suggestions, some of which have met 

with the approval of the Attorney General and some of which wait to be considered. 

 

There are a good number of voices across the land in governments and elsewhere, in Bar Associations, 

that are beginning to propose solutions to some of these problems. One of the things that is being raised 

is whether or not we should have time limits on the length of time it takes a matter to get to court. In the 

United States and in Great Britain I think each of those jurisdictions have 90 day time limits from the 

time a charge is laid. They have 90 days to get the charge into court and on to trial. 

 

Secondly, in our jurisdiction and certainly in other jurisdictions as well we are now appreciating the 

tremendous burden which has been placed upon the system by the legal aid measures we adopted in the 

past five or six years. What legal aid has done in many respects is to bring to trial people who in other 

circumstances would have pleaded guilty, who are today pleading not guilty and going to trial very 

often, when they have an option, to the District Court and on to the Queen’s Bench and in some cases 

appeals where, in fact, it is very questionable whether they should be doing that. In the process what 

they are doing is so burdening the courts and contributing to additional delays. 

 

Third, people are growing concerned too, with the practice under which appeal courts receive so many 

appeals on sentences. Sentences are handed down by the District Court and by the Queen’s Bench and 

indeed some in the Magistrate’s Court and appealed to the Court of Appeal. Some concern is being 

expressed about the high volume of these appeals going to the Court of Appeal, and really saying in 

effect that Courts of Appeal are 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1936 

 

chiefly these days, in respect of criminal matters, tinkering with criminal sentences instead of 

performing the original function that was intended. 

 

One of the other suggestions for reform that is being advanced and I am sad to say being advanced by 

the federal Minister of Justice and his law reform commission and if I can read between the lines of our 

own Attorney General’s remarks, drawing some sympathy from him, is that perhaps one of the answers 

is to do away with the preliminary inquiry which no doubt would save some time but which would no 

doubt also substantially weaken the quality of justice which we are meting out in criminal matters. 

 

These questions are designed to draw the kind of detailed information which we need from the 

Government in order to assess the current problems and more importantly in order to be able to focus on 

the kinds of solutions which would be of some genuine value. 

 

I have been here throughout the Session. I haven’t been tanning anywhere and I think this is the first 

time these matters have come before the House. Therefore I hope they aren’t going to draw the same 

kind of response the previous two questions did. I hope, too, the Attorney General, and I am not quite 

sure why he has wanted these questions made debatable, will indeed provide us with the information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by Mr. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview), Return No. 40. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be asking at the conclusion of my 

remarks, which will be very brief today, to adjourn this Return by virtue of the fact that I have not had 

enough opportunity with the officials in my Department to determine whether or not the questions can 

be answered in the form that it is asked. I will be doing that for all of the ones that relate to the 

Department of the Attorney General. I want to tell the Members of the House it is not designed as any 

attempt to delay or to thwart the request for information. Indeed I hope, barring illness, that next 

Tuesday we will be ready to proceed with either agreements on these requests or amendments where 

necessary. 

 

There may be some amendments necessary because from the preliminary work that the department 

people have done with respect to the series of questions we may need to amend fiscal years, as opposed 

to calendar years; the questions are framed in calendar years. Some of the questions are not 

synchronized with the way the administrative set-up is in the department. We will try and take that into 

account. I think many of them we can answer and put the information before the House. 

 

I would simply close my remarks this afternoon by saying that we all share the concern expressed by the 

Member for Regina South about delays in the Saskatchewan court system or indeed in any court system 

in the Dominion of Canada. Again I think when my Estimates come up we may have a more detailed 

discussion of this and pending the tabling of this information at some later date, a more detailed debate 

or discussion but I am led to believe by the magistrate’s people and by other administrative officers in 

my department, that while there is a delay in Saskatchewan, no doubt we are quite favorable in ranking, 

in 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1937 

 

terms of delays with respect to the other provinces, if I may put it in that context. I don’t think that is an 

excuse nor is it an answer to make sure that we speed the thing up a little more. The point I want to 

make is that my officials advise me that this is not as critical a problem as appears to be in other 

jurisdictions in the country. 

 

One other final word before I adjourn the debate and that is specifically with the possible solutions the 

problem which the Member for Regina South has raised. One particular comment he made related to 

preliminary inquiries and the possibility of doing away with preliminary hearings. I have taken the 

position that this is something which must be examined very carefully. In Saskatchewan we have been 

experimenting for a little while now with a pre-trial disclosure mechanism. By this I mean the 

prosecutors in appropriate cases reveal the file to the counsel for the defence, to show the counsel for the 

defence the nature of the case which lies against the accused. There is as well an understanding and 

perhaps I won’t put it any higher than that, the defence counsel outlines in exchange the nature of the 

defence. 

 

In Ontario they have recently formalized this procedure. Just a few weeks ago, in fact, about a month 

ago, I think they announced it, with a view to seeing if on revelation of the files the various parties can 

determine whether or not charges should go ahead or whether or not a change of plea should be made. 

 

Discussing this with my colleague in Ontario, Ontario appears to have entered into a fairly elaborate 

reporting system on this new procedure, something which I think they probably have to do by virtue of 

the fact that it is a province nine or ten times the size of Saskatchewan. 

 

In our province the department solicitors feel that our little experiment can be achieved for the time 

being without getting into a heavy bureaucratic overlay. This is not by way of laying the groundwork for 

doing away with the preliminary hearings. It is by way of an attempt to see if we can smoothen out the 

judicial process without impairing the rights of any accused person, because the state has rights as well 

in unnecessarily delaying the obligations of the state in certain prosecution cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe personally that this is the kind of experimentation which needs to be done, not 

only because of the delay problem and indeed not in sole response to the delay problem in courts, but 

rather as kind of an ongoing testing of certain propositions which may exist in our criminal judicial 

system. I believe that lawyers must continue to ask questions relating to the fundamental concept of such 

things as preliminary hearings. I think in Saskatchewan our lawyers have been fairly good but generally 

my observation has been as Attorney General that the organized Bar tends to react in an almost 

knee-jerk kind of reflex in opposition to any kind of suggestions which say that there should indeed be a 

testing of the proposition that a preliminary hearing is something which is vital to the democratic and 

judicial system that we have in this country. We are participating as much as we can in the Department 

of Attorney General with other provinces in developing these kinds of experimental programs and trying 

to work up solutions to the delays in the court system. 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1938 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken far more than I had intended to. But I simply want to tell the Members of the 

House that I will be asking the adjournment of all the other matters because time has simply not 

permitted my officials to be ready to advise me as to how we can answer these questions, if we can, and 

I undertake to the House that next Tuesday when they are called we will be ready to go with the 

appropriate amendments or with agreeing to as many of these as we can. I think this is valid and proper 

information which should be before the House and should be the source of a debate on this question of 

streamlining the court system. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 41 

 

MR. CAMERON (Regina South) moved, seconded by Mr. Wiebe (Morse), that an Order of the 

Assembly do issue for Return No. 41 showing: 

 

The number of persons charged with offences under the Criminal Code who pleaded not guilty in the 

first instance, opted for trial by Judge alone, had a preliminary inquiry, then pleaded guilty, in each of 

the years 1971 to 1976, both inclusive. 

 

He said: I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it would be in order for me to move several of these at the same time 

and those particularly that relate to the Attorney General’s department. I have no objection whatever to 

his seeking an adjournment because indeed the questions require a good deal of detailed information. So 

may I move collectively the numbers of which I will give to you and move them and then I gather the 

Attorney General will request to be adjourned and I have no objection to that. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Member will agree with me that it would preclude the opportunity for 

other Members to speak on any particular one and there may be some Members who wish to do that and 

I think what we will do is follow the regular routine. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Romanow. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 5 — NATIONAL COW-CALF STABILIZATION PROGRAM AND 

NATIONAL MARKETING AGENCY FOR RED MEATS 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cut Knife-Lloydminster) moved, seconded by Mr. D. Banda (Redberry): 

 

That this Assembly requests (1) the Federal Government to immediately fulfill its obligation to 

provide a meaningful National Cow-Calf Stabilization Program in response to the prolonged depressed 

marketing conditions in the beef industry and the dangers these conditions present for an extreme 

depletion in our beef breeding herd and distortion of natural production advantages through stop-gap 

provincial programs; and (2) that the Federal Government initiate discussion with the provinces at an 

early date toward development of a National Marketing agency for red meats. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it’s rather unusual that this Resolution 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1939 

 

introduced in the Assembly on November 19th of last year is still valid today, some four and a half 

months later, even after the Federal Government has announced a national cow-calf stabilization 

program. 

 

Before I go into the two main areas of the Resolution, I want, Mr. Speaker, to present a quick summary 

of the problems facing our cow-calf operators in the province. Everyone is aware that the problem today 

is simply that cow-calf operators are not receiving a fair price for their beef. Over the last three years, 

prices have been dropping steadily, while costs are rising steadily. Our farmers in Saskatchewan are 

constantly losing anywhere from $100 to $250 a head, depending on the age and the weight of the 

animal. This is the immediate problem. Young farmers and smaller farmers cannot survive this situation 

as well as the established farmer and many are forced to sell out their herds and breeding stock. This will 

cause a serious shortage of beef in the years ahead and many experts predict extremely high prices and 

shortages ahead for our consumers of beef, by the year 1980. 

 

This so-called over production now and low prices today will definitely mean shortages and high prices 

in the near future and this should concern every citizen, whether he is a farmer or not. 

 

I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, that I chose the word “meaningful” cow-calf program when I worded the 

Resolution last fall, because the Federal Government did realize the political bind it was in and decided 

to do something for our farmers. I compliment the Federal Government for doing something, but I 

criticize it for bringing in such a weak and meaningless program. 

 

What’s wrong with the federal program? First, how far will $70 million go on a national basis? Our 

province, which is small in population but large in cattle numbers, will be spending an estimated $36 

million alone in their program in 1977. That is more than half of what the Federal Government has 

estimated for all of Canada for 1978. How can $70 million hope to keep our herds up and make a 

meaningful payment to farmers who are losing over $100 a head right now, in all the provinces? 

 

This meagre sum amounts to about $20 a head, when farmers are losing well over $100 a head. 

Secondly, no payments will be made to our farmers under that federal plan until 1978. That is one year 

away. The crisis is here now! As the old saying goes — and it’s very valid here — the federal program 

is “too little, too late.” 

 

Thirdly, this weak federal program will not help eliminate the various stop-gap provincial programs 

which distort the natural production advantages because richer provinces with smaller numbers of beef 

cattle can afford to pay higher subsidies to their farmers, even though that particular province may not 

be a natural beef producer. Yet another weakness of the program is that payments are made, or will be 

made, on the basis of 90 per cent of the average calf prices averaged over the last five years. If there is 

an upturn in the 1977 prices, that will increase the average and thousands of beef producers will receive 

nothing, even though we know every one of them has been losing money over the last three years. As a 

matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is possible that no payment at all will be made under the plan 

announced by that Federal Government. Of course, this plan does nothing to correct another problem, 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1940 

 

the monopolistic pricing policy, and does nothing to improve the present chaotic marketing system in 

Canada and in the provinces. 

 

For all these reasons, we in this Legislature, must all ask Ottawa to make the necessary changes in the 

plan to make it meaningful with long-range goals and objectives, and I will be asking all Members, 

regardless of their political views, to join with me in supporting this Resolution, dealing with a very 

serious problem in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Beef imports into Canada are a real concern to our producers as well, as imports have produced the 

negative effect of depressing our markets and causing damaging reductions in domestic prices paid to 

our producers. It is interesting to note that since 1968 consumption in Canada has outstripped 

production. I was quite surprised to learn that fact. And the current slump in prices will lead to a further 

decline in numbers of cattle raised. According to Statistics Canada, in Saskatchewan, total cattle and calf 

numbers have dropped quite markedly to 2.91 million in July of last year, from a 3.02 million high in 

1974. The total numbers are down for western Canada by some 208,000 since 1974. And so the picture 

in Canada today simply put, is one of declining prices, declining numbers of cattle and increasing 

imports. Imports in 1976 came to 190 million pounds of beef. That is a lot of beef that could have been 

grown in Canada by our Canadian farmers and sold in Canada. 

 

I want to turn now to the second part of my Resolution which calls on the Federal Government to initiate 

discussions with the provinces at an early date toward development of a national marketing agency for 

red meats. And, I suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is the part of the Resolution that will get the 

hottest debate and I look forward to that debate. 

 

Many farmers and their various organizations believe that Canada’s beef marketing system needs an 

overhaul, if not a complete change in direction. True, not all farmers believe this, but as one can best 

surmise by statements of various groups, perhaps more than 60 per cent are desirous of change and a 

close examination of the present marketing system in Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

At the annual meeting of delegates of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool held in Regina last November, a 

Resolution was passed to launch an immediate study into beef marketing in Canada. This study may 

ultimately favor establishing a national producer-controlled marketing system for cattle. And, indeed, 

discussions are being carried on across the province at various meetings sponsored by other farm 

organizations like the NFU and the Western Canada Cow-Calf Association. And I am glad that this 

debate is going on in the province at this time. What are the results of some of these meetings? 

 

As reported in the press, at a meeting held in Langenburg in the latter part of February with over 350 

cattlemen in attendance, a Resolution was passed asking for a national producer-controlled marketing 

board — 350 cattlemen there. A meeting at Esterhazy attended by about the same number, 350 people, 

also passed a Resolution asking for a national producer-controlled beef marketing board. 

 

The National Farmers’ Union says 57 meetings it sponsored very recently around the province attracted 

some 1600 people who were about 85 per cent in favor of creating a system in which government 

agencies would purchase meat from producers and sell 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1941 

 

it to packers, controlling the price right through from producer to the consumer. 

 

A recent meeting in Shaunavon, and I am sure the Member from that area will be up in this debate 

supporting that particular meeting and espousing what it said, attended by more than 100 people, was 95 

per cent in favor of retaining the present open-market system. But I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what has 

the open-market system, with its boom and bust cycles done for our beef producers in Saskatchewan so 

far? What about the recent meat scandals in Quebec which revealed that the Mafia control a good 

portion of the industry today? What about the commission agents, who buy as cheaply as possible from 

producers, to sell to the packing house with whom they are affiliated? What about the serious inequities 

in the prices producers receive for live cattle of the same quality in that same open market? These 

inequities occur regardless of how the producer sells his animals or the region in which they are sold. 

What about the hoax perpetrated for years by a well-known food chain that steer meat is somehow better 

quality than heifer meat? And the food chains have downgraded heifer meat and offered ridiculously 

lower prices for it. Prices for heifers have been anywhere from $3 - $10 less per hundredweight than for 

steers. And I ask Members of this House to ask themselves, what is sacred about a market system that 

has victimized beef producers so severely that many have gone out of beef production, suffering heavy 

losses? And I think each one of us rural Members can look at our own constituencies and tally up the 

number of farmers that are going out of the cattle business, have lost money, and are going to pack it up. 

 

I want to know too, what is good about a marketing system which lost an estimated $87 million for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan in 1975? This is an estimate made by the National Farmers’ Union. What is 

sacred about the absence of any real farmer bargaining power in the market place to counteract the 

powerful domination and manipulation of the price-setting mechanisms by the packinghouse and the 

retail food industry? There is nothing sacred about that. The farmer is one of the few people left today 

who does not bargain for the price he receives for his goods and services. What is sacred about such a 

system of marketing? How can we continue to support a marketing system that allows prices on carloads 

of beef being shipped out of Saskatchewan to be set after the cars are loaded and after they have reached 

their destination in Montreal or Toronto? I wonder what other groups of people would do business that 

way, to have a product on the market and not know what price it is going to get until it ends up 

somewhere in another part of the country? Mr. Deputy Speaker, we cannot afford the present system of 

marketing beef any longer, and it is time for an overhaul. 

 

Yet, there are many strong voices of support for the present system. Where do these come from? Vocal 

groups of well-established cattlemen, yes they favor the system, because they have done well and are 

well-established and they can take the rise and the fall. The Vice-President of Swift Canada Co. Ltd. 

favors the present system. He said, and I quote, “It is difficult at this time to identify any serious 

weakness in the Canadian retail beef marketing system.” That was a March 26, 1976 quote from the 

Winnipeg Tribune. Chester Wilcox, Meat Merchandising Manager of Dominion Stores said, and I quote, 

“I believe the system we’re handling beef in now is the best system for handling beef at this time”. 

(Globe and Mail, March 26, 1975) These are the kinds of people who think the present system is just the 

best system for 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1942 

 

them. This is the old cliche — what’s good for the huge chain stores and the packinghouses must be 

good for Saskatchewan farmers. This is definitely not the case in the beef industry. 

 

Before I conclude my discussion today, I would like to present some basic calculations which should 

help many of us to make up our minds on this question. If Saskatchewan, and I say, if Saskatchewan 

were to develop a more efficient beef marketing system, along with concurrent expanded and more 

efficient meat packing facilities, it could mean potential net savings of between $13 and $20 million per 

year — savings which could be shared with cattle producers in the province, packers, and consumers — 

all. 

 

Now I just want to go through that calculation that I have worked out. In 1975, 339,000 head, or 2/3 of 

Saskatchewan’s beef cattle, were slaughtered outside Saskatchewan in Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario — 

2/3 of the cattle outside the province. Only 1/3 — about 168,000 head, were slaughtered in 

Saskatchewan and more than half of the meat from these animals was shipped as carcasses or sides 

rather than as boxed wholesale or retail cuts. These figures do not include the nearly 1/2 million head of 

Saskatchewan feeder cattle that are shipped out of the province each year for finishing in other areas. 

 

A more efficient Saskatchewan beef marketing system could include the following potential cost 

savings: 

 

First, shipment of animals direct to Saskatchewan plants for rail grading instead of indirectly through 

public stock yards and country sale yards, could result in potential savings according to the Federal Beef 

Marketing Enquiry, of about $6 - $11 per head on an estimated 300,000 head not shipped directly to the 

plant in 1975. This would be about $1.8 to $3.3 million savings annually. 

 

Secondly, operation of Saskatchewan plants on a double shift basis, thus spreading fixed costs over 

more animals, could offer estimated potential savings of $20 to $30 per head on a slaughter cattle supply 

of 507,000 head in 1975. A saving there of between $10 and $15.2 million a year. 

 

Thirdly, if we upgraded our system of marketing and slaughtering, freight savings on carcasses shipped, 

instead of live animals are estimated at $10 per head on 32,000 head shipped east and $5 per head on 

306,000 head shipped to Manitoba and Alberta in 1975. This would be a saving of about another $1.8 

million. 

 

Fourthly, a potential savings on freight, shrink and better utilization of by-products through shipment of 

boxed beef instead of carcasses — estimated $16 per head there on 482,000 head (95 per cent of 

Saskatchewan slaughter cattle not shipped as boxed beef in 1975) for savings of about $7.7 million. 

Estimated potential gross under my four point tally, is between $21.4 to $28 million a year. 

 

Now obviously if you overhauled the marketing system, you would have to have some expenses 

incurred. If we take away estimated operating and assembly costs of a Saskatchewan Beef Marketing 

Commission, or whatever it is, at $6 per head on 507,000 animals, the cost would be about $3 million. 

Less another cost which would be incurred for capital investments 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1943 

 

required to upgrade Saskatchewan facilities to process Saskatchewan supply of slaughter cattle to the 

box beef stage would cost about perhaps another $5 million to update and expand the plants so that we 

can handle all our own beef. This could mean a potential net savings of between $13.4 and $20 million a 

year for Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that is a rough calculation. I tried to put together the best kind of figures I could, if we updated and 

modernized our system of beef marketing in the province. 

 

Now the accomplishments of these activities which could also obviously be to the benefit of all 

Saskatchewan people, would, of course, require the complete co-operation of everyone engaged in the 

beef marketing system. Cattle assembly systems would need to be re-organized; meat packing, cooling 

and processing facilities would need to be expanded and constructed; rail grading and weight per grade 

pricing systems would need to be brought to maturity; and marketing mechanisms, as well as markets, 

would need to be developed. 

 

The opportunity exists for Saskatchewan beef producers to play a leading role in the advancement of 

measures which could benefit themselves as well as the entire province. The first step requires that the 

cattle producers petition the Government with their views and plans for a new and improved marketing 

system, as is provided for in the provincial Natural Products Marketing Act. This is the Act which 

allows farmers to do this, to petition the Government to do something. And I know that our Minister of 

Agriculture will be willing to listen to these requests and make the necessary changes. However, we are 

all aware, everybody is aware in this House, that no government can take any action unless the public is 

behind it and supporting it. 

 

No doubt the Manitoba vote will be brought up in this debate ensuing, so I would like to make a few 

comments at this time on that particular vote. I view the Manitoba vote as a vote on a particular kind of 

marketing agency in a particular area of Canada. One should not assume that the negative vote in 

Manitoba necessarily means an automatic negative vote in Saskatchewan or British Columbia or Alberta 

for that matter. The Manitoba situation is much different from the Saskatchewan situation. The vote in 

Manitoba called for a “board” not a “commission” and we are all aware that a board has much more 

authority than any commission would have, by statute. 

 

AN. HON. MEMBER: — Is that not what you say when you get down to the bottom line? 

 

MR. KWASNICA: — No, not really. It is important to consider the matter as a continuation of the 

basic philosophy of orderly marketing. And that is what I am talking about; that is what we all 

understand this to be. This philosophy has been fought for by prairie farmers over the years and the 

Canadian Wheat Board is an accepted method of marketing prairie grains, and few would deny the 

success and value of the Canadian Wheat Board in today’s marketing structure. I am glad to bring this 

kind of a resolution on the Order Paper for debate because we in the New Democratic Party have a 

philosophy which is that orderly marketing in the long run is the best way. We have seen over the years 

the inequities that have arisen — I don’t have to remind you of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange, which 

rooked farmers something terrible in the years 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1944 

 

we had a Canadian Wheat Board — so therefore I am glad that we have a chance to debate a 

philosophical argument of this kind. 

 

In concluding my comments today, I want to mention a specific communication that I have received 

from farmers in my constituency regarding orderly marketing of beef. This particular communication is 

against it. It’s a telegram I received from Zone 9, Local 2, of the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers 

Association, in the Lloydminster area and they sent me a telegram on March 9, which contained about 

19 signatures from farmers throughout my constituency, flatly opposing the idea of a beef marketing 

board or commission. I am glad that they have indicated to me as a Member where they stand on this 

issue. It is a flat rejection of orderly marketing. However, on the other hand, I know for a fact, that there 

are many members of another organization in my constituency as well, the National Farmers’ Union, 

which is fairly active in that northwest corner, who definitely favor a national red meat marketing 

agency. As I said earlier, the Wheat Pool has ordered a study which could very well suggest orderly 

marketing too for beef. I am informed, Mr. Speaker, at this very present time that some several hundred 

Saskatchewan farmers are in Regina today, in the Centre of the Arts at this very moment, meeting with 

the Minister of Agriculture of our province and his Agricultural Cabinet Committee and the MLAs who 

have been able to get over there. At this very moment I don’t know what the number is but we know that 

it is in the hundreds and I have received phone calls from the farmers in my area who have arrived on 

the scene already. They are at this very moment presenting a proposal to the Minister of Agriculture 

regarding setting up of a beef marketing commission. They have done a lot of research and they are 

placing their proposal before us at this very time. And I am glad that they have taken time off from their 

spring work to come to Regina today to do it. 

 

The problems in the beef industry have been clearly identified in my presentation this afternoon. The 

situation is serious. The future is ours. It can be a stable and bright future if we choose to put some order 

into it. Therefore, I urge all Members to support my Resolution, which really, if you look at it carefully, 

is well thought out, very simple and it calls for meaningful changes to the announced National Cow-Calf 

Stabilization Program and asks the Federal Government to initiate discussions with the provinces at an 

early date in order to develop a national marketing agency for red meats. Everybody can truly see the 

advantages of going national on a project of this kind, for sales, for advertising, you can put everything 

into this particular agency and move the beef produced in this country at stable prices so that the farmers 

will know where they stand. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move Resolution No. 5, seconded by the Hon. Member for 

Redberry (Mr. Banda). And by the way, before I conclude, I am pleased to see that the Member for 

Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) has now agreed to a debate with the federal Minister I am told on the 

value or non-value of orderly marketing and I will look forward to that debate and I can assure the 

Member that I will be there, whenever the debate is called, and we on this side of the House look 

forward to that particular debate with anticipation, because here we have two Members of the same 

party, supposedly at different ends of the spectrum. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1945 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — I am glad to see that the Member for Cut Knife (Mr. 

Kwasnica) will be in attendance when his hero, and particularly the hero to his Minister of Agriculture, 

ventures forth into Western Canada to talk about the marketing board structure. I sincerely hope that 

your hero does come out to western Canada because there seems to be some doubt, since the Manitoba 

vote, that the proponents of the marketing boards have enough courage to stand up on platforms in front 

of legitimate cattlemen and time will tell whether the hero to this government across the way, at least 

your agricultural people, will stray out into the confines of western Canada to face western Canadian 

cattlemen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose that lawyers get upset when non-lawyers tell them how to practice law. I suppose 

doctors get upset when laymen tell them how to practice medicine and I suppose accountants get upset 

when non-accountants tell them how to be an accountant. And I think cattlemen are basically the same 

way, because I have listened to some of the darnedest tripe in the last 20 minutes about my business that 

I make my living from, from a teacher that probably doesn’t know a cow from a blackboard, and as I 

recall talking to one of his colleagues about a year ago, wouldn’t know the north end of a cow heading 

south, and yet this expert, the best that they can put up to talk about agriculture, is a teacher. Maybe 

that’s because you don’t have too many agricultural people over there, certainly not very many 

knowledgeable ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Cut Knife has spent some considerable time in elaborating on how the 

cattle industry is going down the tubes, how that, at the present rate of destruction there will be no cattle 

herds left, that there will be a shortage of beef, and I suppose you can carry it through that famine will 

take western Canada. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you today that some of the theories as well as the figures 

that he has put forward are harebrained and not even remotely cognizant of the facts. Mr. Speaker, in 

Canada today, as of January 1, 1977, the number of total cows, and bear in mind this is a crunch one, the 

number of total cows is down less than three per cent from the all time record levels of one year ago, the 

levels that were totally unacceptable, that glutted the market and absolutely made life miserable for 

every cattleman established or non-established. Bear in mind, the most important factor is yet to come 

and that’s in the United States, because that’s the one that turns our market. In the United States, they 

are down only about two and three-quarters per cent from the unacceptably high levels of one year ago. 

And that’s an even bigger factor than the Canadian one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present cattle numbers right now are lower than they were for any period in our time up 

through 1975. In essence what I am saying, they are down slightly from what they were at the end of 

1975 but higher than at any other point in time in our history. If I could use the American figures, which 

I deem much more important than Canadian, you go back to ’72 — 38.8 million, ’73 — 40.9 million, 

’74 — 43 million, ’75 — 45.5 million, ’76 — 43 million, ’77 — 42.5 million. Mr. Speaker, this is hardly 

any evidence of the cattle industry disintegrating. In fact, the problem has been that the cattle industry 

expanded too quickly and it must now contract to acceptable levels of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Cut Knife has spent some considerable time downgrading the free market 

system. Mr. Speaker, I 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1946 

 

should like to say that I have one criticism of the free market system when it pertains to beef cattle over 

the past couple of years, and that is that it has worked far too efficiently. It worked far too well. Because 

the free market has reflected the situation as it existed, we had a terrible over-supply and the markets 

simply reacted to it. 

 

Now let’s go back as to why the free market system did not react properly when we had the collapse. It 

was not given an opportunity to react properly. If you recall we were facing record prices both in 

Canada and the United States when a supposedly right-wing, free enterprise president froze the price of 

beef. His name was President Nixon. And freezing that price of beef was a political move aimed at 

consumers in the United States who were mumbling. But again it is a tragedy that he froze the price of 

beef because it had gone as high as it was probably going to go, because consumers were already 

building up a resistance to the product, they were going to stop buying it and the price would have 

eventually started to decline. But instead, the American President had to intervene, probably in 

something that he didn’t know that much about. The absolute result of this was that when he froze this, 

he did not freeze the price of imported beef, which in essence was our exported beef to the United 

States. It was not frozen. Feedlots in the United States hung on to their product indefinitely, would not 

market it because of the freeze, so the primary source down there was Canada, and the pressure on the 

Canadian market was intense. The Canadian price skyrocketed. Some of you may remember those days. 

 

The price freeze came off some months later and the glory days that Saskatchewan cattlemen and 

Canadian cattlemen enjoyed for some period of time was gone. And then perhaps one of the great 

tragedies happened when the price started to drop and the flood of American cattle started coming out of 

the feedlots and started coming into Canada. I believe our Federal Government of the day did a terrible 

thing. They played games with our American friends. They weren’t honest with them and under the 

guise of a phoney ban on DES or diethylstilbestrol, they placed an embargo on cattle totally contrary to 

traditional patterns, interrupting the free flow of cattle back and forth across the line. The Americans 

aren’t dumb; they knew how phoney it was. And the Government of the day and the Minister of the day, 

I believe, attempted to perpetrate a bit of a fraud when he used the excuse, diethylstilbestrol instead of 

honestly and candidly saying, “We just can’t afford to have that many cattle coming in here; it’s too 

many, we have got to be sensible.” And he didn’t have the courage to stand up to the Americans and say 

that; instead he used this phoney issue and the Americans eventually retaliated by an embargo of 

Canadian cattle going to the U.S., which was the final and ultimate straw towards collapsing our market. 

And that’s what I mean when I say the free market was not allowed to act properly or act normally in 

response to these increasing cattle numbers. But since the price has collapsed, since the situation is as it 

is, it has reacted far too well to the over-supply. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to suggest to this House today 

that nothing has been solved by support programs, by cattle loans or cattle advances over the long period 

of time. Over a short period of time for a cattleman, who is short of cash, no question about it, the short 

term grants were helpful. But over the period of time, over the long haul, he will curse the day that these 

programs ever went into being. What they have done is they have kept cattle where they shouldn’t be 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1947 

 

instead of taking the music, taking your beating, reducing the volume, they simply prolonged it and 

strung it out and those of you who may argue that the law of supply and demand is dead, try selling a 

product. You can have supports, you can put everything into it that you want, but somewhere along the 

line, unless you can create a monopoly, somewhere along the line the law of supply and demand must 

come into view. Even the Canadian Wheat Board cannot destroy or circumvent the law of supply and 

demand. 

 

The Member has talked at great length about orderly marketing. And I must confess that I have no idea 

what orderly marketing is. If you mean going back into the, if I could use the grain trade, if you mean 

going back to the days of 1968 and 1969 when we had a four bushel quota and then a few years later we 

had an open quota, if that is orderly marketing, God help us. I really don’t know what it is. The one 

thing I would like to say about the free market system is that even when it is operated under the most 

adverse conditions of the past two or three years, every animal that has been sold has found a home and 

I suggest to the Member that the cattle industry has survived this and will continue to survive it provided 

the governments will stay out of it. Let it take its course and let us get back on stream. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I should like to take just a brief moment to demonstrate another means in 

which the free market has not been allowed to operate and that has been the importation of offshore, or 

what is affectionately known as oceanic beef. Mr. Speaker, last year we slaughtered more cows, I mean 

straight butcher cows than we have for a good many years or which we may probably ever do again. 

Normally we need this oceanic beef coming in for a variety of reasons. They are supplying grades of 

cattle with which I don’t think we in Canada want to become involved. There is no way the Canadian 

cattlemen want to become involved in the manufactured beef game. It’s strictly not economically sound 

or feasible. We want to stay away from it. Normally we do not kill enough cows in order to meet the 

demands for this kind of beef. Last year was an exception. Last year we were killing sufficient grades of 

these classes of cattle, that we really didn’t need the Australian beef. And yet what did the Government 

in Ottawa do? It raised its import from Australia, the whopping figure of 59 per cent from the year 

previously. At a time when we were really able to supply this demand, record amounts of oceanic beef 

was allowed into Canada. And while it has been curtailed somewhat, there are still tons and tons, excuse 

me, kilos and kilos of bonded beef waiting for exposure on to the Canadian market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on at great length, talking about this great panacea of a national marketing board 

or national meat authority, whatever the thing is called, but I won’t because he’s not much opposition 

and I’ll wait until somebody a little more formidable appears on the scene. 

 

But I would like to take just one moment and point out to the Member, that perhaps he should take a 

look at some of the marketing boards right here in Saskatchewan and what have they done. Let’s take a 

look at your turkey marketing board. And you just count up the number of producers that you had a few 

years ago and you count up how many producers that you’ve got right now and you’ll find that the 

number of birds in operation are probably higher, at least as high or higher than we’ve had than was the 

case a few years ago. But look at the numbers now and you will see that what’s happened there is that 

the small operators have slowly and surely been strangled out of there 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1948 

 

and it has been simply a case of the larger operators picking up that portion of the market. You take a 

look at your own hog marketing board and see just what has happened to your numbers of hogs which 

declined drastically and are now starting to pick up. But take a look at where these hogs are coming 

from. And take a look at your numbers of producers. And frankly, I wish I had taken the trouble to go 

and get those numbers. But you can find them for yourself; they’re not hard to get. And you take a look 

at what has happened to your number of hog producers. The number of hogs marketed is climbing now, 

but where are they coming from? They are not coming from that fellow that used to run a small hog 

operation. They are coming primarily from the increases in production among our Hutterite brethren — 

large operations. They’re moving into hogs and they’re picking up that vacuum. So what is happening in 

your old hog marketing board is that your smaller producers are falling by the wayside, your larger 

producers are simply getting bigger. You take a look at your dairy board. You will find the same thing. 

And frankly, I don’t care to waste any more ammunition on such inconsequential opposition so at this 

point in time, Mr. Speaker, I shall say that obviously I shall not be supporting the Resolution. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, when the Member moved this particular 

Resolution it reminded me of the debate which took place in this House some time ago, in which we 

soon do get a difference between the Members opposite and those who sit on this side. Members on this 

side of the House are saying that we should let those who are in the business make some decisions. And 

the very typical approach from the Government Members opposite is, look, we’ll tell you what’s good 

for you. I was amazed at the mover of this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, mentioning a vote and how there is 

a vast movement in Saskatchewan from these different groups who are supporting the cattle marketing 

board. The Member knows full well that that statement is completely out of order and does not in any 

way resemble the feelings among the people who are, in fact, producing cattle. He knows very well the 

ruckus that the producers in Manitoba raised, when they got all of the kinks out of the ballot. He knows 

very well that if a ballot were exercised in Saskatchewan today, it would have the same resounding 

effects and the same outcome as in the Province of Manitoba. What the Member is trying to say, and 

supposedly all Members opposite, is to go to one of the last truly independent operations and say, look, 

we know what’s best for you, we know in entirety what’s best for you. So please let us tell you. You 

know, you people, you need some government control over your operations. You know the Members 

start talking about a few meetings out here and there. You see a press report about a meeting held, I 

believe it was in Wawota, where the number present was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 225 

people. And those who favored, and who would favor the Resolution right now out of the 225 were ten. 

Now don’t come to this Assembly and try to tell us that there’s overwhelming support out there among 

the producers in favor of the marketing board because that simply is not the case. 

 

My colleague for Thunder Creek mentioned the point about always wanting someone else to tell us how 

to operate. I want to point out a few things to you. In 1970, in the Saskatchewan Chicken Marketing 

Board, there were 87 producers. We come down to 1976 and the number had been reduced to 68. Let’s 

go back to 1970 and see what the productivity was. 1970 — productivity, live weight in pounds, 

17,695,000, with fewer producers as in this case, fewer producers the total output had increased to 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1949 

 

21,206,401. I would hope that the Member would come back and tell us how many hog producers are in 

Saskatchewan today and tell this Assembly how many hog producers were in Saskatchewan, five or six 

years ago. 

 

Let me show you, Mr. Speaker. We have the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers Marketing 

Board. In 1972 we had only five producers over the 10,000 dozen mark. A few years later the number of 

producers was drastically reduced but the number of those who are in the big time operation now, is 13. 

What the Minister wants to do, the Member wants to do is to check out what is, in fact, happening. 

 

Now the very people whom you claim are hollering for a beef marketing board are the very people who 

will find themselves out of the operation just as happened with the other marketing boards. Mr. Speaker, 

if the cattle producers of Saskatchewan want to have a marketing agency it should be the cattle 

producers of Saskatchewan who decide whether they want it or whether they don’t. And I would 

challenge the Opposition to the Government Members, I would challenge them before they make and 

pass this particular Resolution to give some consideration to allowing the farmers of Saskatchewan to 

voice their opinions in the same way as the farmers of Manitoba did. No, Mr. Speaker, despite the gloom 

that the Member wants to put it, the cattle industry of Saskatchewan has its ups and downs. But thank 

God for the individuality of the producers; they themselves are saying they don’t want to get hooked up 

with a marketing board. And I hope that the Government would have some consideration before passing 

a Resolution such as this. 

 

Now in closing, Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much if the Hon. Member of, the federal Member, I should 

say, the federal Minister of Agriculture is going to venture west to engage the Member for Thunder 

Creek in this debate. I doubt very much if that is going to happen. Certainly I don’t think if it does 

happen that they will select a site in western Canada. If the Member for Cut Knife has agreed to be 

there, I’m going to tell the Member, the mover of this Resolution, that I will certainly be there as well. I 

want to see what happens when this Government which has been holding hands in a dictatorial way with 

the federal Minister of Agriculture by trying to impose and I am going to emphasize the word “impose” 

— impose a marketing board upon the cattle producers, a federal Member, a Liberal Member and this 

Government working hand in hand with them for some time. It is going to be very interesting indeed to 

see how the Members react to this particular Resolution. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am going to leave the discussion at this particular time and challenge the Government 

not to pass this particular Resolution until they have demonstrated to Members on both sides of this 

House that they are, in fact, speaking for the true legitimate cattle producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to this debate 

perhaps in such degree as to help the Member for Thunder Creek legitimize the discussion. It’s a 

wonderful thing when you get into a debate on the cattle industry and have a teacher from the 

Government side of the House speak supposedly, knowledgeably, about the question and a school 

superintendent from the Tory side to speak about it. He is a hobby farmer in the cattle business, I 

understand. I’m in the cattle business as well and I’d like to pass on a few things to the Government 

Members and to the 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1950 

 

Members to my left as well about this whole question of marketing boards in Saskatchewan. And it has 

been a long struggle indeed — the teachers versus the ranchers. 

 

I’d like to address a few remarks firstly, to those comments given to this House by the Member for Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster who insinuated or certainly suggested that Saskatchewan was not prepared to put a 

vote to the producers, certainly not in the same light as those put to the Manitoba producers. And I don’t 

blame them a bit. If you’re looking for a successful conclusion, on your terms, to a vote like that, I 

wouldn’t put the same vote in this province either. I think the results would be even more significant 

than they were in Manitoba. The Member suggests that that was one situation a beef marketing board 

was proposed there in that area and he didn’t necessarily mean that the situation in Saskatchewan would 

be the same. He suggested that a vote would deal with a commission rather than a beef marketing board 

as was proposed in Manitoba. Well, I’ll tell you something about your vote in Saskatchewan on a 

commission if you’d like to put that vote to the people of Saskatchewan. And I suggest to you that it 

would go very poorly from your point of view for several reasons. 

 

The most significant is that producers in this province have had several years to evaluate the 

performance of the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission, a commission which was introduced 

without a vote from the producers and despite the fact that the producers called very loudly for a vote. 

Despite the fact that a vote was promised to the producers as well, it has been denied. 

 

Saskatchewan beef producers and pork producers have had the opportunity to assess the abilities of the 

Hog Marketing Commission in Saskatchewan to provide support for hog producers in Saskatchewan to 

do a job for them. The Member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster made reference to the potential in 

Saskatchewan, if we had an orderly marketing system for beef, to bring about tremendous increases in 

the amount of our locally processed beef. 

 

Let’s just take a very brief look at the Hog Marketing Commission and what it has done for local 

processing of pork. Closure of Burns Plant in Prince Albert and processing of Burns in Regina — pretty 

fair record — orderly closures is perhaps the best way to put it. If you want to be judged, if you want a 

beef marketing commission to be judged on the basis of your success in the hog industry, I suggest that 

there’ll be a far more than 77 per cent of your cattle producers in this province that vote against it. 

 

Let’s turn to another situation or another area, that the Member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster talked about 

and that was the question of the vote in Manitoba. One thing perhaps he better be well aware of is that as 

far as the vote in Manitoba went and the distribution of ballots, it’s a curious thing for legitimate cow 

producers and cattle producers in Manitoba to vote on this thing. Any cattle producer in Manitoba, who 

was receiving a cash subsidy from the Manitoba government or an agricultural subsidy of some other 

nature, had his ballot mailed to him by the Manitoba government. His ballot was mailed to him. If a 

cattle producer was independent, hadn’t applied for his subsidy or anything he, in order to obtain a vote, 

had to write to the Manitoba government and request that a ballot be sent to him. And if you people are 

aware of the amount of hassle some of those producers had to go through in order to simply receive the 

opportunity to vote, you might considerably change your mind about 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1951 

 

the situation in Manitoba. Everything conceivable was done by that provincial government to see that 

that vote went in favor of the Manitoba government and it was rejected, despite the fact that the cards 

were stacked. And I suggest that if you have the courage to hold an honest vote in Saskatchewan, the 

results as I said, would be even more significant. 

 

There’s one specific problem in the cattle business that the Members opposite seem to think that a beef 

marketing commission would solve and that’s, of course, the fact the price that farmers and cattlemen in 

Saskatchewan receive for their product is not high enough to legitimately cover costs these days. I don’t 

know what you expect to accomplish with a beef marketing commission. We see the situation of the 

wheat marketing board, great institution in Canada, the saviour of Canadian grain farmers. I suggest it 

has been good for Canadian grain farmers over the years. What success has it got towards guaranteeing 

farmers in Saskatchewan a decent return on their investment? It hasn’t had that much success in the past 

and I think if it were not for the introduction of the Federal Government Stabilization Program, its 

success in the future would maybe be limited as well. What’s your Hog Marketing Commission done for 

hog producers in Saskatchewan in the way of price support? Bring in a subsidy — try and convince the 

hog producers in Saskatchewan that without a hog commission a subsidy would be unable to be 

provided. Garbage. Any kind of subsidy this Government wants to institute can be done in the free 

market system. This same applies to the beef organization. What can this particular Minister of 

Agriculture or for that matter the federal Minister of Agriculture do to increase beef prices in Canada by 

establishing a so-called orderly marketing organization? There is only one thing that this Government 

and the Federal Government can do to raise the price legitimately. Raise the price in Canada and call off 

the import beef supply. You do not need an orderly marketing system to do that. Your entire concept of 

a marketing board or orderly marketing system seems to be a little disjointed. 

 

Someone on your side of the House is going to have to get up and explain to Members on this side of the 

House how a beef marketing board is going to increase the price to beef producers in this province. It 

has not been done on this level, nor has it been done on the federal level. And until that happens, this 

caucus, and certainly the beef producers of Saskatchewan, will be unable to support such a program. 

 

The Member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster talks about widespread support throughout Saskatchewan for 

an orderly marketing system. I will say, if he believes that sincerely, he is sadly misguided, and I do not 

base my information on that that can be gained from the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association. I will 

have you know our family is very actively involved, has been in the past, and still is, in the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Livestock Committee Yards and organization in Kindersley; very actively 

involved. We have long supported that organization. Members of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

organization held a public meeting there, which attracted many members of your purported friends, the 

National Farmers’ Union — big supporters of an orderly beef marketing system, certainly, many of the 

more active members of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, some of whom I even suspect are supporters of 

this Government opposite. The vote there, when it was put to a vote by the board of directors of the 

Livestock Committee, as to whether or not farmers at that meeting, and I say that meeting, would have 

gone in favor of the Government’s position, whether or not these people wanted an orderly marketing 

system, 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1952 

 

or a marketing board for beef, that vote was very soundly defeated, very soundly defeated. Everywhere 

you turn in Saskatchewan, when cattle producers of any nature are organizing meetings to discuss the 

question and a vote comes up, it is defeated. And that includes the meetings sponsored by the National 

Farmers’ Union in many, many instances in Saskatchewan. 

 

One curious thing that sets the Liberal Party aside from the New Democratic Party opposite, and perhaps 

the Tory Party to our left, no one has really seen them in the position where they might be able to 

indicate to us what their policy in this matter is, but certainly, the very significant thing that sets our 

party aside from the New Democratic Party is the fact that we have always said, and have always 

practiced the policy of letting the producer decide for himself. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — That is the Liberal party policy, both on the provincial level and on the federal 

level. The Member to my left has suggested that the federal Minister of Agriculture is trying to ram a 

beef marketing organization down the throats of the Canadian cattle producers. Nothing could be farther 

from the truth. Regardless of whether or not the federal Minister of Agriculture is in personal agreement 

with a so-called orderly marketing organization for beef, he has long stated that he will never see one 

brought in if cattle producers themselves do not want one, a position that is significantly different from 

that taken by the Government opposite, as witnessed by your stand on the Hog Marketing Commission. 

People in this Liberal Party, and we certainly philosophically cover a wide spectrum of Canadian 

people, have always taken the opportunity to use our position in the Liberal Party to discuss issues such 

as these before the public. Some Members of our caucus, I suspect all of them here of the Liberal Party 

in this House, are opposed to introduction of a mandatory marketing board system. 

 

I suspect even that the majority of Members on this side of the House are opposed to a marketing board 

system in principle. That is not necessarily the case on the federal level. Some Members of the federal 

Liberal caucus may very well be in favor of a marketing board for beef cattle in Canada — that’s fine, 

that has been the wonderful thing about the Liberal Party over the years. The important, and most 

significant factor is that we have always used our position to intelligently discuss the issue with the 

public and have always assured the public that they would make the ultimate decision. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — That has always been the Liberal Party’s position and it will remain the Liberal 

Party’s position. 

 

Personally, I can not see the advantage in a mandatory beef marketing system or a so-called orderly 

marketing system in Saskatchewan, certainly not as put forward by the Member for Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. The advantages he speaks of in bringing it in, I think, are false. Under close 

scrutiny I don’t think one of them would stand up one per cent. 

 

The discussion about increasing beef processing in Saskatchewan is bordering on lunacy. That certainly 

should be evident to 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1953 

 

him. If he would talk to the Member sitting next to him, the absent Minister of Agriculture, and ask him 

how we have been doing in pork processing in Saskatchewan since the inception of the mandatory Hog 

Marketing Commission, you will have to look at that one again. 

 

I am personally opposed to it, not just on principle, but rather because no one, certainly not in your 

caucus and no one on the federal level has yet been able to indicate to me that it would be an advantage 

to Canadian producers. If you have the courage to undertake a legitimate vote in Saskatchewan, I invite 

you to do so, and I think that the results of that vote should leave, and would leave little doubt in your 

mind about where the Saskatchewan cattle producer stands on that particular issue. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Score — three ranchers versus two teachers. 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — I find the Member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster’s Motion very 

interesting, in the fact that by his remarks I doubt that he has ever sold beef cattle on any market in his 

life, or had to make his living from raising cattle and selling these to markets. 

 

First we hear that marketing boards are going to stabilize our prices. Now stabilization is what it means, 

stabilization. We can stabilize at a poverty level or at a level that is a profit level. 

 

If you go to the record of any board, a marketing board, including our Wheat Board, you will find that 

prices have been anything but stable. I have raised grain for over 20 years, and I have sold the stuff, 

when you could sell it, from $1.60 to $5 and in the last year back down to $3. So, the fallacy of 

stabilization or the saying that stabilization is achieved by marketing boards is certainly proven many 

times over. 

 

We also find that the other great thing that we are going to do for our producers is help the small 

producer. We go back again to the Wheat Board. Since its inception we have been continuously, 

throughout western Canada, in fact, all of Canada, but particularly in western Canada, losing our small 

farmers. Certainly the Wheat Board has powers to control quotas and selling, but has done nothing to 

keep the small producers in business. 

 

Records were read in by the Member for Rosetown and this is from your Saskatchewan Marketing 

Board report. It states there, in the egg business, your small producers dropped from 82 to about 46. 

Your large producer 10,000 and over went up from 9 to 13, with no droop in production, which takes the 

other hope for achievement that your marketing board will do and throws it out the window. It does not 

stabilize the price; it does not increase the price that the market will bear and it certainly does not keep 

the small producer in business. 

 

Then we come to the stance of the federal Minister of Agriculture who says that he would not put in a 

board without a vote by producers, and producers will run this board. The interesting thing on our Bill 

C-176, when it sets a criteria as to who can vote, it says anyone with an interest in the product. Now, I 

am not a lawyer, but we do have some lawyers. I would like to carry that to its conclusion. Does a 

consumer have an interest in the product and in the producer vote? Where do you 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1954 

 

break off the voter level? We also find that in the United States on most of your marketing boards and in 

Canada, we now find a consumer sitting on every board. I find it very interesting that we never find a 

producer being asked to sit on the consumer organization boards. But while we make our livelihood we 

are expected to put them on our boards. 

 

Here we do find that in Saskatchewan we have a different way of doing things. We can have a board or a 

commission. A marketing board has the authority to set quotas on sales and also on production. A 

marketing commission which can be set in place by Order in Council at any time, has the only one 

difference that it cannot set production quotas. But when you are dealing with a perishable product, you 

are dealing in a matter of semantics. If you have a perishable product, and you set the quotas, nobody in 

his right mind produces over what he can sell, so you have set production controls. 

 

I find it interesting that in every session we have a little resolution urging the Federal Government to set 

up a marketing agency. I find this interesting because I don’t think you fellows have the guts to put in a 

marketing commission on beef or a marketing board or even ask for the vote. I just don’t think you do. 

What you are asking is that the Federal Government do your dirty work which you haven’t got the guts 

to do. 

 

Well I am sorry that I don’t have all the figures that I would like to have to enter into this debate. I 

would like to make a few remarks at another time, so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 — MAINTENANCE OF GOOD HEALTH SERVICES 

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre) moved, seconded by Mr. Banda (Redberry): 

 

That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for making 25 per cent more funding 

available for hospital services this year over and above the 21.5 per cent more funding available last 

year and recognizes the strong commitment of the Government of Saskatchewan to the maintenance of 

needed health services and particularly to medically required hospital services. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to be able to point out certain facts incorporated into this 

Resolution that I have put forward in the House. The Resolution commends this Government for its last 

year’s drastic increase in funding hospital services . . . 

 

MR. CAMERON: — You should be . . . 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, you just finished condemning your own federal Minister of Agriculture. 

We don’t stoop to those kinds of tactics on our side of the House. At any rate the Resolution commends 

this Government for its last year’s drastic increase in funding for hospital services, an increase of 25 per 

cent, and this is over and above the 21.5 per cent increase for the year before. Mr. Speaker, no other 

province in Canada can match 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1955 

 

records such as these. No other province can match this province’s health services offered. Regardless of 

how often and how wildly Opposition Members rant and rave to the contrary, the people of 

Saskatchewan are proud of their health services brought in, I might add, in violent, almost convulsive 

opposition by the Opposition parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear voices in the distance and if they would stand up or if they would care to speak on 

this Resolution a little later on I think we would be pleased to hear where they have gone wrong in the 

past. At any rate, Mr. Speaker, when one considers the many programs offered, when one considers the 

fact there is an equalization principle involved in the offering of these services, when one considers what 

is offered in other provinces and in the various states of the United States, only those who would want to 

distort for political advantage, will wish to continue this attack on our health services. 

 

Now let’s look at some facts in this area, facts that Opposition Members have chosen to ignore. In the 

first place all provincial governments are experiencing dramatic increases in health costs — increases 

ranging anywhere from 20 to 30 per cent. All provinces find themselves in this same situation. Besides 

this, Mr. Speaker, drastic cuts in Federal Government cost sharing in health care is another reason why 

provincial governments find themselves in this real dilemma. Now add to this Federal Government 

inflation and a Conservative desire to see wage controls remain in perpetuity and the situation becomes 

quite clear, and that is that a responsible Government such as this one is concerned about health care 

costs, and well it should be, because this Government is answerable to all the citizens of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to increase health care spending from $268 million to $338 million is not exactly the 

response of an unresponsive government. It was a responsible increase as compared to Tory Alberta’s 

puny 11 per cent increase and Ontario’s increase of just seven per cent. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Put the care back . . . 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — The gentleman talks about care. I am going to get on to the care business as far 

as the old Tories are concerned in a little while. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They are young . . . 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, there are young Tories but they are all old Tory thinkers — 17th century 

style. But that is new for some of them. 

 

But the thing that must be told loudly and clearly, Mr. Speaker, is that there never was a cutback in 

grants, nor was one red penny of potash money ever taken from general revenue at the expense of the 

health care of our citizens. Mr. Speaker, Tory and Liberal claims to this effect were and are false, 

misleading and typical of them. Those are the very same ones who sit opposite who opposed 

hospitalization and medicare when those two programs were introduced in this province. At any rate, 

Mr. Speaker, I would be the last person in this House to deny Liberals and Tories the right to distort and 

mislead the people in this province. Far be it for me to question the motives of Tories when they try to 

whip up distorted stories relative to health care in the two recently held by-elections. 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1956 

 

MR. PENNER: — Did you say Wipf or whip? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Wipf or whip, same difference. But I do say to these same Tories that deceit is 

terribly difficult to live with, at least we, on this side of the House, think so, but that is on their 

consciences and this is especially true of their leader, their leader, who on more than one occasion — 

where is the Hon. Leader of the Tory Party — who on more than one occasion has resorted to this 

despicable practice which he practices with near perfection. You see, with experience you become a 

near perfectionist and I say that the Hon. Leader who is again not in his seat, is a near perfectionist. And 

when the Tory Leader talks of putting care back into medicare without telling us how he would 

accomplish this, my thoughts go astray to things best left unsaid in this House at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one will deny that we should be spending more on a variety of programs, medicare, 

programs to assist the mentally retarded and other programs too numerous to mention. Well, in this 

regard the Liberals show some consistency. They are true to their belief that if you give more to 

corporations there will somehow be more money for government to spend on such things as health care. 

They in their confusion and naiveness continue to bungle along. Well, I have no quarrel with them if this 

is what they believe. I have no quarrel with them if they score high on kindness to corporations and low 

on logic and mathematics and common sense. 

 

But it is the Tories’ position that I find difficult to stomach. One Tory gets up and tells this House he 

believes stiff daily fees should be charged those in hospitals. Another suggests deterrent fees because he 

feels Saskatchewan citizens are visiting their doctors too often. Why, it wouldn’t surprise me one bit if 

one of these days one of them will propose a motion making it illegal to become ill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the highest ratio of hospital beds per 1,000 in Canada. Our rate of 7.7 per 1,000 

citizens is the finest in North America. We also have the highest use rate of hospital beds in North 

America at 220 per 1,000 citizens as compared with the Canadian average of 156 per 1,000 citizens. 

 

Now I know what the Tories would like to do to increase the hospital bed rate of 7.7 per 1,000 citizens 

in our major cities. I’m sure their answer is to close down the hospitals in our rural areas. But I say this 

insidious Tory scheme is not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. It may be an accepted 

accounting procedure to some Tories to resort to this inhuman plan, but it is unacceptable to Members 

on this side of the House and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I ask, what is the Tory answer to this if I am wrong in my assumption? 

 

Or are they really saying Saskatchewan doctors are unnecessarily hospitalizing too many citizens? I 

sometimes feel this is what they want to say but are not courageous enough to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe Tory Members are suggesting our doctors are tying up hospital beds for too long 

for routine observations. I don’t know. Maybe they are suggesting needless surgery is being performed. 

Only the Tories know. Maybe the Tories are 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1957 

 

suggesting mismanagement. This, I know, only a Tory would know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, this Government, responsive and dedicated to the people of 

Saskatchewan, responded well to the situation. It increased its spending; it instituted a day surgery 

program, and it has dramatically increased its spending in this area in the present fiscal year. 

 

And to those who suggest that hospital waiting lists are too long, I agree, but they are long in other 

provinces too. Now I am not suggesting we should be satisfied, because I am not. But the situation is 

improving, and in this regard I have had verification of this from a few doctors with whom I have had 

communication over the past year. 

 

And so it is, with this in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I ask Opposition Members what their solutions are. 

Would they increase taxes as most imply by their statements? Or would they, like certain Tories have 

suggested, decrease benefits to the elderly and the physically and mentally handicapped in order to 

spend more on health care? 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone can criticize, but only responsible people come up with responsible solutions to 

problems. And so I say to Tory Members opposite, when are you going to come up with something 

constructive in this area? How long are you going to be led around by your noses by your Leader who 

hasn’t come up with one constructive idea on how he would improve health care? To Members opposite, 

especially Tory Members, I say, go forth and tell our citizens what you would do. Shake off that 

millstone you have around your neck and tell him you want to be positive from now on, that you now 

realize that you have been led astray because one among you is so power-hungry, and I have evidence to 

prove this. 

 

To Tories, I say, lay down your nasty little cudgels. Help this Government and the citizens of 

Saskatchewan to maintain the best medicare program in the world. Think positive, and some day you 

will be positive. Some of you have the capability to be positive, although, I grant you, not many. 

 

Think before you suggest cutting out the many needed programs offered. Think before you tactfully 

condemn our doctors in the future. Think before you attack the integrity of citizens who have occasion 

to visit doctors or be hospitalized. 

 

To Tory Members opposite who support the principle that the richer you are, the healthier you have a 

right to be, and to all confused Liberals, but that’s only 12 of them, I say, stand up for Saskatchewan. 

 

A change in attitude on this issue, a change to truth, can only enhance your position, something I, with 

charity in my heart, would like to see come about for the good of Saskatchewan and its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move Resolution No. 14. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1958 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was making a few 

comments in response to the Resolution introduced by the Member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. 

Mostoway) that I referred to as a joke, and I related to him as being the clown prince of the NDP, 

because only someone like the Member for Saskatoon Centre could bring forth a resolution 

congratulating the Government of Saskatchewan or the NDP for their provision of health care services 

in 1976. 

 

I pointed out that every single professional and everybody interested in health care in Saskatchewan had 

been extremely critical of the NDP over the past year about this integration of good quality health care 

that has been traditional in the Province of Saskatchewan. I also pointed out the fact that the only 

defence the NDP ever had when it came to talk about health care, was statistics. And you know, 

statistics are a funny thing. They talk about free health care. They talk about the removal of deterrents. 

They talk about the removal of the head tax, some of the very steps, Mr. Speaker, some of the very steps 

that may well have caused the deterioration of health care in Saskatchewan today. 

 

They turned around, Mr. Speaker, and they relate to the proliferation of programs. They talk about 

dental care. They talk about the prescription drug plan. They talk about SAIL. They talk about hearing 

aids. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Frills. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, Mr. Minister, they may well be frills when it comes to talk about the basic 

services of hospitalization and medicare. They may well be. 

 

Let’s look at what happened in the prescription drug field. In two years it has gone from zero to $20 

million, and that is a lot of money. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — What would you do? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, I would not be keeping old people from hospital beds. That is one thing I 

would not be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has turned around and by proliferating programs in this province, has completely 

distorted the priorities in health care. They have turned around and sacrificed the good, basic services of 

medicare and hospitalization. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there will be many more people who will want to speak on this 

Resolution, and I therefore, would like to move an amendment, and then we will hear what some of the 

other Members have to say about the ridiculous Motion of the Member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is moved by myself, and seconded by Mr. Cameron that all the words after Assembly be 

deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its misplaced priorities, preferring to purchase potash 

mines before providing quality medical care and continuing to treat the suffering with statistics instead 

of quality treatment. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1959 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move that, I want to talk about this business of potash. An NDP keeps saying, 

“Oh, the relationship of potash has nothing to do with medical care.” And yet, Mr. Speaker, they took 

$35 million from the Energy Fund to put into the consolidated revenue to pay for health services. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if they hadn’t completely dissipated the Energy Fund, and if they purchase Alwinsal for 

the same price as they purchased Sylvite, the Energy Fund will be bankrupt. And instead of being able to 

provide some additional resources for the starving hospital boards and for the medical equipment that 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association says you are denying them, you are turning around and using all 

that money to purchase potash mines. Mr. Speaker, that is providing not one new job, not one new job. It 

does not care for one old person. Mr. Speaker, I think when we get down to talking about potash, I am 

going to prove that when you talked about the maximization of benefits to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the purchase of the potash industry is the worst possible way to maximize benefits of the resource 

industry for the public of Saskatchewan, and I think it is very easily proved. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am saying again that this Government has sacrificed quality medical care for its 

citizens, for quantity. They have turned the medical care into a public, political issue, and they have used 

statistics to try to justify the sacrifice of what they are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore, so move the amendment. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to congratulate the 

Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald). One thing about him is that he is a very 

consistent man. He consistently rises in this House, makes a lot of noise. He consistently tries to confuse 

the issues. He consistently does not want to talk about what is really in front of us, but tries to mislead 

and steer debate into many directions. Very seldom is he prepared, doing homework, learning and 

finding out the facts is not something that he has really got a great attribute for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing that I want to congratulate the Hon. Member for is that he is consistently 

wrong about his facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before 5:00 o’clock, the Hon. Member said that Regina and Saskatoon communities had 

fewer beds than any other city of similar size in Canada. Mr. Speaker, there is nothing worse about 

distorting that kind of a thing because, Mr. Speaker, the facts are obvious, they are there and they are 

proven, that Regina and Saskatoon . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — On a Point of Order, I would just like the Member to give the entire quotation, 

“when it takes in the rural population of Saskatchewan that it serves.” 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — What are the facts about the hospital situation in Saskatchewan? We have in 

Saskatchewan, about 7.8 beds per 1,000 population. In Regina and Saskatoon we have four beds per 

1,000 in one case and something better than four in another case, compared to less than three in places 

like Vancouver, Toronto and Montreal, compared to about three beds per 1,000 in Winnipeg. 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1960 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very comprehensive study of that particular area on the number of hospital beds, 

which I will be glad to provide this House with. The Hon. Member may recall, about three years ago we 

had commissioned Doctor Clarkson to do a very thorough investigation about the hospital needs in the 

city of Regina and Saskatoon. That report contains a comprehensive documentation of beds per 

thousand population, city by city, community by community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will be glad to table that report. In fact, it has been made available and I am sure that the Opposition 

has a copy of it, because I had tabled that report a couple of years ago. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They never read them. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — The problem is, as my colleague says, they never read them, because they want to 

confuse the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then to further confuse things — for a long time, the Liberals were saying that we are not 

providing enough money for hospital care. Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite the Hon. Member to take a look 

at today’s Leader-Post. In the case of Regina, the two hospital systems that are operating, the Regina 

General Hospital under that board — what does the paper say? They ended up the year with a 

considerable surplus. In the case of the South Saskatchewan Hospital — two out of three hospitals the 

board operates — ended up with a surplus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, let me remind the Hon. Member during the days of the Liberal administration, hospital after 

hospital in this province operated at a deficit and the hospital boards were required to go to local 

governments for assessments, for municipalities to place assessments on the ratepayers in order to bring 

hospitals out of deficits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the story since 1971? It is, in fact, a great story to be told about hospital care. 

Today the hospitals do not have deficits. There are more hospital beds; employees in hospitals are better 

paid than they ever have been, Mr. Speaker. Hospital employees, that is the non-professionals, have had 

their wage increased by 150 per cent since 1971. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And you are proud of that? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Yes, I am proud of that, because I think it is time that hospital workers received a 

decent wage, and we are proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the case of nurses, when we took office, what were the nurses getting? Maximum rate under a Liberal 

administration — $500 per month. What do the nurses get today — $1,220 per month, Mr. Speaker. 

That is a record of which we are proud. It seems to me employees who get decent pay do better work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member further tries to confuse things by talking about quality care. It is 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley becomes an authority on the 

quality of care. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, because I do not know of two medical doctors or 

specialists who will agree on how to define quality care. Yet here sits an authority on quality care. Mr. 

Speaker, does the Hon. Member say to us in this House that it is good quality care 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1961 

 

when based on studies conducted by the medical profession in the city of Moose Jaw in the one hospital, 

some 52 per cent of the hysterectomies that were performed were unjustified. Is that good quality care? 

Mr. Speaker, or in the other hospital, about 45 per cent of the hysterectomies that were performed in 

Moose Jaw were unjustified. Is that good quality care? Or in the case of Weyburn again, this was a study 

done by the medical profession not by the Department of Health. It is true that the department and the 

MCIC did co-operate in providing certain information. In case of Weyburn we had three times as many 

appendectomy operations as we had throughout the province. Is that good quality care, Mr. Speaker? Or 

let me ask the Hon. Member, is it good quality care when we find that in the case of one physician in the 

one hospital keeps patients for gall bladder operations, on the average and this is over a year’s average, 

under eight days, and in another hospital, another physician on the average over a year’s period keeps 

his patients for 22 days. Is that good quality care? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I doubt it. I doubt it very much, because you can’t judge quality on the basis of length of 

hospital stay. This Government is concerned about quality care. This Government is concerned about 

quality care. We have co-opted the medical profession, Medical Care Insurance Commission and the 

Department of Health, all of whom have been working on this question of quality care. But, Mr. 

Speaker, to define quality care is just not that easy. And, Mr. Speaker, the medical profession itself 

concedes that the question of quality care is something that is very difficult to define. Yet there is the 

Member for Indian Head-Wolseley trying to be an authority on quality care. Mr. Speaker, I will have 

more to say about quality care when I re-enter this debate later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to make one comment about the Hon. Member inferring that money is not 

provided for equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole question of equipment in hospitals is a matter of concern to every jurisdiction — 

of what to buy and what is needed today and how soon it will become obsolete. Mr. Speaker, this 

province does not have to take a back seat to anybody, in terms of equipping our hospitals. Our hospitals 

are as well equipped as any in the world, Mr. Speaker. There are, from time to time, new pieces of 

equipment that come into being that we do not buy immediately, and properly so. But, on the other hand, 

Mr. Speaker, let me also point out how advanced Saskatchewan has been. 

 

For example, what the Members of the Opposition and I think, at times, the media, do not recognize is 

that Saskatchewan on various pieces of equipment, particularly in cancer treatment, has led North 

America. 

 

For example, you may recall that in 1971, we purchased and installed a betatron. Mr. Speaker, the 

betatron that was installed was one of only three installed in North America, one in Boston, one in 

Montreal, the other one at the University of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. It is still one of the unique pieces 

of equipment. Mr. Speaker, I know that the Liberals, when they were in office, tried to buy the betatron 

from Germany by trading wheat, but that did not work. The Germans wanted hard cash and we provided 

hard cash, in order to have that equipment. It has been a very useful piece of equipment. 

 

In the area of cancer we take no back seat. Mr. Speaker, I 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1962 

 

invite the Members to visit the Plains Health Centre. It is recognized to be one of the most up-to-date 

hospitals in North America. 

 

True, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals finally did get construction started. But we completed it and we put that 

hospital into operation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan again has become a leader in the health field. That is really what the 

Liberals and the Conservatives dislike. They do not like this province providing first class care to its 

people. They would like to have us return to the days under the Liberal administration where inadequate 

financing was provided in support of health care. That is not saying that our medical profession tried to 

do anything less than provide first class work under difficult circumstances. They have always done first 

class work, but, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to support from a Liberal government for health services 

they have always been caught wanting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have much more to say about this matter and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 26 — CANADIAN FARMERS PREVENTED FROM BUYING 

CHEMICALS AND PESTICIDES IN THE UNITED STATES 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington) moved, seconded by Mr. Birkbeck (Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the federal Minister of Agriculture for his announcement of March 4, 

1977, which will prevent Canadian farmers from buying agricultural chemicals and pesticides in the 

United States. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Resolution is to call upon the Minister of Agriculture of 

Canada to reconsider his announcement to prevent Canadian farmers from buying agricultural chemicals 

and pesticides in the United States. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What . . . 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Pay attention; you may exercise some influence there. 

 

For the past several years the costs of certain pesticides has been cheaper in the United States, 

sometimes as much as 40 to 50 per cent cheaper than the price of the Canadian equivalent. As a result 

some producers have taken advantage of these price differences by buying the cheaper US chemicals for 

their own use. As of March 4th the Minister has now banned this opportunity. One of the problems with 

this ban is that many producers have already ordered and paid for and are simply awaiting delivery of 

the US pesticides. If these producers cannot import their previously ordered pesticides and farm 

chemicals they will suffer a significant economic loss. I would ask the Minister to suspend any 

restrictive actions against these farmers who previously ordered and paid for chemicals. These chemicals 

should be allowed to cross the border subject to the regulations 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1963 

 

in place prior to the announcement of March 4th. The Minister said that there has yet been no decision 

made regarding the entry into Canada of previously ordered pesticides. Such a decision should have 

been made much earlier; it should have been considered with the Minister’s announcement. His game 

playing is putting Canadian farmers at a disadvantage. This is but one criticism of the Minister’s 

announcement. On the whole I would question the wisdom of banning the purchases of US chemicals in 

any case. The arguments for this ban are very weak. 

 

First, he suggests the Canadian Pesticide industry is being hurt by purchases in the US; however, figures 

show that United States purchases have only accounted for three per cent of the total sales to Canadians. 

Is the Canadian industry in such bad financial shape that a three per cent loss could spell doom? The 

Minister seems to think so. Producers in the past could see price competition from the United States 

keeping Canadian prices competitive. Now with no competition many producers will see an increase in 

input costs and reduction in net incomes. The second argument is lack of detail and labelling and lack of 

bilingual content on the labels and this is a very weak argument. Many products are brought into Canada 

in bulk and have no label. I wonder if the Minister and the Cabinet could strictly enforce The Labelling 

Act to see that a product brought into Canada has bilingual labels no matter what form of packaging it is 

in. Rather than taking any action in protecting the producer from a drop in income because of the ban, 

the Minister has only issued a challenge to the chemical industry to price its products competitively 

throughout the North American market. In this regard what measures will the Minister take to ensure 

Canadian pesticides compete with US pesticides? If the pesticides are not priced competitively what 

action will the Minister take to rectify the situation? 

 

Surely these are two questions which every producer would want to know the answer to. Producers want 

to be assured that the Canadian pesticide industry will not try to squeeze the domestic market to the 

limit. Unfortunately the Minister has not yet seen fit to answer these questions. Instead he only responds 

that he has had discussions with farm organizations about the ban leaving the impression and the 

inference that those organizations supported it. This is not the case. 

 

Among others, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, the Ontario Federation of Agriculture and the 

United Grain Growers have all opposed the ban. Consequently our hope is that the Minister will 

reconsider his ban or at least take measures to minimize its impact. What has happened is the Minister of 

Agriculture of Canada under the federal Cabinet has capitulated to big business and used gimmickry to 

give them embargo protection for imports in the disguise of safety and labelling, a definite ruling against 

the Canadian farmer. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — What percentage . . . 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Three. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move this Resolution. 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1964 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments in regard to this particular Resolution 

and I sincerely hope that they will be brief tonight. First of all let me say in starting my comments that I 

hope that all Members of this Assembly will vote against the particular Resolution that has been 

presented. I can see some concern being expressed by the Member for Souris-Cannington in regard to 

the particular actions of the federal Minister of Agriculture in that they relate possibly to some of the 

large farmers who are located within his constituency, as his constituency of Souris-Cannington does 

border on the American border. But by going along with the recommendations that are being presented 

by the Member for Souris-Cannington, we are saying that we are in favor of protecting or leaning 

towards a select group of farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan; that select group of farmers are 

those located close to the American border. Secondly, it protects those who are large enough and 

wealthy enough to drive across the state line and purchase enough chemical in the US to make it 

economically feasible for them to do it. It is not economically feasible for anyone from the area of 

Weyburn, Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current and so on to take advantage of any particular saving that 

might be made by driving across the US border and picking up these chemicals. 

 

It is important to note as well that American firms demand cash upon delivery of their particular product 

which in turn means it rules out any possibility of one ordering that particular chemical by mail or by 

freight and I understand that there would be other technicalities involved as well. The freight and cost 

involved would not provide any advantage to the farmer living in a situation other than close to the 

American border. 

 

But let’s look at the short term and the long term effect of the actions taken by the federal Minister of 

Agriculture. What he is saying is that he is not in effect banning the sale of American chemicals in the 

Province of Saskatchewan or any province in Canada. He is saying that any chemical manufacturer or 

any person who manufactures or produces or sells chemicals in the US is quite able to sell them in the 

Dominion of Canada as long as he has those chemicals registered with the Dominion of Canada. What is 

the reasoning behind this? 

 

First of all, it is the legal constraints that might be applied to the use and abuse of chemicals in this 

country regarding safety, environment and health. What’s the reasoning for regulating those products or 

to have them registered? First of all if there is a major accident with one particular kind of product from 

the US, the provincial and federal authorities by having it registered within this country know 

immediately what action has to be taken to prevent any further damage by that particular accident. If the 

chemicals are not registered in this province or in this country and an accident does occur it means 

having to try and contact someone in the US to find out where that product was made, and find out as 

well whether any kind of preventative action can be taken. As far as having any effect on the cash output 

of the farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan and Canada, let’s look at the total amount of chemicals 

sold within Canada. 

 

Last year, a total of $120 million worth of chemical was sold in the Dominion of Canada. Of that, $80 

million was related towards agriculture. Of that $80 million there might have been close to $2 million in 

imports and the majority of that was not in the Province of Saskatchewan, but in the Province of 

Ontario. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1965 

 

Most farmers will find that the majority of the products that we produce within the Dominion of Canada 

such as 2-4-D, is much cheaper than what we can obtain them for in the States. Your teflons are 

equitable in price, so there is basically no savings whatsoever by going across the border and buying 

these chemicals there. 

 

Again, looking at it from the long term aspect, the majority of chemicals are made from petroleum. I 

think we have to protect Canada’s availability of that petroleum. What would happen in the event of a 

petroleum shortage in the US? You can rest assured that if we relied in Canada strictly on the Americans 

providing us with our weed sprays and our chemicals that in the event of a petroleum shortage in the US, 

imports would be cut off and we would not be able to purchase any of that needed and I must say much 

needed chemical for our fields and our crops. 

 

What we are saying to our producers in this country is, yes, go ahead and produce the chemical that we 

need, if you can produce it on an equitable and even basis with that in the US. 

 

What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that the position taken by Mr. Whelan is a position that I would hope 

all politicians, those who are in government and those who are in opposition throughout this country 

would take in looking at problems. It is not necessarily what is best for their re-election or election in 

four years but looking at and solving the long term problems of this country is important. By keeping the 

borders open in terms of chemicals may garner some politicians a few more votes in the next election, 

but it will certainly not protect the agricultural industry in this country in the long term. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WIEBE: — By supporting this particular Resolution you are saying, look, I want some particular 

political advantage in the next three or four years, and am not concerned about what may happen in the 

future to the agricultural industry in this province. For that reason I ask all Members of this Assembly to 

reject this particular Resolution. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to put in a few words 

with respect to this Resolution. Far be it from me to spend a lot of time defending the federal Minister of 

Agriculture in some of the things he does. I would suggest that in this particular issue, I would find 

myself somewhat in support of what the federal Minister has done. I agree with the statement which was 

just made by the Member for Morse, that not very many people are really able to take advantage of this 

kind of chemical which is being brought across the border, unregistered chemicals, incidentally, being 

brought across the border from the United States. 

 

It is true that a few people who are large operators are able to go down there and take advantage of that 

market or some of those immediately across the border are able to take advantage of that market. 

 

I think we have to recognize that there is a problem with regard to our chemical industry in Canada. Out 

of the total 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1966 

 

chemical sales in Canada of about $120 million, about $65 million is imported from outside of Canada. 

That amount is increasing as time goes by. The percentage of chemical which we are producing in 

Canada for our own use is decreasing. I think it is important that we not become entirely dependent upon 

the rest of the world for our chemical supplies. 

 

I would agree with the Member for Morse that in times when there is oversupply in the United States or 

an adequate supply of these chemicals, that they will be pushed into Canada at probably some very low 

prices. However, if there happens to be a shortfall on supplies in the United States, these supplies could 

very easily be cut off, and our farmers would find themselves in very difficult and very expensive 

replacement situations. 

 

I would suggest also that the Member for Souris-Cannington was somewhat irresponsible when he said 

that we should let these chemicals come across the border, whether they come in in bulk or however 

they come in, whether they are registered or unregistered, and that we shouldn’t be concerned about that. 

I think of some of the experiences we have had, not only in Canada, but in the United States with regard 

to the chemicals getting into food supplies, especially in terms of feed additives, and we are talking now 

of chemicals in all forms, particularly in feed supplies where there have been many serious accidents 

with regard to improper chemicals getting into food supplies. I think if we leave ourselves open to 

unregistered chemicals, certainly we are leaving ourselves open for those kinds of accidents happening 

here in Canada. These can be very expensive to correct. I really don’t want to say any more about it, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that I would take the position as taken by the Member for Morse that we should defeat 

this Resolution. I think that the importance to Canada and to the Saskatchewan farmer of getting these 

kinds of unregistered chemicals across the border is not sufficient for us to be taking the kinds of risks 

we would take if we were to allow the unrestricted imports. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Member for Morse and the 

Member for Saltcoats, the Hon. Minister of Agriculture were not listening very carefully when the Hon. 

Member for Souris-Cannington proposed this Resolution. 

 

The Hon. Member is not trying to open up the borders for chemicals to be coming in from the United 

States; that is not the intent of the Resolution at all. I can assure the Minister of Agriculture that our 

Member for Souris-Cannington is not irresponsible in any manner or way. Of course, the Hon. Member 

for Morse wants to make a political issue out of it. That isn’t what we are trying to do here. Quite 

simply, Mr. Speaker, we want to protect those farmers that have already purchased chemicals. We want 

them to be able to bring those items across that they have already bought and paid for. That was the 

intent of this Resolution. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, the Members need to be informed a little more on this Resolution and I 

therefore, beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1967 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 28 — IMPOSITION OF THE METRIC SYSTEM IN CANADA 

 

MR. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by Mr. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan for its 

imposition of the metric system in Canada and Saskatchewan without the consultation of people 

affected. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that the intent of this Resolution is not lost as well. I’m very 

pleased to have the opportunity to speak on the Motion which I have placed before the House and I am 

sure that any reasonable thinking Member of this Legislature would support this Motion. Mr. Speaker, I 

will just go back a few years to try to give an explanation as to how all this came to pass. 

 

In 1970, the Federal Government set up a metric commission to plan for Canadian conversion to the 

metric system in the interest of world trade. This commission worked out what they thought would be a 

good plan. Then they proceeded to get things in motion. Provincial governments were informed to 

prepare supporting legislation and companies were advised that metric conversion would take place on 

or about February 1, 1977. Grain companies and business began to change over at a considerable cost. 

The conversion would be affecting the train trade, packing and the oil and gas distributors. All this was 

done before legislation was passed in Parliament. As I understand it this particular legislation came in 

for real debate in the House of Commons on January 26, 1977, only five days before the system was to 

go into effect. 

 

The Government seemed to feel the grain industry was for the metric system based on the expressed 

views of grain companies who were representatives of a sub-committee set up by the metric 

commission. Some other representatives of that sub-committee were the Canadian Grain Commission, 

the Canadian Feed Manufacturers’ Association, the Canada Grain Council, the Pioneer Grain Company 

Limited, the Alberta Wheat Pool, the United Grain Growers, the Canadian Wheat Board, the Ontario 

Grain and Feed Dealers’ Association, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Anglo-Canadian Grain 

Company and the Department of Agriculture for the Province of Saskatchewan, and the co-ordinator for 

the metric commission. I don’t feel any of these representatives of this sub-committee that were 

appointed or set up by the metric commission really approached their membership, the people they 

represented. I think if they had, in particular the farming industry in Saskatchewan, they would have 

found out that our farmers did not want a metric system in their business. Yet every one of the 

organization’s representatives on that commission had a vested interest. The problem was there was not 

one producer represented on the committee. The committee was supposedly set up to advise the metric 

commission which in turn would advise the Minister. 

 

I can honestly say that I have not had one person come up to me and tell me that he thought the 

conversion to the metric system was a good idea, and that is in or out of the agriculture industry in this 

province. I would estimate between 90 and 95 per cent of farmers in western Canada are opposed to 

metrication. 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1968 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say at this point that I think all people understand that we are 

gradually moving to the metric system throughout the world, and that it is a good system mathematically 

speaking. It is a simpler system, but that depends to a large extent on what age you are. Our young 

people learning this metric system now in our educational system will have no problem with it. But as it 

pertains to agriculture in Saskatchewan the average of our farmers is well over 45 and this system is not 

something that they are totally incapable of accepting, but it is a matter of giving them time and of using 

a dual system to allow them or afford them that necessary time to make the conversion. This way the 

older farmers could use the old system and the younger farmers who have studied the metric system in 

school or were more familiar with it could use the metric system. Eventually we would end up with a 

situation in which all farmers in western Canada would be using the metric system. 

 

Very simply, the Government’s position whether it be federal or provincial should be to respect the 

wishes of the majority of the people. In western Canada and in particular Saskatchewan, the majority of 

people are farmers and producers and are happy with acres and bushels, but as I say they realize we have 

got to progress and they say we shall progress, but let’s try to do it in some easy stages and let’s not just 

go bang right into this new system. 

 

The basic argument is that we must make the change to the metric system for the sake of our trade with 

other parts of the world, our export market. But let’s be sure of one thing. We may export a lot of things, 

but we do not export land. Therefore, I think my argument is very simple. There is no reason why we 

cannot use a dual purpose system, in particular, at the farm level as it pertains to bushels and acres being 

converted to tonnes and hectares respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this New Democratic Government put this legislation through by Order in Council without 

telling the Legislative Members that all land surveys had to be done in future in metric. They did not 

consult with the farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan in a real and meaningful way. There was no 

reason in my mind, why this Government could not have brought this legislation before all Members of 

this provincial Legislature. That would have given the people of this province a real and meaningful way 

to express their views on the conversion to metric. 

 

Of course, as I said before, it is very difficult for this Government to explain why it is necessary to 

change acres to hectares when we are not selling land in the world trade. 

 

Now then, why Pierre Trudeau and his centralist Liberal Party, could not consider amendments by the 

Conservative Opposition to allow the use of both the metric system and the imperial system is beyond 

me. The only answer is, of course, that they, like the NDP in Saskatchewan, are centralist in their 

policies and believe that they know best what is good for the people and to consider a meaningful 

amendment by Opposition, either in Ottawa or in Regina, in our Provincial Government, would be 

absolutely out of the question. 

 

I would like to say that a reasonable argument can be made for leaving our land system with the imperial 

system of measure. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1969 

 

The land adjustment in the three prairie provinces, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta will be a 

fantastic cost. I don’t know whether the provincial governments are going to pay for it or who is going 

to pay for it. The registration of titles of land will affect the oil and gas industry as well as our 

agricultural industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure this House that I am a supporter of the good characteristics of this metric 

system. As I said before it is a simpler and better system, mathematically speaking. 

 

Canada and the United States for that matter should be in harmony if you like, in their measuring system 

with the rest of the world. Both these countries must trade internationally and it is the pressure from big 

companies, automobile companies, the grain trade, machine companies and generally speaking, 

international companies of the world, that has brought this metric system to Canada. 

 

Now Canada needs to trade internationally and it is much simpler and cheaper for us to use the same 

system of weights and measures as the rest of the world. But I might add that it is little consolation to 

our consumers who go to the store and pick up a package that is measured in something that they don’t 

even know what it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to this point, the trading companies have been making the calculating changes. Now this 

legislation will relieve these trading companies of that duty and place it squarely on the shoulders of our 

farmers and individual citizens of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer myself and I can assure you that this is going to require some extra time in 

the field. You will think of it some of those spring days, not when it’s warm, but kind of dirty and dusty 

out there and you are standing there trying to figure it out with a piece of paper and a pencil. If you are 

lucky you’ll have one of those little computers. Again, if you are lucky and the people of this country 

are lucky, it will not result in a crop failure, because if we had a crop failure we would certainly have 

some second thoughts about converting to the metric system. 

 

Mr. Speaker I will close my remarks on this Motion by simply saying that surely the Liberal 

Government in Ottawa and this New Democratic Government in Saskatchewan, could have taken some 

time to consider the total ramifications of this conversion to the metric system. It will have a tremendous 

effect on the people and we must have some feeling for people and understand that people do not adjust 

quickly to change and that surely for these reasons alone there could have been amendments accepted. 

Debate could have been taken into consideration in this Legislature. There was no need for it to have 

been passed through Order in Council. This would have given the people an opportunity to express their 

views on this matter and we could have considered some educational programs in the conversion to the 

metric system. 

 

As I have said before, I agree with conversion to the metric system, with the exception, in particular, of 

land. Taking these things into consideration we should have allowed the dual system, at least for a short 

term. If the Government would have been so considerate to have brought it before the 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1970 

 

Legislature, the length of time could well have been decided as to how long it was necessary to go with 

a dual system to give our farmers in particular, and our consumers, an opportunity and the necessary 

time to make the adjustment to these necessary changes from imperial measure to metric. 

 

I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, move Resolution 28, seconded by the Hon. Member for Souris-Cannington 

(Mr. Berntson). 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I want to make some extensive comments to 

this Resolution, but I understand we want to get into some other business. I want, in addition to that, to 

draw to the attention of the Member for Moosomin, what his counterparts in the Conservative Party in 

Alberta are doing in this connection. They are farther advanced than the Province of Saskatchewan in 

their conversion to the metric system and many people think that they are very wise in doing that and 

indeed in leading the way in many respects to the conversion that’s going on. 

 

The Member for Moosomin, in speaking to this Resolution and indeed their party in moving the 

Resolution, demonstrates again the old dinosaur attitude of the Conservative Party. The moment you 

have the least hint of change in any respect, they cower and run for cover. They always want to preserve 

every last vestige of the status quo. That’s not so bad, but what they always do in the process is spread 

their political mischief. They know that some people are opposed to change and when there is a change 

it opens up the political opportunity to spread mischief. I’m not surprised it’s this Member that puts the 

Resolution on the Order Paper, because he’s following in the footsteps of Alvin Hamilton, who has been 

doing his best these last several months to spread around myth and mischief in the same way this 

Member is doing about the conversion to metric. 

 

If I asked the Member to tell me what an acre is, Mr. Speaker, what would he tell me? He would scratch 

his head for a few minutes and he would say, why an acre is 16.5 feet by half a mile. I would ask him 

what is an acre in terms of the metric system and he would say, I don’t know, even though it’s a hundred 

feet north by a hundred feet east, or rather a hundred paces north, a hundred paces east and you have a 

hectare. He says it’s so complex nobody can figure that one out. What he does is always makes the 

assumption, as they always do in their arrogance is assume that the population is so stupid, so opposed 

to change that we can’t somehow convert in due course to the metric system. 

 

The Resolution says, there has been insufficient consultation. This thing has been around for six years. I 

don’t know what kind of consultation the Member wants. If he doesn’t understand after six years, is 

there any prospect of his understanding in six more years? I doubt it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Then he says if we convert to the metric system, why we may have a crop failure. 

Well, I suppose if we had a good crop, he’ll say it might have been so much better if we hadn’t had the 

metric system. That’s the sort of mischief and myth that they spread in connection with some of these 

proposals. 

 

The Member says, well we should have a dual system, where 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1971 

 

we convert slowly over the course of time to the metric system in the grain industry, so that farmers can 

understand. Once again, he’s way behind the times because that’s the very policy that’s being pursued at 

the moment. 

 

There is very good reason for converting to metric in the grain industry. I remind him of only two facts. 

One is that it now requires in Canada 16 conversions from imperial to metric to get grain from 

Saskatchewan to a ship in Thunder Bay, sixteen, and a cost in excess of $1 million annually, to the 

Wheat Board to do those conversions. 

 

I mention only two of those facts. The Member says we ought to have a dual system for a period, so 

farmers can understand. That might have been a useful idea, had it been expressed six months ago, 

before we implemented a dual system instead of expressing it six months later after it’s already in effect. 

The Government of Canada has indicated to producers that it too is concerned that producers should 

understand and have a gradual period to work into the use of the metric system. They have therefore, 

said that we are going to continue to use the dual system. You will have quotations made to you in the 

metric system and they will be accompanied by traditional quotations in the imperial system. And over 

the course of time we will slowly adjust to the new system and save a million dollars annually that we 

are currently losing and avoid these conversions from metric to imperial so many times in the course of 

shipping grain from the prairies. 

 

And, as usual of course, the Member speaks on both sides of the issue. He tells us on the one hand how 

foul it is that we should be requiring these poor, ignorant people, as he describes them, to convert to this 

new system. He moves a Resolution to condemn the two governments for moving in this progressive 

way, and then, on the other hand, of course he is careful to say in ten minutes, ‘but I appreciate the need 

for all this metric conversion; we live in a real world; other nations use the metric system; we are one of 

the few who no longer do; we have to over the course of time convert.’ He spends ten minutes of his 

time telling us about the value of converting to metric, and then moves a Resolution and condemns the 

governments for doing it, in face of the fact that it has been around for six years. 

 

I am going to tell the Member the next day I speak to this, about what they are doing in Alberta, which 

as I said earlier, is farther advanced even than is the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and because I want to speak to the Resolution at greater length, I beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 30 — PENSION PROVISIONS 

FOR SASKATCHEWAN GOVERNMENT SUPERANNUATES 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon) moved, seconded by Mr. Cameron (Regina South): 

 

That this Assembly urges that a full examination be made of the pension provisions currently in force 

for Saskatchewan Government superannuates with a view to determining: (a) whether Saskatchewan 

Government superannuates are 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1972 

 

receiving fair pension benefits relative to other groups; (b) whether such pension benefits should be 

indexed as are Federal Government superannuates’ pensions; and (c) generally whether fair and 

equitable pension provisions exists for the former public servants of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving this Motion I would hope that the members of this House will look 

upon this Motion in view of the fact that the time has come to review and examine the pensions in force 

now for Saskatchewan Government superannuates. 

 

There certainly can be made a good case for what this Motion requests, and that is a full examination of 

these pension provisions. I am not, at this time, judging the pensions as to the benefits compared to other 

pension funds. There can be no doubt that many pensions fall far behind in serving the needs of those 

who receive those pensions. 

 

The shortfall in providing a decent standard of living for those on pensions is apt not to fall to anyone in 

particular, it is rather a result of inflation and the resulting increase in the cost of living. Many of these 

inequities are now being covered in negotiations between employers and employees and it is now a fact 

that the Federal Government superannuates have their pensions indexed to the rises in the cost of living. 

 

The people who are now on pension are the ones who find themselves trapped. They find that they have 

no way to negotiate a better deal on their pensions as they are no longer involved in the collective 

bargaining process. Therefore, their only recourse can come through a full examination being made of 

these pension plans and efforts made to correct any deficiencies that this examination might prove that 

exists in these pensions at this time. 

 

I do not bring this Motion forward with any intention of starting a political debate on the pensions that 

have been available throughout the years. I would rather put this Motion forward in this light, and that is 

that we, in this Legislative Assembly, in urging this examination can offer assistance to these 

superannuates that they cannot achieve in any other way. 

 

Therefore, I ask Members on both sides of this House to accept this Motion in the spirit that it has been 

presented and I ask that all Members support this motion. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly to this Resolution, in 

seconding it. Its origin lies in this history. The Saskatchewan Government superannuates currently look 

about and see pension provisions that have been made for others, principally teachers, but other groups 

as well, and they think rightly or wrongly, most likely rightly, that the provisions in respect to pensions, 

which have been made for other groups are more liberal and more generous than what has been made for 

them. They have, over the course of time, been meeting with the Minister responsible trying to impress 

upon him their case. In addition to that they have been meeting with some Members of the Legislature. 

They have circulated some material to us, asking us simply to get on with the process of examining the 

provisions that have been made for them, to determine whether or not they are fair as to the three 

respects that are mentioned in the Resolution. But while they continue to get 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1973 

 

a sort of sympathetic ear from the Minister responsible, and continue to get some general sympathy from 

Members, they feel that their cause is not getting the kind of attention that it ought to be getting and, 

therefore, the Resolution is put on the Order Paper for the purpose of sparking some debate among 

Members and to bring to Members a greater awareness of the issue that these people are raising with us 

in their efforts to get to the Minister responsible and the Government and get, perhaps, some concrete 

action. 

 

The Resolution requires nothing of Members in the way of decision, but requires some thought about the 

plight that they indicate they have. The purpose, in addition to that, is to get Members of the Assembly 

beginning to think seriously about some of the issues that these people are raising and in an effort to 

persuade the responsible Minister of the Provincial Government to get the examination on and over and 

bring to some resolution, the problems and the issues that these people are raising. 

 

I am happy, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons to be seconding the Resolution. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 31 — SUFFICIENT FUNDS FOR PROBATION SERVICES 

FOR JUVENILES AND ADULTS 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana) moved, seconded by Miss Clifford (Wilkie): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to provide sufficient funds to permit a 

renewed emphasis on probation services for juveniles and adults. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying that I have nothing but respect for the people now working 

with juveniles and working in probation services in the employ of the Provincial Government. The 

reaction of the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes) whenever suggestions are made to him about 

spending priorities of the Government is to bawl like a weaned calf over what his employees, in some 

way, have been attacked, that any criticism of the spending priorities is tantamount to criticism of the 

workers within the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Motion that is coming deals with the problem that exists in probation services, which is 

not due to the people, but to the lack of money and the lack of people that the lack of money causes for 

probation services. The problem is not a result of what they do, but their inability to do enough. 

 

The Social Services workers are highly skilled professionals who are extremely interested in the field 

and they understand the problem better than we do in this House. They are, unfortunately not given 

sufficient funds to adequately perform their functions. 

 

Saskatchewan has a higher crime rate than Manitoba, higher than Ontario, higher crime rate even than 

the Province of Quebec. We have one of the highest per capita crime rates in Canada and, in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the only area that I can think of in the 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1974 

 

country where a higher crime rate, in fact, exists is in Tory Alberta. Of course, the Hon. Member for 

Nipawin (Mr. Collver) would be quick to point out that they balance the problem in Alberta by saying 

that, even though they have such a high crime rate, that that very high crime rate is balanced, one 

supposes, by balancing the budget and by saving money for the taxpayers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that crime is a very serious problem and I don’t agree with the Member for 

Nipawin that it is something that should just be ignored by this province and ignored by governments 

throughout the country. I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is something that deserves our attention in this House 

and this Motion deals with the problem of crime and deals with the problem of crime among young 

people. 

 

It would appear that the spending priorities of the Provincial Government on dealing with crime are to 

put the prevention of crime very low in the priorities of this Government. We spent 1.5 per cent of our 

Budget on matters related to the prevention of crime to the Attorney General’s Department and under 

two per cent of the entire provincial Budget is spent to protect Saskatchewan people in this way. 

 

I suggest that we underspend and as a result we spread the RCMP too thinly around the province; we 

compel the city police forces to operate with the barest minimum of personnel and though the officers 

involved throughout the province do, I believe, a very good job within those constraints, still when the 

court system and the policing functions are financially restricted the high crime rate must necessarily 

follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say all of those things by way of a preamble to a specific request and specific suggestion 

to the Government. I believe that far more money has to be put into probation services. The recidivist 

rate once a person has been in jail is extremely high in North America. We don’t do the rehabilitation 

job that European prisons seem to accomplish. We have more people in prisons in Canada than they 

have in Great Britain though Britain has more than twice the population that we have in this country. 

 

The British borstals deal with the young offender and the Minister would be wise to study the British 

borstal system. They deal with the young offender and have a very satisfactory success rate in terms of 

rehabilitation. We aren’t doing the jobs in the prisons of reforming people who get there, and that means 

that we have to do an even better job of keeping young offenders from getting to prison. 

 

Because we lack a borstal system, because our boys’ centres are not as effective as their European 

counterparts, we have to win the battle at the probation level. We have to do even better with probation 

services and we have to do better in dealing with juvenile offenders before they get to jail. 

 

While it is true that sending someone to jail accomplishes the aim of punishment which perhaps is some 

deterrent for that individual and others, at the same time the jail experience hardens the mind of the 

young offender against society, allows for the formation of strong friendships analogous to the kind of 

friendships that you develop when you face adversity together in the military. And what we are really 

doing with the prisons, to some extent, is training the young offender in the criminal subculture. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1975 

 

A young man having gone to jail through stupidity or ignorance or bad casual friendships may well 

come out hardened against society, embittered by his experience, with a whole new range of friends, 

who to varying degrees are involved in criminal activities. He acquires, in prison, a fair degree of 

knowledge about crime. 

 

Now incarceration may be worth that price because of the deterrent effect, but because we are not 

successful in rehabilitating the criminal in the prisons, I say we have to do the best job we can to 

rehabilitate the criminal before that young offender is, in fact, incarcerated. 

 

What kind of a job are we doing then with our probation services? If the stakes are so high how capably 

does the system deal with the young offender on probation or the juvenile offender working with the 

probation officers? 

 

Since the cost to society, if the young person becomes a confirmed criminal, is very high in both 

financial and personal terms, how much effort do we make to ensure that the young person does not go 

to jail, which from experience we know will probably confirm him in the criminal subculture. 

 

As a society we spend a great deal of money on the national parole service. National parole officers tend 

to be very well paid. Promotion within that service continues to involve the excellence within the service 

at the client level and the caseload of the national parole service is small. 

 

They deal with the confirmed criminal, someone who has been sent to a penitentiary. Pen time begins 

with a sentence of two years or more so they very rarely are dealing with someone who has not been 

convicted of four or five previous offences. Because their caseload is small, they are able to work with 

the parolee on a very personal basis. They will seek employment for him; they are available for the 

kinds of lengthy discussions which are often necessary for people who have difficulty facing the 

problems of life, credit, marriage difficulties and peer group disagreements, the kinds of life support 

problems which the rest of us take for granted and deal with in an adequate and automatic way. Those 

kinds of problems dealt with by the national parole service, because their caseload is small, have 

received that kind of attention and it means that the national parole service is doing a far better job with 

their caseloads than the probation services do with theirs. It is those kind of problems that may trigger a 

return to crime. 

 

The work of the national parole service, in solving those problems, frequently averts a return to crime by 

the parolee. We give excellent probation service to confirmed criminals, two years and plus, who are 

trying to break what is often a 10 or 20 year criminal habit and we are right to give that kind of attention, 

in the first instance, to the young offender and to people dealt with by the people under the provincial 

probation services. 

 

We would, more appropriately, give the special kind of attention that the national parole service affords 

to 16 and 18 year olds if, indeed, we have to choose to give that kind of service to one or the other. 

 

Unfortunately, for Saskatchewan at least, probation services come under the Provincial Government 

and, unfortunately, probation services are under financed while the national parole service is 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1976 

 

national and is properly financed. It is no answer to say that the NDP is spending as much as or more 

than the Liberals. That is the kind of answer that we always get when Motions of this nature are brought 

before the House. It is the kind of answer, Mr. Speaker, that the Member will rise in his place and say, 

well we are spending more than the Liberals spent. It is the kind of answer, Mr. Speaker, that seems to 

forget that the Liberals were in power a whole generation ago. The Liberals were in power when Mr. 

Speaker’s father was in this House, when three Members of our Liberal caucus had their parents in the 

House. A whole generation is gone. 

 

I heard one of the Members talking about something in 1936 the other day, when my grandfather was in 

the House. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that in response to this kind of suggestion that we don’t hear the 

Minister rising and saying, well we are spending more money on probation services than the Liberals 

spent, because the fact is that you are not spending enough and I think you know it. 

 

The current spending is insufficient in absolute terms and the result is that, to some extent, probation 

services have become a joke and most probation officers would probably agree with that appraisal. 

Young offenders now know that they will get a suspension on their first offence almost as a right. They 

know that being on a suspended sentence involves no responsibility and that they get a free ride on their 

first offence. The pre-sentence reports that are prepared are usually of excellent quality, but because the 

probation officer is so overworked he is not able to follow up on the plans that he laid in the 

pre-sentence report. The hands of the probation officer are economically tied and a natural progression 

develops from minor criminal behavior to probation to further involvement in crime and ultimately to 

jail and then to the penitentiary. The probation service which does not have adequate staff to respond 

quickly to requests for pre-sentence reports finds itself putting most of its effort into preparing 

pre-sentence reports and little of its effort into reforming the young people with which it works. 

Reporting by the clients on probation is typically monthly and frequently seldom on the basis of 

whenever the client can make it into the office. Effective community supervision requires frequent 

contact. Frequent contact builds a rapport between the probation officer and the young offender. It 

provides an opportunity for surveillance in monitoring of behaviour and it allows for regular 

counselling. With adequate time the probation officer can assist in finding employment, advise on the 

myriad of life support questions which we deal with on our own if we don’t have the kinds of problems 

that the young offender particularly faces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it is up to me to talk about the size of the caseload, but I think that each 

probation officer should be in a position to spend something in the neighbourhood of about an hour a 

week dealing with each case, either in a conversational way or dealing with the problems of that case, 

finding them employment, trying to deal with some of the problems that they may have with creditors 

and others. And that may mean that a caseload of about 25 to 30 appears appropriate. My information is 

that the current caseload in probation services is 48 so that even when the Government includes 

supervisors and others who don’t work directly in caseload the ratio is alarmingly high. As the system 

now exists the NDP Government is foisting a hoax on the people of Saskatchewan. The Government 

pretends that we have adequate probation services to offer 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1977 

 

protection as an alternative to jail while, in fact, there is no significant protection because there is no real 

supervision. We are allowing criminals to go free without the benefits to society of seeking to 

rehabilitate them nor the benefit to society of the deterrence and temporary safety that flows from 

incarceration. The only purpose in allowing the first or second case to go unpunished and to become a 

suspended sentence with probation is to afford an opportunity to rehabilitate and under our current 

system we are not using that opportunity to rehabilitate and we are endangering society at the same time. 

The probation order needs teeth. Those probationers who violate their orders should be breached and 

incarcerated. The judge when passing a suspended sentence tells the young offender that if he breaches 

the probation order he can be sentenced for the original crime and he will have committed an additional 

crime for breaching the original order. In practice the judge, the probation officer and the criminal all 

know that nothing much happens if another crime is committed. The criminals know that almost no 

probationers at all are ever breached. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the Government would be afraid to 

indicate the scanty number of breaches that have taken place in this province because that number in 

itself indicates the weakness of the system in its under financed form. When the criminal knows that he 

will never be breached the authority of the probation officer is destroyed. The longest possible sentence 

for breach of probation is six months which in itself is probably inadequate but when no one is ever 

breached even that six months becomes a joke. 

 

Why are there no breaches? It is not because of the inadequacy of the probation officer. Again it goes 

back to the priorities of this Government in failing to provide sufficient funds for the administration of 

justice. To breach someone the probation officer has to take the case back before a judge which is 

almost never done because probation officers are too overworked to know that their cases have 

deteriorated and require the action of a breach. But even when the individual commits some other crime 

the probation officers simply don’t have the time to become involved in the paper work of breaching an 

individual who may be in question. Deterrence is lost and the protection for society is lost in the process. 

If probation is to be truly effective in helping people to develop a responsible attitude and thereby truly 

effective in protecting the public, then probation must hold clients accountable for their actions and 

probation officers must be given the freedom from time constraints to react quickly. This is important to 

the individual in terms of rehabilitating that individual and rehabilitating that individual is important as 

well to society as is reacting quickly important to society in terms of protection to society. 

 

The parolee may have become a danger to society and the probation services must be able to react 

quickly to protect the community. If the parolee now poses an undue risk we cannot give the probation 

officer the freedom to move. We con the public into thinking that they are protected and these 

potentially dangerous criminals are being adequately supervised. The number of individuals who 

commit crimes while on probation or on bail is in itself an indictment of the Government’s financial 

constraint against the probation services. It is not good enough, as the Hon. Attorney General tends to 

do, to simply say that our crime rate isn’t growing as quickly as it used to. It is time that the Government 

faces its responsibilities in the area of safety to the public. Our loss in crime, in financial and personal 

terms is too great. Our level of crime in Saskatchewan in absolute 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1978 

 

terms is unacceptable and the office of the Attorney General and that of the Department of Social 

Services simply has to do better than it has been doing in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving this Resolution. 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I have previously spoken on this matter. I have 

talked about the probation system being understaffed and cumbersome and as having lack of structure 

and again because it is such a serious matter I would like to speak at a greater length and I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South) moved second reading of Bill No. 87 — An Act to provide for 

an Economic Impact Statement to accompany Government Bills when introduced in the 

Legislature and to accompany Statutory Instruments and Regulations when issued, made or 

established. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise to . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I ask the hon. Member and the Members of the House to stand this item to give me 

a further opportunity to look at it. It arrived on the Order Paper yesterday and I haven’t had an 

opportunity to make a judgment on it. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — May I rise, Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order? 

Are you considering the fact that it may be out of order? May I ask then when we can expect a decision 

on this matter? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — On the next Private Members’ day. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, has anybody raised a Point of 

Order on this particular Resolution or have you taken it upon yourself with this particular Bill? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — At this point no one has raised a Point of Order. However, I wish to have an 

opportunity to examine the Bill. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Do you examine all Bills that come in by all Members? I would find it somewhat 

unusual if you did. I can see you asking for leave or to ask the Member to stand it if there has been a 

Point of Order taken. I may have been out of the House when such a point was taken, but I don’t 

recollect any Point of Order at all being taken on this particular Act being submitted by the Member. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I examine all Bills which may possibly be money Bills that are not put forward by 

members of the Executive Council. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1979 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, with respect, is Mr. Speaker not an umpire, 

an arbitrator an analogous to a judge and the Members of the House analogous to the Council who 

brings matters to your attention to be decided. You are not with respect, Mr. Speaker, designed to go on 

an investigation to decide whether you feel that something is improper or not. In the absence of any 

Point of Order being raised, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague from Regina South should 

be permitted to proceed. If no Point of Order has been raised he should be able to proceed. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If the Member will bear with me for a moment, I refer Members to Rule No. 30 

with regard to Money Motions in the Rule Book for the Legislative Assembly: 

 

Any vote, resolution, address or bill introduced in the Assembly for the appropriation of any part of 

the public revenue or of any tax or impost to any purpose whatsoever, or to impose any new or 

additional charges upon the public revenue or upon the people, or to release or compound any sum of 

money due to the Crown, or to grant any property of the Crown, or to authorize any loan or any charge 

upon the credit of the province, shall be recommended to the Assembly by message of His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the Assembly. The consideration and debate thereof 

may not be presently entered upon but shall be adjourned until such further day as the Assembly shall 

think fit to appoint. 

 

There is a very important principle involved with regard to any money Bills and the Members will be 

aware that I have cited that principle before when Bills came forward which I considered to be money 

Bills. Members will also realize that first reading of a Bill has a caveat on it automatically with regard to 

whether it is a money Bill or not. This is the first opportunity I have had to have this Bill before the 

House in second reading and consequently I am not prepared to make a decision at this time. I have 

reserved decision and will bring forward a decision as soon as possible. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to point this out. I agree with everything you say about 

money Bills and I am not being critical in the sense that you haven’t had time to examine the Bill, if 

indeed that is the function you are to perform, but I bring to your attention that there is nothing that I can 

recall in the Bill that in any way would directly suggest that there would be any expense on behalf of the 

Crown. The Bill is quite clearly worded. There is no suggestion that I recollect of any possible 

government expenditure and I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that unless the matter is brought to your 

attention by a Government Member or any other Member that on the face of it the Bill is completely in 

order. It is not your function, with respect, to go behind the apparent face of the Bill to see if there is 

some conceivable way that there could be an expense put upon the Crown. I would submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that perhaps any Bill that comes before this Legislature if scrutinized carefully enough would show 

some expenditure i.e. the very fact that the Bill is being printed is an expenditure in itself. I raise a Point 

of Order now to question just how far Mr. Speaker’s jurisdiction in this regard goes without the matter 

being raised on a Point of Order by any other Member in this House because I 



 

April 12, 1977. 

 

1980 

 

feel very strongly that if private Members’ Bills either from the Opposition or from Government 

backbenchers are going to be scrutinized in detail by the Speaker, it certainly infringes upon the rights of 

the Members of this Legislature to put those Bills into effect to begin with or to propose them. 

 

I think there is a distinction between a Bill that on its face would show some expenditure on behalf of 

the Crown, and Bills such as the one introduced by my colleague the Member for Regina South, which 

as I recall it, shows no possible expenditures at all on the face of it. As I indicated too, Mr. Speaker, any 

Bill, if scrutinized in detail would likely result in some minor expenditure of some kind being involved. 

I merely rise at this time to question your prerogative of rising and declaring a Bill of this nature, 

perhaps, to be out of order, when on the face of it, to me and to other Members here, it is completely in 

order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Member is to be commended for examining the Bill and coming to his 

conclusions of whether or not this is a money Bill. Unfortunately, I have explained to the Member that I 

have not had the opportunity to determine whether this is, in fact, a money Bill or not. I think the 

Member is wrong to suggest that I have suggested in any way that it is a money Bill. 

 

I think in theory I am in a position to examine any or all Bills that come before the House. The fact of 

the matter is, I think, the Speaker usually routinely examines Bills put forward by Members who are not 

of the Executive Council to determine if they are, in fact, money Bills. If a Bill is brought forth by the 

Executive Council and doesn’t have the money recommendation on it, and some Member draws the 

Speaker’s attention to it on a Point of Order, then I would automatically reserve judgment on that 

particular Bill until such time as I had determined in my mind whether it is a money Bill or not. 

 

With regard to the expenditure of funds to print a Bill, that is altogether a different thing than that to 

which I am referring. There is a provision in the legislation under which this Assembly operates to print 

as many Bills as Members wish to bring forward and that doesn’t represent a charge against the 

revenues of the province. 

 

I think I have made the point that I have to acquaint myself with the particular Bill. If Members will go 

back one number on the Order Paper, they will see Bill No. 82 which I held in the same position. 

However, I had more time to examine that Bill and I didn’t raise any question with regard to whether it 

was a money Bill or not. In fact, I determined in my mind that it was not. No Points of Order were 

raised, therefore, it didn’t become an issue. I haven’t had the same opportunity with this Bill. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say one final word. I am not trying to put you in the position 

of being on the defensive or anything else on this particular point. It may very well be that you are right. 

But, I wonder, if in your examination of the Bill and when you rule on this, if you would be good 

enough to refer to us, the Members who sit on your left, the authority that says that you should examine 

all Bills submitted by private Members. I am sure there must be such an authority. I am not aware of it 

in our own rules in the House of Commons rules or in Beauchesne. I would be pleased if Mr. Speaker 

would direct me to that authority so that we will know where we stand on future occasions. 



 

  April 12, 1977. 

 

1981 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I will take that under consideration. I think we have discussed the Points of Order 

with regard to this Bill sufficiently at this time. I will take them under consideration. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I am going to rise then on a Point of Order if I may, a new point. There is an 

aspect here which concerns me. 

 

I want very much to get this Bill before the House. I did it, I drafted it, I drafted it with the point in mind 

that Mr. Speaker now raises. I consulted with the Legislative Counsel in doing it and paid particular 

attention to Mr. Speaker’s ruling last session which was very wide in this respect in drawing up this Bill. 

 

What troubles me is that Mr. Speaker will go away and in the course of the next week come to a 

decision on whether or not the Bill is in order or whether it isn’t, never having given me the opportunity 

to address some argument to Mr. Speaker to persuade you that the Bill is in fact in order and is no 

charge upon the public purse. My question, Mr. Speaker, is when will I have the opportunity prior to 

your making a decision to address some argument to you in an effort to persuade you not to rule it out of 

order in the event that that is your inclination. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is quite clear that the Speaker is in a position to make a judgment on a Bill 

whether it is in order or not. It is sufficient that the Speaker at that time cites precedents to support his 

argument with regard to the orderliness of the particular Bill. There is no opportunity to appeal a 

Speaker’s ruling. The Member is saying that he has very carefully drafted the Bill. That may be so. But 

he should not put me in a position of saying that it is out of order, because I have said nothing of the 

kind. I am neutral on the matter. I think the Member owes me the opportunity to examine the Bill and 

bring forward a ruling. The ruling will have citations attached to it and the Member has to accept that. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH — VOTE 32 

 

HON. W.E. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Chairman on my immediate left is Mr. Mel 

Derrick, Deputy Minister of Health; on my immediate right, Mr. Ken Fyke, Associate Deputy Minister 

of Health; behind me Mr. Carm Feader, the Administrative Officer, Director of Administrative Services; 

and Mr. Lawrence Krahn, Budget Officer. 

 

ITEM 1 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I should like to begin the 

Estimates of the Department of Health with a few very general comments about the state of the 

Department of Health and of health care in the Province of Saskatchewan, and perhaps generate some 

intelligent debate on this very important subject. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — When I say intelligent debate, I do respect the Minister of  

 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1982 

 

Health much more so than the Attorney General as far as responding in an intelligent fashion. 

 

I do want to say, Mr. Minister, that as you know and as I am sure your staff is aware, there has been a 

great deal of controversy in the Province of Saskatchewan over the past year about the standard of health 

care or the quality of health care or whatever word you want to use. I think also . . . if the Attorney 

General would . . . You know, I would like to be very quiet and polite and courteous in this particular 

opening remark. As long as the Attorney General doesn’t stir me up I am sure that I will remain that 

way. 

 

I want to tell the Minister of Health that this is not a problem that is native to Saskatchewan. It is a 

problem that is right across the country; it is Canada-wide and probably world-wide. What is different, 

what is distinctive to Saskatchewan and I think the thing that must be debated here tonight is the 

perspective by which the NDP views the problem and also the method of attacking the problem or to 

finding a solution to that problem. 

 

Let me give you a couple of examples and I think a very obvious one. In 1971-72 the health budget was 

something in the neighbourhood of $151 million, give or take $100,000 or so. In 1977-78, the budget for 

health is $404 million, almost an astronomical climb in a period of five or six years, the kind of a climb 

and the kind of ascendancy in spending that this province or country cannot continue to expect or to 

prevail in. As a result the Federal Government has now placed some severe restrictions and some 

limitations on increasing health expenditures and their contributions thereto. We could go on and give 

you some specifics. 

 

When we talk about $404 million, we are talking over $1 million a day of taxpayers money to maintain 

our health programs in this province. 

 

Hospitalization for example has been the biggest one, going from $78 million to something in the 

neighborhood of $232 million this year; medicare from $30 million to $75 million. I don’t have to tell 

the Minister the percentage of increase is something in the neighborhood of 150 in one to 200 per cent in 

the other. 

 

I want to try to examine, perhaps very briefly, what the NDP has done and summarize in their term of 

office, the five years since they have been the Government and managing the health affairs of the 

province. First of all, of course, they took great pride in the concept of freedom from cost individually 

for an individual citizen of Saskatchewan. They eliminated all user pay, and whether we call them 

utilization fees or deterrent fees, they immediately removed those. I am not sure whether they were right 

or wrong; there has been debate on both sides. I was one of those who supported the concept of 

utilization fees and probably the only Member in the Legislature now that did. I don’t make any 

apologies for that. 

 

The second thing they did, they immediately removed the head tax, first of all from the senior citizens 

and second of all from all people. 

 

The interesting part about those particular directions as far as the financing of health care is concerned is 

that they did not make any distinction in relation to ability to pay, no 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1983 

 

distinction whatsoever. In other words it made no difference whether you were a millionaire or a 

multi-millionaire or whether you were a pauper. Each of you were given free, free as they called it, free 

medicare. Of course you and I know that free medicare is not possible. We are just talking now about 

$404 million. 

 

The second thing they did, of course, is they then began to take medicare as their personal prerogative 

and their means of political survival. They felt that quality of medical care or the standard of medical 

care, if you prefer the word better, my friend the Minister of Finance doesn’t like the word quality, he 

likes to make a distinction, their idea of quality or continuing high standard of medical care was the 

introduction of a vast number of new programs. 

 

I think all of us will recognize in health care in Saskatchewan or in Canada that there are two specific 

areas of health care; one is a basic program, and I suggest to you that all of us will agree that the basic 

components of health care programs in Canada are hospitalization and medicare, those are the basic 

components. The second component of the health care programs in Canada, the supplementary or 

additional programs, the NDP went about introducing a vast number of them very, very quickly. 

Denticare, Hearing Aid Plan, the Drug Program, the SAIL, you could go on and on in the smaller more 

minor items in those programs. They did that without any idea or any cost impact. Had the people of 

Saskatchewan had a long term view as to what those programs might do to the expenditures of dollars in 

Saskatchewan, we might have had some very serious reservations about them. So all of a sudden we had 

two areas; we had the removal of all user pay in Saskatchewan and the second thing, the proliferation of 

all general programs in health care. 

 

We now have to assess what is the result of those two directions that the NDP initiated in 1971-72 when 

they became the Government, coupled with the fact that costs have risen so dramatically. Now all of a 

sudden governments at every level are immediately putting the brakes on, the Federal Government and 

provincial governments, including the Minister of Health in this Government. I respect his attempts and 

I say that in all honesty to try to control them. I don’t agree with the direction he has gone and I am 

going to discuss that. But I do respect the fact that he does realize that Saskatchewan is in a serious 

problem. So is Canada, because we may not only be costing the taxpayers a great deal of money, but we 

may be seriously jeopardizing the very fundamental basic health care programs in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada, and I refer to hospitalization and medicare. That is the real issue that we have to face here 

tonight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What was the Minister’s dilemma? He was faced with what one could honestly 

say is a hell of a problem. What was the dilemma? 

 

First of all how was he going to control expenditures, realizing that the Federal Government is putting 

the squeeze on, which was their responsibility perhaps, just the same as he was putting the squeeze on. 

What was his dilemma? Should he tackle first of all the basic programs, health care or hospitalization 

and medicare? Should he leave alone the supplementary or frill 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1984 

 

programs and continue to spend the dollars on them because they are politically palatable and politically 

popular. That was the decision he faced. What was the answer that he came to? Well, I think we are all 

very well aware because it is only about a year ago, in fact, if I can remember it was April 9, about one 

year and three days ago, that the Minister came out and brought about his statement and his press release 

on how he was going to tackle the problem of controlling health costs in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, I don’t know if I have to remind the Minister but I am going to read it for the benefit of the 

House, because I think it is important to get the background of how the Minister attempted to tackle the 

problem in Saskatchewan. The headline of course is, “Hospital Patient Days To Be Cut Back By Five 

Per Cent”. The minute we take the hospital patient days, we recognize automatically that we are 

attacking the basic services, the basic components of health care, hospitalization and medicare. The 

minute you reduce the patient days you influence the entire hospital and medical program, simply 

because a hospital is funded on a patient day basis. In other words the money that the hospital receives is 

related to the per patient days. And to reduce it by five per cent reduces the opportunity of expenditure 

in every area of hospital services by that five per cent. That is what is important. So the first thing he did 

was cut the hospital per patient days by five per cent. What else did he do? He terminated the financing 

of regional hospital councils after September 30. I am not really familiar with hospital councils. I did 

have the opportunity of meeting a couple of them, but surely at this time of increasing costs and 

expenditures perhaps those regional hospital councils could provide some good economic and good 

basic financial information and advice to the Minister. Instead of that he did away with them. 

 

I am not sure that I disagree with the restriction of all capital grants unless previously approved in 

principle. I think it was an area of stand pat, let’s take a look to see where we are going, let’s try and find 

some area of control. 

 

Curtailment of equipment grants to Crown owned hospitals except the most essential items, Mr. 

Chairman, is something I do disagree with. We come back to talking about the differences of the health 

component, the basic services and the supplementary services. The fact is that the Minister had decided 

to zero in his restraints on the basics and then we start talking about health costs or equipment and 

equipment restrictions. 

 

What I am trying to point out to the Minister is that the decision of the NDP Government in 1975-76 

was a very simple one. They faced a very serious problem which all of us admit. They decided that they 

would tackle that problem one way, for they had a choice. Either they would attack the basic services or 

the supplementary services. They decided to attack the basic services. And those basic services are the 

important component of health. I don’t think anybody would deny that, not even the Minister. That is 

where I question the priorities and that is where the people of Saskatchewan have questioned the 

priorities. 

 

Let’s go on and look. Many of us could argue about where and what is the impact of these cuts. First of 

all there is no question about it, hospital beds were closed, no question about it, staff cuts and reductions 

were made in various hospitals, no doubt equipment was not purchased that should have been purchased 

in the eyes of the professional. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1985 

 

I am not here to suggest that I am a professional expert in the field of health or medicine or hospital care 

nor are any of us in this particular area except perhaps the officials. But I do know that there is one 

group in the Province of Saskatchewan which is orientated strictly to the benefit of providing care for 

the sick, and that is the medical profession. And they also have an association, which is called the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 

They presented a brief to the Government a few weeks ago, that if it is valid, and I have absolutely no 

reason to question its validity, its honesty, its truth or its motivation, if it is valid, it is a screaming 

indictment of the Department of Health, of the NDP Government and the direction of health services in 

the future in Saskatchewan. Let’s make no mistake, it is an indictment no matter how many speeches the 

NDP make, no matter how many speeches the Minister of Finance stands on his feet and makes about 

the expenditure of dollars, and statistic study quotes. I can go on. I have read it and I have some 

experience in the Department of Health, very limited I will admit, but for example I fought the 

recommendations in the areas that they pointed out made eminent sense, eminent sense to me. For 

example they zeroed in immediately on the age old problem of the location of hospital beds in 

Saskatchewan, despite what the Minister of Finance says. 

 

This is a problem that we have been discussing in Saskatchewan since I became involved in government 

in 1964. We did attempt to do something about it, much perhaps to our political demise, if you want to 

call it that. But we did attack the problem. We recognized that the area of population growth and the 

Medical Association pointed this out very clearly, the areas of political growth, or population growth in 

Saskatchewan were in the urban areas. The areas of decreasing population were in the rural areas, the 

small towns, the villages, and the farm lands. They pointed out that the areas where the beds were 

needed and utilized the most were in urban areas and regional hospitals or base hospitals and regional 

hospitals. They gave the example of Saskatoon, where because of the number of beds in Saskatoon, I 

believe they use, and I will look it up and give you the exact figure, about 127 people per thousand 

whereas in Melville it was over 300, because of the bad location of hospital beds. And what did the 

Department of Health and the Minister do about it? They treated Saskatoon the same as any other part of 

the province. They turned around and rushed out and opened a hospital in Elrose, that I believe is seven 

miles or 25 from another hospital; another one in Lampman, eight beds I believe. 

 

Instead of turning around and directing their attention to the geographic location of beds and where 

those beds were needed they completely ignored the problem, completely ignored it and treated 

Saskatoon and Regina just the same, and you and I know, Mr. Minister, when we take the thousand or so 

beds in Saskatoon and realize that if you utilized them for the rural areas that it would be about 500 beds 

for utilization or what is 45 or 50 per cent of the citizens. In Saskatoon it comes to four beds per 

thousand, where in other parts the average is about 7.7 or 7.2. 

 

So if you take the massive population in those two urban centres, what is it eight or nine in rural 

Saskatchewan and where people are using those hospitals for only minimum needs and requirements 

because believe me I know that the people in constituencies that have rural hospitals do use them, do 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1986 

 

appreciate them and they are important. But when they are sick with any kind of a real problem they are 

in the cities of Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw or Swift Current. You know it and I know 

it, and somewhere along the line your Government, you Mr. Minister, should have had the courage to 

attack that problem. 

 

I could go on and talk about the other things that they point out, for example when they start talking 

about the quality or the standard of health care. They point out that budget restrictions appear to have led 

to province-wide reduction in hospital staff, and this isn’t the Liberal Opposition or the Conservative 

Opposition talking, this is the Saskatchewan Medical Association which says: 

 

(a) In an increasing number of rural hospitals only one registered nurse is on duty at night. 

(b) In urban hospitals where whole wards are left with only one registered nurse at night. 

(c) The morale of registered nurses across the province is dropping due to the frustration with 

increased work load. 

(d) Special duty nurses are being assigned to care for in-patients who previously were handled by the 

regular nursing staff 

(e) Well trained orderlies are in short supply. 

(f) Out-patient diagnostic procedures are being delayed; interns are asked to perform an increasing 

number of orderly duties at night and on weekends. 

The staffing formula applied to Saskatchewan Hospitalization Services Plan in its funding of hospitals 

is to be ridged to provide for staff adjustments during the peaks and valleys of patient care. 

 

I could go on and on. The conclusion, the initial statement is what is really frightening, and what they 

start off to say. 

 

The Saskatchewan Medical Association wished to express its concern about the fact that the standard of 

health care in this province is and has been falling behind North American standards. This situation is 

being aggravated by the budget restrictions imposed by the Provincial Government during 1976, which 

included, and I could go on and enumerate them, which I did already at the beginning. They 

recommended one or two things, a co-ordinated approach between the Government and between the 

Medical Association and the public. The Minister has been very quick to accept the discussion between 

the Medical Association and the Government, but he has ignored the third person, the consumer of 

health services in Saskatchewan which is the public. And on two occasions I have asked the Minister if 

it would not be worthwhile at this time to have a public inquiry into the standard of health care in 

Saskatchewan, and its total responsibilities, the way it is financed, determination of priorities, because 

that is the problem. The priorities in this Government are determined for health care on a political basis, 

or you would not be tampering with the basic health service, hospitalization, and medicare that we aren’t 

tampering with and that is a fact, and if it wasn’t you wouldn’t be tampering with it. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I have no objection and I don’t think anyone in Saskatchewan, or 

anyone in Canada has to the attempts of you as Minister in your Government to control and restrain 

health costs. What we do object to, which I do 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1987 

 

point out, is the fact that I think your direction in the restraint program is degenerating the standard of 

health care in Saskatchewan because it is attacking the basic services rather than the supplementary 

services. I would like to have the Minister’s comments. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, one of the problems we have, of course, is that the Member of the 

Opposition deals with the thing in generalities just the way the SMA brief dealt in generalities. They 

never get down to any specifics. They didn’t provide any basis for a valid comparison to prove their 

allegations at all, and neither did the Member opposite. Perhaps, Mr. Chairman, if I could give a brief 

statement with respect to the situation it would solve all of the problems and there wouldn’t be any more 

questions from the Opposition. 

 

The Health budget, of course, has provided for major increases in the funding of health programs, and 

the Member admitted that. It provided for the reasonable sustenance of existing provincial programs and 

for the development and expansion of a number of new services which were needed and wanted by the 

people of this province. The 1977-78 Health budget as he mentioned provided for $403,700,000 in terms 

of total expenditures, an increase of some $65.8 million over the previous year, approximately 20 per 

cent. Funds provided for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan will rise by 20.3 per cent to $232.4 

million. Included in this total is $615,000 for the purchase and installation at the University Hospital of a 

computerized Axial topography scanner, a sophisticated piece of x-ray equipment, and we do not 

apologize for delaying it because the obsolescence factor in that particular type of equipment is 

extremely high. It was reasonable to wait in order to make a more intelligent decision a bit later on. That 

scanner will help to maintain the University Hospital as a major Canadian teaching hospital and 

treatment centre. Mr. Chairman, $23.5 million will be provided for hospital construction and equipment. 

I want the Hon. Members to note that the University Hospital construction project will cost about $41 

million and will be completed in 1978. $3.1 million has been budgeted for the beginning of the 

regeneration of the Regina hospitals. Regeneration is expected to total almost $66 million over the ten 

year construction period. In spite of the continually increasing amount of funds provided by this 

Government to the hospital sector, that is something the Member touched on, we continue to hear 

complaints by health interest groups who believe that the hospital sector needs many millions of 

additional dollars to enrich its programs. 

 

The Saskatchewan Medical Association alleges that Saskatchewan’s standard of health care is falling 

behind North American standards. Their solution to this totally unsubstantiated allegation is to spend 

extra dollars, almost exclusively, on institutional care. In our view we have provided generously for 

hospital services in the province. The portion of the health budget devoted to our hospital sector will 

approach 58 per cent in 1977-78 and almost 63 per cent if capital grants are taken into account. 

Fifty-eight per cent represents a significant increase in proportion to the total health budget devoted to 

the hospital sector. 

 

In 1971-72, and you were talking back about those years, 53.2 per cent of the provincial Health budget 

was spent on 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1988 

 

hospital care. It is now up to 58 per cent. When you look at the total figures that is an immense sum of 

money. If you want to compare these figures, compare them with oil rich Alberta. According to the 

latest figures released by Statistics Canada, the percentage of general hospital cost to total health cost for 

Alberta in 1971-72 was 45.3 per cent, that is compared with our 53.2 per cent and has fallen to 44.6 per 

cent in 1974-75 where ours has risen to 58 per cent. The pressures to provide ever increasing funds for 

hospital services is great. It is the hope of this Government that a healthier lifestyle will eventually 

reduce this pressure as well as reduce the demand on traditional hospital and medical services in the 

province. 

 

Despite what the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) says in defending alcohol and tobacco, I 

argue that in terms of lifestyles, in terms of changing our cost relation to health, we need reduced 

consumption of those commodities. We intend to make a serious attempt to reduce illness by promoting 

a greater awareness of the unfortunate effects of our unhealthy habits in daily living. We would like to 

keep the Member for Thunder Creek around for awhile to entertain us. We would like to convince him 

that he should stop smoking cigars so he won’t end up as a cancer or an emphysema patient in the 

hospital. 

 

The 1977-78 Health budget is designed to sustain and enrich the Saskatchewan health programs. 

Additional funds are being provided to the SAIL program. Our Government realizes that this program is 

one of the more important new health programs of direct benefit to handicapped persons. We hear a 

great deal of criticism about SAIL. Certainly you hear where errors were made and they do occur, but I 

would like to point out to the Members of this Assembly that from August 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976, 

4,722 pieces of equipment were loaned on a long and short term basis to handicapped persons and 4,042 

persons were beneficiaries of that plan, and most of them were satisfied with the materials supplied. I 

am well aware that the SAIL program is experiencing some difficulties; we expected that to some 

degree, but when the program started the expectations of Saskatchewan citizens and health professionals 

were raised suddenly to a degree which had not been anticipated. The demands for equipment and 

service greatly exceeded the known demands which had existed in Saskatchewan prior to the start of the 

program. As a consequence a situation developed where demand exceeded the supply for certain pieces 

of equipment. However, we have undertaken an exhaustive review of the supply, procurement and 

administrative procedures and the review will be completed shortly. When it is completed we can be 

reasonably assured that the stock will be adequate to provide improved service. 

 

The Health budget for 1977-78 fiscal year will provide $6.7 million to the Saskatchewan Dental Plan. 

Coverage will be continued to all children born from 1967-71 and extended to children born in 1972. 

And that, Mr. Chairman, is a preventive measure. Perhaps the Members opposite don’t realize that, but 

in terms of improving the general dental health of a generation, you improve the general health of those 

people in future years. The Prescription Drug Plan through such measures as interchangeability, product 

substitution, effective price competition and large quantity discounts has achieved a reduction of the cost 

of drug materials to where those drug materials are the lowest in Canada, a reduction in the range of up 

to $4 million per year. 

 

These cost savings are of a direct benefit to the people of this province, particularly the chronically ill 

and the elderly. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1989 

 

Although the elderly constitute approximately 11 per cent of the population of this Province, 30 per cent 

of the Drug Plan expenditure for drugs go to people 65 years of age and over. 

 

Prior to the plan we realized that a disproportionate amount of money was being spent by a segment of 

our people for needed prescriptions. Statistics from the Drug Plan confirm this. Fifty per cent of the 

prescriptions paid by the plan went to 8 per cent of the population. It is clear evidence that those people 

in Saskatchewan needing assistance in this area are getting it. 

 

In 1977-78 the Health budget is designed to continue and enrich the benefits of that plan and it is done 

logically. It is done through a committee which looks at the therapeutic value of drugs and is not afraid 

to remove drugs when there is a need to be replaced by better drugs. 

 

In 1977-78, 200 staff of the Palliser and Parkland hospitals do not appear in the printed Estimates. Hon. 

Members opposite refer to this as a “gimmick”. Well, they took the Wascana Hospital out in 1968; was 

that a gimmick? There were 268 employees there at that time. They took the Alcoholism Commission 

out of the printed Estimates in terms of 17 employees at that time. Was that a gimmick? 

 

Let me assure the Hon. Members that no tricks are involved. The Government recognizes the crucial 

role of the community in the provincial health care system. The shifting of responsibility for the 

administration of these hospitals entirely to community boards, is a further step towards community 

participating in the health care field. 

 

I should like to make a few remarks specifically directed to some of the comments made by the Hon. 

Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald). He talked about what he termed frill programs. 

 

The Hearing Aid Program helped over 4,800 people in this province last year in terms of proper 

audiological tests and fitting of proper hearing aids. All those people who got that assistance will not be 

completely satisfied, that is admitted, but the costs were lowered appreciably over going to the private 

market in terms of buying those products and in addition, we know that those people got a proper test in 

terms of being fitted for hearing aids and many of them, some 2,500 of them, didn’t have to have 

hearing aids and were told so. 

 

I mentioned the SAIL Program briefly. The Saskatchewan Drug Plan I have mentioned briefly. They 

talked about escalating costs. I heard comments about costs rising about 20 per cent. The budgeted 

estimate came out very closely, very closely, and the actual rise in cost was around the six per cent level. 

 

We heard a lot of criticism about the Dental Program. I heard Members opposite get up and talk about 

treatment of each child, at a cost of $158. Obviously those figures were rather meaningless because as 

you bring more and more children into the program, in terms of the total cost of setting up that program, 

the costs diminish. And if you will look at the reports you will find that the cost is down to $107 and 

will diminish a great deal more next year and eventually will be down to a much lower level than those 

figures. 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1990 

 

The Member mentioned cost-sharing. Obviously it has to be of concern to this province. We now get 

$20 per capita on a grant basis, plus a transfer of tax points — 13.5 tax points. Now in prosperous times 

like 1974, 1975 and 1976 we may well be able to carry the cost of health in this province. If we get poor 

crop production because of dry weather or drought conditions and get declining market prices for grain, 

this has a major impact on this province, and everybody knows that. The total net earnings of farmers in 

1975 was about $1,470 million. It dropped roughly to the $1 billion figure in 1976 and it will likely be 

down again in 1977. It is reasonable to expect that the net earnings of farmers because of rising input 

costs and declining market prices and perhaps lesser production this year, could bring the net returns to 

farms to half of what it was two years ago. That can’t help but have a major impact on the economy of 

this province. 

 

When you talk about transfer points and you look at the implications of that you can’t help but be 

concerned. 

 

Therefore, we had to take some action. The Member is critical of the fact that we took steps to reduce 

bed utilization, in effect, a five per cent reduction. We still have 1,823 patient days per 1,000. The 

average for Canada is in the 1,400 range. We are still 37 per cent above the average for Canada. Every 

other province in Canada took similar steps; every other province in Canada went to the hospital sector 

which is the major concern, because it is where the major costs occur. The total rise in hospital costs last 

year exceeded the cost of all the frill programs, as the Opposition Members see fit to call them. 

 

The Hon. Member talked about regional councils. We saw regional councils and their budgets rising 

very rapidly. He seems to think the services are no longer available. They are. They are available 

through regional hospitals at half the cost. 

 

I come back again to the SMA brief. I must repeat again that they talked in generalities. Obviously you 

are not going to satisfy everyone at all times. I have lots of letters here indicating satisfaction with our 

programs. 

 

I should like to point out one or two of them, perhaps just to illustrate. I didn’t solicit these; these are 

just letters that came into the office. Here is a reply going out today, and I will quote from it. 

 

First let me congratulate; you on the excellent health care program we enjoy in this province. I know a 

few on this continent and several in Europe and there can be no doubt that this province has one of the 

finest in the world. 

 

That is a person who lived in Europe for a number of years under various plans and moved to this 

continent and that is his comment. 

 

Well, let’s talk about the United States. Here is a letter in the Leader-Post, March 28th, by Mr. Claire 

Black and he says: 

 

We are from the States and as outsiders we can compare the ‘below the border’ health plans with the 

one Saskatchewan has. The Government of Saskatchewan has given its people one of the greatest 

health plans in the world. I 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1991 

 

would also praise Saskatchewan for the combination of car licence and insurance. Compared to 

Pennsylvania and Georgia where I have lived, it is extremely reasonable. 

 

Here is one from a medical doctor in the United States and he concludes his letter by saying: 

 

. . . on having seen the haphazard medical care in this free enterprise area of the United States I am 

learning how excellent our Saskatchewan system is. 

 

He worked here for a number of years before he went to the United States. 

 

There are a number more that I could quote, but I want the Members to realize that in terms of our 

treatment of hospitals, perhaps we could look at some of the things that are happening outside of our 

jurisdiction. Perhaps, they think we should be following the practices that are occurring in the United 

States. Here is an ad: 

 

Sunrise Hospital Medical Centre. Win a once-in-lifetime cruise simply by entering Sunrise Hospital on 

any Friday or Saturday. Recuperative Mediterranean cruise for two. 

 

That is all that there is to it; just schedule your admittance into Sunrise Hospital for any Friday or 

Saturday and you will be eligible to win a free recuperative vacation for two — nothing to do, no 

obligations. 

 

On weekends Sunrise Hospital has an abundance of unoccupied beds, yet our facilities and staff must 

operate around the clock on a seven day schedule and that costs money. To reduce costs we must even 

out this workload, make greater use of our facilities on the weekends by shifting week day admissions to 

Friday and Saturday so that we can actually reduce per patient expenses. This will help hold down rates. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we see bills coming out of the United States today for five and six days of hospital plus 

medical bills in the range of $7,000 to $12,000. I can quote you some of them. That is the kind of thing 

that the Members across don’t realize or don’t seem to put any credence in. They seem to forget that we 

have a health care plan that in the main works extremely well. We don’t say that it works perfectly. We 

don’t say that everything about it is correct; we don’t say that it can’t be improved. But when you talk 

about frill programs, we are saying that those programs are getting at some of the root problems. And we 

are not the only province that is attempting to get some control on costs in the hospital sectors. Every 

province is doing that. Some of them take totally different approaches. 

 

I note the Member said, you know we removed the utilization fee, or whatever you want to call it, and 

we removed the health care premiums. We don’t charge a youngster $1 a day to go to school and health 

facilities should be available on the same basis. We could use the approach that Ontario is using. They 

charge $384 per family. Wouldn’t that create lots of problems for families in Saskatchewan? Obviously 

it would. 

 

Now this is not an argument about attempting to get reasoned control over those costs. I agree with the 

Member for Indian Head that we have some problems here. It is obvious that we have some problems, 

but it is silly just to go around saying 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1992 

 

that our quality of health care is going down. That is a generalization. It is like saying that the quality of 

the Opposition has gone down. I don’t know how you would ever prove it. I don’t know how it could go 

any lower than it has been for the last six years. 

 

However, I don’t want to stir up any difficulties; I want to get these Estimates through, so I will sit down 

and let’s go on. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — You know the Minister reminds me of the person who has a problem, someone 

who breaks a leg and what does he do? He wraps it up in a dollar; he dresses it up in a statistic and says, 

please go away. 

 

Nobody is criticizing you for cutting hospital cuts if you did it in the right place. That is what I told you, 

if you made some cutbacks in rural Saskatchewan instead of the city of Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

The second thing that the Minister has really done is just exactly . . . look Paul you wrote that letter and 

you could even write it properly because the Minister read it properly. You have had your share of the 

Estimates tonight so now be quiet. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what I want to say is that the Minister has really just emphasized everything I said. He 

immediately brings out statistics about the increase in the dollar and year after year, after year, after 

year, that is exactly what has happened in medicare and hospitalization. The taxpayers have put more 

and more and more dollars into health care. Then you enumerate how proud you are of the additional 

expenditures in your supplementary programs. What I am trying to say, Mr. Minister, is that it is time 

that you and the department got down to some real hard facts and some real hard decisions and made a 

decision as to what you are going to do and did a projection. I think that the Minister and the 

Department of Health have a pretty big responsibility. 

 

What is going to happen in 1985? I read a report from The Economic Review of Canada that said that in 

the year 2000 there will be no money for anything else in Canada but health and education, and this was 

before galloping inflation. There wouldn’t be a dollar for anything else! Surely you as a member of the 

Department of Health and as the Minister responsible for the Department of Health have the 

responsibility to tell us and to do some studies and projections and make some of those hard decisions. 

 

We are the only province, I think, that I know of and I am not familiar with them all, that, for example, 

hasn’t made a very basic decision in hospitals, in sparsely populated areas, about size, distance, qualities 

and so forth, but you refuse to do it. Then you point out the idea that as long as you have a program, that 

is real good. Let us not kid ourselves, the implementation of a program does not of itself read excellence 

and there is more than one alternative to implementing a program. You only have to look at Pharmacare 

in Saskatchewan and Pharmacare in Manitoba, look at the number of people who are used to run that 

program in Manitoba and the number of people who are used to run it in Saskatchewan. How many of 

the dollars of public expenditure that are used in Pharmacare are going to pay civil servant salaries? 

How effective is that program? Is that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1993 

 

the best kind of program to serve the needs of the people of Saskatchewan? Is that the most efficient? Is 

it one of those that adheres to the principle of the NDP? It has to be universal; it has to cover everybody; 

it is going to be equal for all but people aren’t equal financially, economically or whatever it is. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just don’t accept that. You say that the brief from the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

is general. I don’t know how general you can get. You talk about electro light machines. They talk about 

the scanner that they have been needing for years; they talk about laboratory equipment in hospitals that 

is outmoded and so forth. 

 

Could the Minister tell me, for example, how many requests for equipment from the hospitals in 

Saskatchewan of over $500 did the Department of Health refuse? And, secondly, could the Minister tell 

me how many total patient days were involved in the five per cent cut last April? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I will have this information for you shortly. You must realize of course, that every 

hospital can buy up to $5,000 of equipment without getting authorization from SHSP or the 

Government. We pay for that through the depreciation process. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What about over $5,000? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, they have to get permission if they go above that figure. We will get that 

information for you. 

 

I should like to point out one thing to the Member. He talked about saving money in the small rural 

hospitals and that is largely a figment of the imagination. Seventy per cent of the costs are in the cities. 

The three hospitals in Saskatoon, last year, cost more than the 11 rural hospitals put together, and a good 

bit more. Therefore, if you are going to have any control in terms of the rising costs, you must have it in 

the larger hospitals. You simply must! 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the Minister could, 

perhaps, be pardoned for some of the paranoia that he has been espousing tonight. He is very good at 

rattling off statistics with very little substantiation of source. I am afraid that the Minister is falling into a 

trap that this whole health program has fallen into, and that is strictly taking a look at a balance sheet. A 

balance sheet in this particular subject simply doesn’t tell the story. The Minister can say that when we 

refer to the quality of our health programs that we are generalizing; of course we are. I don’t think there 

is one person in this province who would generalize and tell you that the quality of our health programs 

haven’t deteriorated year by year and week by week and day by day. Sure you can point to additional 

programs, but let’s get back to the quality. Is there anybody in this Legislature who will stand up and say 

that our hospitals are better run than they were five years ago or ten years ago or twenty years ago? Is 

there anybody in this Legislature who will stand up and say the quality of our doctors is better today 

than it was five years ago, ten years ago or twenty years ago and if you do, you don’t believe it because 

you know better. And this is what it is all about and it doesn’t show up in a balance sheet. 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1994 

 

Mr. Minister you have a very distasteful job because I really don’t think deep down you really believe 

what you are saying. You are exposing what you have to say for your party. I happen to believe that you 

would like to bring health costs under control. I happen to believe that you probably would like to 

provide the kind of quality that we would all like to see. Unfortunately, you are ham-strung by that party 

of yours across the way which is forcing you to proceed in a very alien direction and I am giving you the 

benefit of the doubt in suggesting that deep down you really don’t agree with it. 

 

You foster a system which promotes abuse. I’ve got an abuse right in my family. I’ve got an Aunt who 

is about 89 years old, who devotes her entire week to going from one doctor to another in a 

hypochondriac fashion and she is delighted when one of them will finally prescribe her a sugar pill or 

give her a neck brace or give her some other silly thing and she bothers them incessantly and she keeps 

going until she finds them. How many other people are there like this? Mr. Minister, I suggest to you 

that this system cannot operate successfully under the method which you are using right now. I suggest 

to you today or tonight that it is ridiculous to have a Drug Plan that treats everyone alike whether he or 

she is earning $4,000 a year or $40,000 a year. Frankly, one of the few times I have had occasion to use 

your program, I went down to get the prescription and I was embarrassed to accept it at the prescription 

fee of $2.25 or whatever the case may be. Frankly, I was embarrassed because I thought I was taking 

somebody else to the cleaners in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I suggest to you very respectfully tonight that your system of universal medicare has failed 

and is continuing to fail. And I wish to goodness that there was a clear-cut, concise answer to it. Mr. 

Minister, you know full well that we cannot go on in perpetuity in this sort of a process; somewhere 

along the line those who use the system are going to have to pay more than those who do not use the 

system. There are a variety of forms that this can take and I honestly don’t know what the best procedure 

is. You are better at numbers than I am; you tell us. And I think you know deep down that medicare has 

declined. Take a look around; you don’t have to be an expert; just use the system occasionally and think 

back to those days when there was some sense. Granted there was a cost, but back in those days when 

you needed something done in a hospital you could get into that hospital and you could get it done. Back 

in those days when you wanted to see a doctor you could get to a doctor in some reasonable length of 

time without some absurd, ridiculous waiting period and without spending six hours in that office or 

taking up the time of the emergency ward which in this province is virtually being turned into 

out-patient centres. 

 

I am curious to ask the Minister if he really believes that we can go on on this universal concept as we 

are now doing, and to some extent what we are now doing in education without those two areas 

ultimately consuming our entire provincial output? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, I would not agree with the Member that universality is bad; it must be 

universal otherwise you do not get reasonable care for people. That has happened in the United States. 

It’s crystal clear. When we get people who go to the United States for holidays and come back and 

happened to be ill for over a five or six day period, they end up with bills in excess of $12,000. It 

doesn’t work. It might be all right for you, sir; 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1995 

 

you might be able to get into hospital because you could afford the $12,000, but most people can’t. I 

don’t know whether you have been in the hospital because you’ve suffered from silver dioxide 

poisoning from the silver spoon in your mouth, but the fact remains that universality is essential and 

necessary. I agree with you that there must be a good sense of social responsibility in the individual and 

that the system must not be abused, but I often find people who tell me that the system should not be 

abused are the people who abuse the system. 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Chairman, I should answer a question; I don’t know who asked it, the Member for 

Thunder Creek or the Member for Indian Head. In 1975 approved patient days were 1,840,695 days. In 

1976 approved patient days were 1,774,734, a decline of 65,691 days. But I want to point out that the 

actual number of days used in 1976 was below the approved daily census by 37,000 in round figures. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, oh, my goodness, you can walk up and see a vacant hospital 

bed in any one of these places. Of course, there are lots of hospital beds vacant because the only way 

you can get in there is through a doctor, because you have to have a certain degree of illness. There are 

beds taken in that hospital and you can’t put a person in there. You can’t get an elective surgery; that’s 

another thing; it depends on what you have to go in for. So don’t give us any of that malarkey about the 

number of approved days being below the usage or the usage was below the approved days because you 

know why and I know why and so does everybody else. Many times you are forced to be an out-patient. 

In elective surgery you are put on a long list. Some of them have had to wait six or eight months, 

causing psychological problems as a result of being very much afraid. If you gave them the opportunity 

to go in there tomorrow you would need 10,000 new hospitals and you know it. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — I would just like to say a few words on Item 1. It 

has been interesting sitting here listening to the Minister talk about the grandeur and the greatness of the 

hospital system here in Saskatchewan. One would think that everything is hunky dory and that there are 

no problems whatsoever. But to be fair I can see that the Minister has indicated that there are some 

problems. But I think the Minister is understating the case. I think the medicare system, the health care 

system in Saskatchewan regrettably is in a mess. I say it is in a mess because doctors tell me it is a mess. 

Patients tell me it is in a mess. People on waiting lists tell me it is in a mess. I don’t think that there has 

been anybody except perhaps the Member for Wascana who has been around this province more in the 

past 12 months than I have, talking to people about the political issues of the day and believe me, Mr. 

Minister, if you think the people of Saskatchewan are feeling that your hospital system, your medicare 

system, your health care system is in good shape, you are very sadly mistaken indeed. The people that 

are around Saskatchewan now are realizing full well that the party that introduced medicare into this 

province has treated medicare in such a manner that they are not fulfilling the obligations that they have 

to the people of Saskatchewan. And I can tell you why, I can give you two reasons why. The first reason 

is the misguided priorities of this Government and the second reason is the politicization of medicare 

and health care by the NDP. Perhaps the second reason is the most important. 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1996 

 

You are very proud of the fact that you introduced medicare to Canada and deservedly so. I give you full 

credit for that. But you now feel that every time you get into a political mess, you now feel that every 

time public opinion seems to be going against you that all you have to do is introduce another health 

care program, notwithstanding the cost, notwithstanding the service that it provides, notwithstanding 

that it doesn’t help that many people. Take your Drug Program, your Dental Care Program, your 

Hearing Aid Program, your SAIL Program, nobody is suggesting that any of those programs weren’t 

well meant and that you tried to help the people in need. But look at the Estimates for your Denticare 

Program. You see something like 336 people, 376 people required to deliver the health service of that 

program. It is absolutely mind-boggling. The dentists at the time you introduced that program to the 

Legislature told you that they could run the program in a manner that would be efficient, effective and at 

half the cost. Now you say today that the cost will become lesser and lesser as more people become 

involved in it. Fine, of course it will; but why not let the dentist do it from the start, the dentists who are 

prepared to do it at a guaranteed fee much less than the cost that the people of Saskatchewan are now 

incurring. 

 

Your Government, and I am not suggesting you personally, but your Government is playing with the 

health care of Saskatchewan in a political way and I say that is improper. I say that is unfair and it is a 

bad way for any politician to act. It is to use sick people to get votes and that is what you are trying to 

do. I talked earlier about your priorities and I say to you priorities are misguided. You are so 

preoccupied with taking over potash mines, getting involved in the oil industry, getting involved in the 

mining industry, that you can’t start doing the basics which you were elected to do, one of which was to 

deliver proper health care to the people of Saskatchewan. Your Budget this year, your Estimates this 

year, are an admission that in the past year you did not perform a proper service. They are an admission 

that last year our health care system was in a mess. I don’t think what you are doing now is going to 

improve the situation in any way whatsoever. 

 

You referred earlier with great pride to the additional equipment bought in Saskatoon, the axial 

topography scanner. I think the Minister will admit that you were pressured into buying that piece of 

machinery. The medical people in Saskatoon were outraged that they didn’t have it and they put so 

much heat on you that you had to buy it to avoid the embarrassment of being called by those people as 

incompetent as you are. 

 

Let me talk about another basic health care system that you have completely ignored and that is the 

medical school at the University of Saskatchewan. I asked the Premier the other day about an 

investigation that was being conducted in that medical school and the Premier sort of danced around a 

bit and he said, well there may have been and there may not have been. On further inquiries, I find that 

indeed there was an investigation, an investigation I believe, headed by a Mr. Adams, I am not sure 

whether he is in your department or in the Department of Continuing Education. The reason for that 

investigation was that the morale was so low at the medical school in Saskatchewan that there was a 

great danger that you were going to lose most of the staff at that medical school. I say if you want to 

start talking about preventive medicine, Mr. Minister, that is one place to start — the medical school at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1997 

 

You refer to our criticisms of your programs as being frills and you say they are not frills to the people 

that use those programs. I suggest to you that there are some priorities that you should use in medical 

care in the delivery of medical care to the people of Saskatchewan. One of the priorities is the medical 

school at the University of Saskatchewan; another priority is proper health care at the hospital level; 

another priority is educated doctors, hopefully from Saskatchewan, to deliver that health care to the 

people of Saskatchewan. When you can come into this House and say that you have met those priorities 

and that the people of Saskatchewan can be satisfied because you have met those priorities, at that time 

you will have our full support to go into things like Denticare and Pharmacare and SAIL, but not until 

that time. 

 

You talk about SAIL in your remarks earlier and say, oh sure, we can’t get a few of the prosthetic 

devices that we need. I find it almost inconceivable that you can’t get crutches. At one time the SAIL 

Program in Regina could not supply crutches. The reason I know about that is that Mr. Steuart, the 

former Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake had an operation, got out of the hospital and couldn’t be 

fitted with crutches. Now what could be more basic in a health program such as SAIL than the providing 

of a simple device like that, but he couldn’t get them. I shudder to think about more sophisticated 

devices such as wheel chairs and other prosthetic devices the program was set up to service, if you can’t 

get the basics. So, Mr. Minister, I, in no way speak of you personally in a disparaging way, but I do 

speak of the Government that you speak for in a very disparaging way because I say you have failed 

miserably to come up with meaningful programs that are beneficial and will help the people of 

Saskatchewan in the health care field. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, Opposition Members say we are not giving the hospitals enough 

money. How can they explain that tonight the Regina Leader-Post reports that every hospital in this city 

had a surplus in the year 1976? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Member talks about the Dental Plan; he talks about private practitioners should 

do it. Well, let’s look across Canada. Newfoundland has 110,000 eligible persons in terms of a dental 

plan for children. It uses private practitioners and fee for service. Utilization is 36 per cent. Prince 

Edward Island, a Liberal Government incidentally, has government employed teams of dentists, 

hygienist assistants and government clinics on a salary basis and they cover 85 per cent of the children 

that are eligible. Manitoba has a plan, a dental nurse program with clinics in elementary schools. They 

cover 82 per cent of the eligible children. We covered 86.1 per cent of the eligible children in our plan 

last year. Go to Quebec, which has 840,000 eligible children and uses private practitioners, fee for 

service and they cover 35 per cent. Go to Nova Scotia; they have 134,500 eligible children, private 

practitioners, fee for service and they cover 28 per cent. The fact of the matter is the system that you 

propose does not work; it doesn’t get the service to the people involved. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Minister, as I pointed out earlier, he is great at quoting figures but sometimes 

he is not so great as to what is 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

1998 

 

behind those figures. What would the cost be now, if you can tell me, if we had the private dentists 

operate the program as they wanted to do, as they submitted information to you at that time? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The fact of the matter is that very large numbers of those children wouldn’t get any 

service at all because there aren’t dentists in a lot of those areas. You are comparing apples and oranges. 

 

MR. MALONE: — You get up and say they wouldn’t have the service. How do you know they 

wouldn’t have the service? How can you stand up in this House and say they wouldn’t have the service? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They didn’t have it before, that’s obvious. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Obviously they didn’t have the service because there was no plan. How can you get 

up in the House now and say that if the private dentists had operated the plan as they wanted to operate 

the plan, they wouldn’t have had the same service? You don’t know. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The statistics in other provinces clearly indicate they wouldn’t have it — 35 and 28 

per cent coverage. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I don’t care what happened in other provinces. I don’t care what happens in the 

United States. What we are talking about is what is happening in Saskatchewan. You say that they 

wouldn’t have had the services because they didn’t have them in other provinces. I don’t know whether 

that is correct or not. I am not prepared to accept those figures. You get up and speak with pride about 

the program with 376 people running it. I don’t know how many are professional, I suspect a very small 

percentage. But when you are asked a simple question as to what the cost would be if it was run by 

professionals on a fee for service basis and a guaranteed maximum fee, you get up and say I can’t give 

you the figure, but it wouldn’t have worked anyway. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I can’t give you the figure because there is no actual experience to prove it and you 

couldn’t give the figure either. 

 

MR. MALONE: — The dentists made a proposal to you, did they not, about a year or two ago as to 

how much the plan would cost if they operated it. I assume you still have that proposal. The Minister of 

Finance (Mr. Smishek) just has to get in. I can’t resist saying this, the Minister of Finance can’t resist 

getting into health care. When he was Minister of Health he did such a job on it that people started 

calling him the Minister of Disease, so then he was moved over and became Minister of Finance. 

 

In any event, Mr. Minister, why can’t you give me those figures? I suggest to you that you were given a 

brief by the dentists. I suggest to you that you have the figures in front of you as to how many children 

are involved and now you get up and say you can’t tell me. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

1999 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We have statistics on page 24 of the report if you want to take all the services 

which run from initial oral examination, down through dental polishing, amalgam, topical fluorides, 

nutritional counsel and all the rest of it. And you could determine what the fees are on it and multiply it 

out and I suppose you will get the figure. The point that I am trying to make is that in every province 

where they use private practitioners and fee for service, they are covering fewer than one-third of the 

children that are eligible. In every province and I am not talking politically, I am talking about a Liberal 

province as well, Prince Edward Island is included, where they have government employed teams, 85 

per cent of the children get the services. I am simply suggesting that that should tell you something. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I won’t belabor the point. We will get to it when the Dental Care item comes up. 

You say that in Saskatchewan we have this coverage and I accept that. The point is how many of those 

children that were examined need treatment? And under a private program in these other provinces I 

suggest to you without knowing but just hearing the statistics you have read out, that likely the child was 

not given treatment unless somebody discovered that the child needed treatment. Now I am not 

suggesting for a moment that there wasn’t. You can’t get up now and say, well we did a great job 

because we have examined all children, because you don’t know in other provinces whether they 

examined them or not, or whether there is an education program in effect. So my point is, don’t get up 

and tell me what happened in other programs or other provinces and then say our program is better when 

you don’t know what happened in those other provinces. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — This comes out of the Leader-Post, March 21, 1977. It is an item from Quebec 

where it talks about dental care for children under eight years of age and they use private practitioners 

and fee for service and this under the Dental Plan, a dentist would receive $105.50 for a series of four 

visits by the child that included a complete examination, x-rays, tooth cleaning and filling of cavities, 

and that is in the range of what it is costing us in terms of treatment under the Dental Plan. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Let me just ask you one other question before I sit down, away from Dental Care 

and that is Pharmacare. Has your department done any comparative study between the Saskatchewan 

program, which I believe takes something like 77 people to administer and the Manitoba program, 

which was instituted by an NDP Government, which I believe takes something like 22 people to 

administer? My figures may be slightly out in Manitoba, but I believe in Saskatchewan it is more than 

three times the people that are required to administer it. Have you done a comparative study and have 

you been able to determine whether the service provided, that is drugs to those who need them, is any 

better in Saskatchewan than it is in Manitoba? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, I believe it was the Member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) who back on 

March 17, talked about administration costs at large. The provincial costs are about eight times as much 

as they are in Manitoba; that was his statement. Manitoba doesn’t maintain a formulary system at all. 

Therefore, it has not achieved any drug material cost savings which we have 



 

April 12, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2000 

 

achieved in the range of $4 million per year. I don’t know how many people they have working in the 

Drug Plan in Manitoba; I suppose we could find that out in time. I am not sure that we have it available 

immediately. But I can say that the cost for carrying claims in this province is good. It is low just like 

MCIC is low in terms of its administrative cost. In our hospital plan, administration cost is very low in 

relation to the plan in total expenditures. We have also been very, very instrumental in bringing down 

costs appreciably, and that can’t be over stressed. I will cite a drug or two, Ampicillin; it used to be 11 

cents a pill and now it is four. Here is another one, Diazepam; it used to be six cents a pill, but is now 

half a cent. I have no way of knowing how badly these drugs are needed, but I am telling you that the 

Formulary Committee made up of pharmacists, medical doctors and a pharmacologist are the people 

who make the decisions with respect to the therapeutic value of the drugs that will be on that formulary 

and they do a good job. 

 

MR. MALONE: — What the Minister says, Mr. Chairman, is that you save some money buying drugs 

to run the formulary, and I would say obviously you should because you are buying them in bulk. What 

I am asking you, is how much money have you saved for the people of Saskatchewan? When I look at 

your Estimates and I find 77 people are involved in providing this service at a cost of, I am sorry I can’t 

find the item, but it seems to me that the cost of 77 people to administer this plan weighed against the 

cost of 20 to 22 people in Manitoba is in itself reason for you to look into what is happening in 

Manitoba. Obviously their plan there is being administered at a great deal less money than the plan in 

Saskatchewan is being administered, formulary notwithstanding. And all I ask you to do is look into that 

plan and see if perhaps that plan would be just as effective in the Province of Saskatchewan in delivering 

the service that your existing plan does which requires 77 people. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I think we can’t give you very good comparisons with the Manitoba plan; we 

haven’t looked at their report and it is really very minimal; it doesn’t give much information at all. You 

are really comparing two plans that aren’t comparable in many respects. I might point out to the 

Members that British Columbia is in the process of setting up a universal plan. They have, I presume, 

looked at both Manitoba and Saskatchewan plans. We haven’t got any more information with respect to 

the Manitoba plan at the moment. 

 

MR. MALONE: — You get up and you say you can’t give us the figures and you don’t know and then 

you say that the plans aren’t comparable. Surely you are contradicting yourself right there. For you to 

say that they are not comparable, you should have some knowledge about the Manitoba plan. 

 

I was recently in Manitoba and I inquired of pharmacists and people in Manitoba as to how their plan 

was working and heard nothing but good things about it. I have inquired of pharmacists in 

Saskatchewan, what they think of our plan and believe me, most of them are so sick and tired of the 

paperwork involved in it that they are ready to throw up their hands over it. I am concerned as well 

about the people that should be getting drugs pursuant to the formulary in the plan, and aren’t getting 

them because those drugs are of an exotic type and aren’t considered by the formulary. Those drugs are 

very 



 

Committee of Finance  April 12, 1977. 

 

2001 

 

expensive. They are the people who are suffering more than anybody else, because of the unique nature 

of the drug. The plan in Saskatchewan doesn’t cover them. My information is that in Manitoba the plan 

would cover them. I am not going to sit here and damn your plan. I am saying to you, I think it behoves 

you as the Minister of Health to talk to your counterpart in Manitoba, a member of the same party that 

you are a member of, and see how their plan is operating. I suggest to you that you will find that the plan 

is operating in a manner much cheaper than the Saskatchewan plan and is providing probably just as 

good if not a better service to the people of Manitoba than is the Saskatchewan plan. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 o’clock p.m. 


