




















































Hansard: November 21, 1977


91 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

November 21, 1977. 

 

EVENING SESSION 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES - POLITICAL ARRANGEMENT – ALLOCATING OF SEATS IN 

THE ASSEMBLY (CONT’D.). 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — When the clock arrived at 5 o’clock, I was saying that we are faced here 

today as we were last week with a matter that should be of the gravest concern to every member of this 

House. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a matter because of its great concern that must be cleared up 

once and for all. And only a complete withdrawal of all allegations, and I say all allegations, not just the 

letter, and an apology to this Assembly and to you and to the people of Saskatchewan, is acceptable as 

far as I’m concerned. I will, in a minute, give you an example of why I say that, and I will do that in just 

a minute. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, society learns by example. And the example of disrespect for rules and the 

law-abiding Conservative caucus opposite, sets an example of the worst possible kind. People who 

debate that who vote to make the laws of this land should not lead in setting that kind of example. All 

across this country, people are saying that we need more respect for our institutions. They are saying 

that our institutions are under attack and we see now by the example set by the members opposite in the 

last several days, that the Conservatives are part of that attack. Mr. Speaker, what a contrast. What a 

contrast between these new Tories and those of old. Never was there a man who showed greater respect 

for parliament and the institutions of the parliamentary system that the Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker. Now 

I remember very well, Mr. Speaker, when I was growing up in the community in Saskatchewan of 

Hudson Bay, I heard much of this man, I heard from him and about him. And I grew up and I went to 

school and I learned to disagree with many of the things that he talked about. And I do today. But never 

did I then, and neither do I now doubt or never have I lost the respect for his defence of our system of 

our government in these institutions. 

 

I ask this House, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the Tory members opposite, would he have condoned their type 

of action? Would he have forced a member of his own caucus to sign such a letter which was clearly 

meant to create doubt and suspicion and show disrespect for the Chair of the Speaker? Would he have 

anything to do with the provincial Conservative Party or a provincial Conservative Leader that could 

even think of showing this kind of disrespect for our parliamentary system? I think not. Tories think that 

this Legislature is a joke. I want to put on the record of this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t believe 

that the people of Saskatchewan think that, and I know they don’t. The people of this province want this 

Assembly to work and they expect, and have the right to expect, every member of this Legislature to 

make it work. And they don’t expect cynical political opportunism to replace the rule of law and orderly 

procedure. And every member of this Legislature should agree with that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this place is not a joke and while Conservative members opposite call press conferences to 

announce that they won’t smoke or slouch or read, there are issues that need attention. Attention in this 

Assembly is where those issues need to be talked about. And they can only get an adequate and fair 

attention if the process of this institution of government, the institution of the Speaker, has the respect of 

every member of this House, and I mean every member. It’s interesting the kinds of things we 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

92 

 

have again witnessed here today. An offer of a withdrawal. And on the outside, and I say this, because I 

think it is important on the outside, it looked like a noble thing to do. But was it really what the member 

meant? Was it really what he meant or was it again an attempt to try to make a joke of this institution. I 

was listening, I was listening, we’ll see how sincere it was. I was listening to the eighteenth hour today 

on which there was a news report and I have here a transcript of that news report and if you look at it, it 

tells a very interesting story about the seriousness of that withdrawal. Mr. Speaker, after the debate in 

this House this afternoon, I assume the interview took place in the hallways of this Legislature and the 

reporter on CKCK radio said that after offering to withdraw the letter, Berntson said in an interview, 

outside the House with me, that he still believes a deal was made. The reporter, Mr. Speaker, asked the 

question, “Do you now say that no deal was made?” The member said, “I can’t say that,” and the 

reporter said, “Why can’t you?” And the member, Berntson said, “Because only they will know for sure, 

I guess.” And the reporter said, “Well you obviously felt when you wrote the letter that a deal was made, 

you’re changing your mind now?” And the response was, “I’m suggesting and I have suggested before, 

that in light of past activities such as the two by-elections in February, and the by-election in Pelly, they 

worked hand in hand together, and there is no reason to believe they would not do the same thing here.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a member asked what time this was. This was on a radio broadcast on the eighteenth hour 

at 6 o’clock this evening. After the Liberal, Mr. Speaker, supposedly in great sincerity, having a great 

change of heart, offered in this House to withdraw that letter. Mr. Speaker, that withdrawal, or offer of 

that withdrawal, was a fraud. It was a false offer to withdraw. Now, Mr. Speaker, it may not be contempt 

in the face of Mr. Speaker, but it is a contempt outside the face of Mr. Speaker. I think that is completely 

and totally unacceptable to this Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — . . . to offer to withdraw that damning letter, that letter which tries to cast 

disrespect on the institution of the Chair of the Speaker. Then in the same voice and minutes later to go 

out into the hallway and say it’s okay, even though I withdrew it in the House and everything we tried to 

do and everything we tried to say by innuendo and otherwise we still believe. What kind of a withdrawal 

is that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those Conservative allegations and they belong to each and everyone in that caucus, which 

have not been supported, which cannot be supported just as other allegations which they have made in 

this Legislature before, must be cleared up and every Saskatchewan citizen must know that they have 

been cleared up, because some of the damage has been done, it has been done as those Conservative 

members have wanted it to be done therefore there has to be some action done by this Assembly. If the 

Conservative caucus has any purpose at all other than to gain power by any means whatsoever, then they 

should each and everyone every one get up in this House, and they should apologize. They should each 

and every one get up in this House and they should withdraw every allegation made against the Speaker 

and this institution. They should each and every one get up in this House and clear up the innuendoes 

that they have been making, they should humbly show some respect for the rules of this Assembly and 

commit themselves to make some positive contribution rather than simply trying to create cynical, 

political opportunism for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite won’t do it, then it is an obligation of this Legislative Assembly 

and the members in it to do it. 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

93 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the motion. 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I hate to rise in the House to speak on a debate 

that irks me to have to enter into, (microphone problem) that we have to debate such a matter. We have 

what we call in this House parliamentary immunity which protects us from our statements within the 

House from becoming slander cases and being brought before the courts. I think with this parliamentary 

immunity comes something we must have in this House, and that is, protection from statements which 

are erroneous, which are made perversely, intentionally, with malice beforehand, then are repeated 

outside. We have seen cases of this before, it’s happened with the hospital debate, when we come out 

with absolutely no proof to the allegations if they are made. They are made with one intention and that is 

to defame this House, to defame Mr. Speaker, and defame myself, because I am a member of this 

House. I don’t think we can allow this. This tactic was used in the 1930s by Adolf Hitler, it’s called the 

big lie tactic, you take a big lie and say it long enough, people believe it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON: — If we have no protection in this House, then I can get up in this House and make 

allegations of any sort that I know to be untrue, and keep doing this day after day. We are making a 

farce of this institution. My friends, I can’t sit in an institution that we are going to use just for political 

purposes; if this doesn’t have any more purpose of sitting in here, if we can’t respect the parliamentary 

system, we should resign and get out of here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say this member, if he made these statements must 

have proof. If he has proof bring it before us, if he has not proof, it is not good enough for me to have 

him come up and say that I withdrew the statements — come out a half hour later and say they are true. 

That’s not good enough. I want him before a committee, if he’s got proof I want to hear it, if he hasn’t 

got proof, I want him out of this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I suppose it is fair to say that from all 

silly, stupid and childish situations comes some good, because nothing could demonstrate more clearly 

the inability of a group of men to have responsibility for legislating the affairs of this province than 

could the people who sit to my left, than the episode which they have brought before us in the last 

couple of days. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you reflect upon the major issues that have been raised by the Tories 

since this Session of the Legislature began, the Eighteenth Session. We have had issues like, gum 

chewing, reading newspapers, smoking, slouching, and reading speeches. It is interesting even, Mr. 

Speaker, to reflect upon the member who was a member of our caucus at the time, the member for 

Thunder Creek when, he reflected upon the Leader of the Tory Party when he chose to rise and speak 

without notes, during that long pause of a year or a year and a half ago, when he said, “Mr, Speaker 

what happened to the tradition of the House that when you are on your feet you speak,” as he spoke 

about the leader that is now the leader of his party. 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

94 

 

We have had allegations about hospital cleanliness that have been made without substantiation, which 

have resulted in motions by the people who put those very allegations of indicating that they didn’t even 

support what they had said in the first place. We have had a party that backs out of a three party 

agreement. We all recall the incident when that arose in the House. We have had the allegations that 

were raised last Thursday, Mr. Speaker. It is interesting to reflect upon all of those very significant 

things, on the one hand, then to reflect upon things such as integrity and honesty, willingness to accept 

another man’s opinion, willingness to recognize an agreement that is made among gentlemen, a 

willingness to accept the tradition of the House, the tradition of the parliamentary procedure — lessons 

that Grade Eight students in Saskatchewan would recognize readily as being significant parts of their 

history lessons that apparently the people who sit to my left know nothing about. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Most of them didn’t get their Grade Eight! 

 

MR. PENNER: — Well, most of them reflect an intelligence when it comes to speaking in the House 

that suggests that. I was amazed at my colleague, the member for Eston-Elrose when he spoke the other 

day, when he made reference to things that either he had not read or that he chose to mislead the House 

about. I rather suspect that it was a matter that he hadn’t read, when he said things about the letter that 

had been written which clearly went counter, Mr. Speaker, to what was in the letter. I can’t help but feel, 

and I felt it as I went home and I am sure other members felt it as they went home last Thursday 

afternoon, that the whole business of the parliamentary tradition was attack. You were attacked, Mr. 

Speaker, but the whole thing that underlies why we are here, was under attack by people who will stoop 

to do anything in order to try to gain some kind of political advantage. I think it is fair to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the long history of this province, there has been no greater political difference shown 

than the difference between the NDP and the Liberals in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PENNER: — Now the Tory groans in the background, because the Tory doesn’t understand the 

political history of Saskatchewan, he doesn’t understand the kinds of basic philosophical differences that 

have existed between the members who sit opposite and the Liberal Party. Yet despite those kinds of 

differences there is a recognition that a man is worth something, that his word is worth something, that’s 

the kind of basic understanding of man and what motivates man to do what is good for man that the 

Tory by what he has said obviously has not yet learned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am please to support the motion. I think that what happened this afternoon in terms of the 

so-called withdrawal and the remarks that were made outside the House indicate that’s not satisfactory 

and that indeed this matter for the sake of us all — when I say us all, I just don’t mean the members 

sitting here, but I mean the people of Saskatchewan, the people who have some degree of understanding 

of what the parliamentary procedure is all about, deserve to have this matter put before an inquiry and to 

have those who make the allegations substantiate them, or resign Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to 

support the resolution. 

 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — I find this debate to be a rather sad, and degrading experience. But 

it is an affair that I feel must be resolved, if the rule of law in this province is to go unchallenged. You 

see, Mr. Speaker, as all know with any knowledge of legislative proceedings, all of us know the Speaker 

is the guardian of the law in this 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

95 

 

Legislature. A slur to the Speaker must be withdrawn completely by all who had a part in it, if the rule 

of law in this land is to be upheld. I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it is only by our example of our 

respect for laws, that the laws of this land will be respected by the people as a whole in this province. 

And these Conservative members opposite have shown a complete disrespect for the law of this 

Legislature, by their disregard for the office of the Speaker. If we in this Legislature will not abide by 

the laws, if we must cast aspersions on the guardians of the law in this Legislature, then we need not 

expect the citizens of this land to follow the laws that we make. But you know, I think what bothers me 

as much as anything, what has been mentioned so many times, is the childishness of the whole affair. 

 

When I entered politics, I expected to take knocks for my philosophical beliefs. I knew that I’d get it in 

the neck here and there, and I expected to take it and I think I have taken it. I expected there to be give 

and take without crying over attacks that are made, or imaginary attacks that would be made. And I 

thought all members would be men enough, adult enough, to be able to do the same but here what have 

we got? Sheer nonsense and crying over some supposed slight. I find the whole matter much beneath my 

dignity. I want the people of Saskatchewan, yes, the people of Saskatchewan, must know of the pettiness 

of the Progressive Conservatives in this place. Have they shown any concern about looking after the 

policies of the people of Saskatchewan? No. They sent a letter saying we haven’t had our proper place 

within the Legislature. Where do I sit? Not, do I look after the people of this province. Now, if there had 

been more members and if the Speaker had ignored that fact, then one could have accepted that they had 

some cause for dismay. But no. If they don’t get everything they want, then they are just little children 

who cry and throw tantrums; they send letters. Because they don’t get what they want they cry; because 

they can’t get sitting next to mommy – they cry. Do they look after the peoples’ interest in the province? 

No. Where are my offices, Mr. Speaker? Who speaks first, Mr. Speaker? Who gets the first question, 

Mr. Speaker? Just like a little child says, I want my candy first. What childishness, what nonsense. If we 

can’t have our way, like little children again, say those members opposite, we will call names, we will 

cast aspersions on the members of this Legislature — in this case, the Speaker. 

 

As I have said before, this whole debate is beneath my dignity. I had expected more of people like the 

members for Rosetown-Elrose, Souris-Cannington, Estevan and yet I know the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose to be an intelligent man and I know that he can read. That’s an honor. And yet he said, 

we’re not arguing where we’re sitting in this Legislature and you can read it on page 22 of the last day’s 

copy of Hansard. Not arguing over seating – then he didn’t read the letter by the sound of it. If you 

didn’t know the member for Rosetown-Elrose, you would say that he was foolish, that he was 

half-witted. But I say that that is as close as that hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose will come to a 

complete repudiation of his leader, and the childish headline hunting tactics that is shown by that leader 

in sending and instigating that letter. But then we read in the Leader Post that the Progressive 

Conservatives had considered walking into the Legislature and taking over the seats next to the Speaker 

invading the Legislature, Mr. Speaker. Would they have attacked the members of the Liberal caucus 

next? Just like a child again who pounds at someone when he can’t get the other child’s toys. 

 

I want the people of Saskatchewan to notice what goes on in this place and I hope that they take a good 

accounting of it. I’m tired of the childish self-interest of the Progressive Conservative Party that they 

have shown in this place. This childish self-interest should 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

96 

 

show the people of Saskatchewan what would happen should the sorry day ever arrive, that those people 

should form a government in this province. We know who would come first, it is obvious by what they 

have done. I am tired of this Assembly being made a platform for sick childishness. Mr. Speaker, I call 

on the Conservatives to get on with the business of this Assembly, the business of the people of this 

province. Show that you are worthy of the position to which you have been elected. Mr. Speaker, I shall 

be supporting this motion. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few brief comments to make. 

 

I would like to begin by saying that when I was elected to this Legislature, I came I suppose with some 

degree of optimism about the kind of effort that could be put forward in this Legislature to produce 

better legislation and hopefully over a four year period convince the majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan that the province would be better off without this NDP government. I must say I had 

mixed emotions when the Tory caucus proved successful in seven constituencies in the last provincial 

election. And I say mixed emotions, because I’ve welcomed the three new non-socialist members to the 

Legislature that were there because they had defeated NDP members of the Legislature. I had some 

reservations about four of the Tory MLAs who arrived by winning Liberal constituencies in 

Saskatchewan, but at the same time I expected them to have in the long run, the same set of goals that I 

did, in one sense anyway, and that was bringing about better government to this province. I can say that 

it wasn’t long after I sat in this House as a new member that I began to be disappointed by my pseudo 

allies, I suppose. We found that four out of the seven that were initially elected has probably spent some 

considerable portion of their time campaigning hard against the Liberal Party – certainly much harder 

against the Liberal Party than they had against the New Democratic Party in 1971. We find today, that 

probably six out of the eleven, or five out of the eleven that sit in this House today, worked very hard to 

bring about the demise of the Thatcher government in 1971. So I have been put in a position where I 

can’t, at least on a regular basis, count on their support in a general attack on the government to try to 

bring it to some sense and bring up worthwhile alternatives for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people that we’ve seen in this caucus tend for the most part to be a say-anything do-anything bunch, 

generally speaking, bereft of principles. There were, however, some bright lights in the Tory caucus, 

speaking relatively, of course, and I had some small degree of admiration for the principle and certainly 

the bravado of the member for Rosetown-Elrose and I still to some degree count on him as an ally in a 

sense, in this Legislature. 

 

I had a certain amount of respect for the member for Souris-Cannington and the member for Estevan, 

given their past situations and both of them, I think, ended up in the Conservative Party for, in their own 

minds anyway, legitimate reasons. The same may to some degree be said of the member for Swift 

Current. However today we find only one member of that caucus anyway in this entire debate who has 

said anything, I think, that resembles cool rationale, and that’s the member for Rosetown-Elrose, who 

doesn’t always speak with cool rationale. That member said that it makes little difference where he sits 

in the Legislature, and certainly insinuates that what you say is certainly far more important than from 

where you say it. I find that the Tory caucus that I had so often hoped would be of some assistance to 

our party as an opposition party in this Legislature, and ultimately to the people of Saskatchewan, that I 

had hoped would be a benefit, is really of no benefit at all. 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

97 

 

We had hoped in the first instance that we would have at least their participation in the potash debate, so 

that some common sense might be shed on the entire issue and they were silent on that issue – a most 

major issue in this House, so I find myself sitting here looking at a caucus whose only purpose for being 

here is some perverse desire for power in this province with perhaps a few exceptions to the members 

whom I have mentioned. Even those fellows are being dragged down by the members of their own party 

who are here with illegitimate concerns and desires. The member for Souris-Cannington who I said I 

had some considerable respect for, and who, I believe has very gullibly signed his name to a letter he did 

not write and which was forwarded over his name to the Speaker of this Legislature and to the media. I 

find now that this member has his back to the wall; his caucus colleagues probably ill appreciate the 

pains to which he has gone to make a somewhat illegitimate political point for them. They talked him 

into standing up and withdrawing his comments in this Legislature and yet when pressed outside the 

Legislature by members of the media, continues to be loyal to the kind of cause that they put him up to 

putting before the public. I have nothing but sympathy for the member for Souris-Cannington because 

he will certainly find that the loyalty that he has displayed to his caucus will undoubtedly not be there in 

return when he faces the Committee on Privileges and Elections. The other members of this Legislature 

that sit in the Tory caucus that I expected would be here to make some legitimate contribution to the 

workings of this Legislature, have for the most part, remained silent during this debate. I must say that I 

am certainly disappointed that their motives and perhaps their lack of principle will not allow them in 

the first instance to stand behind a member of their own caucus and who they have put up to no good, 

shall we say. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, I would never want to use words as strong as ‘betrayal’ or ‘deserter’ 

because only the member for Souris-Cannington would know to what extent those words are true. 

However, I was at one time earlier today, in perhaps a bit of a magnanimous mood as the word has been 

going around, and I felt — well if the member for Souris-Cannington was sincerely sorry about what he 

had done and perhaps in another way at this moment he is. 

 

We all know that the member for Sutherland, by his own admission worked very hard against the 1971 

Liberal government, so we don’t count on his remarks with much credence. The member for 

Souris-Cannington went outside of this Legislature after he had convinced me that he had some sincere 

desire to apologize to the members of this House, by way of withdrawing his letter condemning 

members of this Legislature and the Speaker. He went out of this House, and for reasons that perhaps 

only the good Lord knows, completely contradicted himself in the media. I have little charity left in my 

soul at this minute. We all know how much damage that statements and issues like this Tory caucus has 

taken to the media can do, not only to the Speaker, but particularly to members of this Legislature, and I 

must say that I am offended that any one member of the Kindersley constituency might possibly 

consider that I would enter into negotiations with members of the NDP party opposite. 

 

That he would not, in spirit, withdraw his letter to this Legislature is condemnation enough of his 

attitude and his principles in this Legislature. That he should be called before a committee to account for 

his actions is the only course of justice open to this Legislature as an institution, and I will certainly be 

supporting . . . 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

98 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — I’ll leave you something to talk about if you get another chance to speak, Mr. 

Attorney General. I didn’t want to rob you of your entire speech. I feel that the only option open to the 

members of this Legislature, and certainly members of this caucus and myself personally, is to see that 

these members are brought before the committee to give evidence, probably which doesn’t exist, 

perhaps only in their mind, but to give evidence backing their allegations. 

 

I will be supporting the resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take a great deal of time in the Legislature this 

evening, but I feel I have a few words which I would like to contribute to this debate . . . to clarify the 

situation, the member for Arm River says. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, I witnessed this afternoon one of the most interesting operations in this House that 

I’ve seen for a long time. The Conservative caucus spent last Thursday, at great length, with three or 

four of their members defending the letter which they had sent to Mr. Speaker, and saying that it indeed 

contained no allegations which in any way reflected upon the Office of the Speaker. Having had a 

weekend to think it over, the member for Souris-Cannington rose in his place and withdrew 

categorically, the letter. Then I think the Conservatives, and perhaps some people outside of this 

Legislature, wondered why members on this side of the House were not prepared to accept that 

particular withdrawal. I think, Mr. Speaker, as the Attorney General pointed out to you on a point of 

order, on page 24, the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland had said, and I read that letter, and I tell you 

now, Mr. Speaker, I go on record for what it’s worth, that I concur with its contents. So while one 

member of the Conservative party is withdrawing categorically what he had said in the letter, another 

member stood on the record, Mr. Speaker, categorically in favor of what was said in the letter. Now the 

member for Saskatoon-Sutherland also said, following that, and I ask any of those people sitting 

opposite or their friends here to our right, to show us one place in that letter where it says that Mr. 

Speaker concurs with the deal. 

 

It wasn’t hard, Mr. Speaker, for someone who at least had reached the second grade, which obviously 

the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland hadn’t, to read the first paragraph. It says and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

The final decision by the New Democratic Party in the matter of recognition of the Progressive 

Conservative caucus as one of the official opposition parties in the fourth session of the 18th 

Legislature of the Province of Saskatchewan, as outlined by your office . . . 

 

And if I can quote, leaving out the middle part (the final decision by the New Democratic Party, as 

outlined this morning by your office). Now surely, Mr. Speaker, nothing could more clearly convey the 

meaning of the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland, than that your office had carried out the decision of 

the NDP caucus and that you, Mr. Speaker, were not acting in an impartial way. Yet the member for 

Saskatoon-Sutherland said, ‘I go on record for what it’s worth and I concur with its contents.’ And I ask 

any of those people sitting opposite or their friends here to our 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

99 

 

immediate right, to show us one place in that letter where it says that Mr. Speaker concurred in the deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, I must admit and I say it with deference with the Attorney General sitting in 

front of me that I have always had a certain amount of respect for lawyers. I have also felt, Mr. Speaker, 

that it took a certain amount of intellectual ability to get into law school, and a teeny weeny bit of 

intellectual ability to get through law school, but the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland has convinced 

me that if you can get into kindergarten you can get through law school. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that the leader of the Conservative Party got into law school but he couldn’t 

get out of it. That shows, Mr. Speaker, when you compare what the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland 

has said, something of the calibre of the leader of the Conservative Party. Mr. Speaker, the member of 

the Conservative Party also likes to spend a great deal of his time passing himself off as a great 

accountant. I think it would be very interesting if some of the members of the press, when they are not 

contributing to the Conservative Party, would spend some of their time looking into the accounting 

background of the Leader of the Conservative Party as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at that group across the way . . . well, he claims to be an accountant, the 

member for Regina South. The last time we had a Conservative government in this province was the 

Anderson government, and it was a mixed bag too, Mr. Speaker. It was an alliance of a few true Tories, 

all three or four of them, some cast-offs from the Liberals and a few unfocused progressives. The 

member for Kinistino this evening, speaking on the French network said, ‘You’d have to die twice to 

forget what that government did to this province.’ 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the kind of activities carried on in this Legislature by the members of 

the Conservative Party can only be drawn as a parallel to the gerrymander that was engineered by the 

Thatcher government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, both parties, the Thatcher government and this Conservative Party in 

this House, have shown time and time again their total disrespect for the office of the Speaker, for this 

House and for the traditions of this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we all stretch the rules on occasion, but this letter which was 

sent by the member for Souris-Cannington offends the very roots and foundation of our parliamentary 

system. First of all he states in the opening sentence that the Speaker has conveyed a partisan decision 

made by the NDP, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, it opens up to the public the accusation that the Speaker is 

being an errand boy for the government of the day. It has since been withdrawn but it was said and 

concurred in by three or four of the members sitting opposite in the Conservative caucus and they 

haven’t withdrawn. They repeated it, as the Attorney General says, tonight on the eighteenth hour, 

which is typical of the Conservative Party and typical of their leader who doesn’t have the guts to stand 

in this House and defend his member. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

100 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the leader of the Conservative Party, in my view, should not even be 

sitting in this House as a member, much less as a leader of a party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, that letter was given to the media and you can obviously 

see the intent of the Conservative Party here. They didn’t care about the rules, they didn’t care about the 

issues. All they cared about was their 30 seconds on television before Mr. Speaker had a chance to reply 

to the letter. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the letter runs contrary to an agreement, a gentleman’s agreement, an 

understanding and a consensus, call it what you like, between all three parties which was made before 

this House sat, on the conduct of the House and that doesn’t bother the Conservatives at all. They aren’t 

interested in understandings, consensus, gentleman’s agreements, or their word. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Not even written agreements. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Fourth, Mr. Speaker, the letter stated that the Tories were seriously considering that 

they take the seats they wanted, regardless of what the Speaker might decide. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Storm troopers. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Storm troopers, the member for Humboldt says. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Wear your little swastikas, eh boys! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — The member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) says, wear their swastikas. 

They has as much trouble spelling that as they do Switzerland. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the public of this province should take a look at the record 

of the Conservatives in this House. 

 

First of all we have the leader of the Conservative Party, the member for Nipawin, petulance over 

decorum. Then he made a spectacle of himself trying to speak without notes and he lasted about 11 

seconds. Next, it was their ignorance of how to use the question period. Last year, two years ago, was 

the faux pas over the opening of the House and this Legislature. Then they blundered into (perhaps fell 

into is a better description), the filthy hospital issues and came out with egg all over their faces. This 

year it is the letter and where their wives sit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a record of leadership, this is not a record of a real leader, it is a trial of 

confusion and a litany of childishness. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest the people of this province cannot count on 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

101 

 

the calibre of judgments that have been offered by this Conservative Party opposite. 

 

I want to suggest to the members who are sitting here tonight, without the benefit of their fearless leader 

who has run out of this House, that they cannot afford this kind of incompetence either. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it is and it will be the Achilles heel of any Tory government, and I suggest to 

the members of the Conservative Party opposite that whether you are going to be the government, or the 

opposition, or the third party (and I suspect it is the latter) if indeed any of you are here in the next 

session . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — . . . that you had better deal with your Achilles heel now. 

 

I doubt, Mr. Speaker, whether there is one member of that Conservative Party opposite who can, in all 

honesty, rise and defend the integrity and fearlessness of his leader. I doubt if there is one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I listened to some of the statements made by the Leader of the Conservative 

Party and I can say on a couple of these things comments without feeling hypocritical myself. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have listened with interest to some of the debate this evening and I am having 

some difficulty tying it into the resolution which is before us. The motion has to do with sending a 

certain letter to a committee. I wonder if members could be relevant to the motion that is before us. I 

think there are several members who have had a go at the motion this evening who have strayed a bit 

from the relevance of the resolution. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I certainly want to be in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about this letter because I think in part what we are discussing in this letter is 

not only what is in it but what we feel are the motivations behind this letter, and why and how this letter 

came into being. There have been other members who have said (and they were in order, Mr. Speaker, 

and I trust I will be) that they are somewhat sceptical that the member for Souris-Cannington actually 

wrote the letter but rather that he signed and delivered the letter, as he says, on behalf of the 

Conservative caucus. One wonders why the Conservative caucus, which talks so much, and indeed I 

suspect the member for Souris-Cannington does as well, about law and order, about decorum in the 

House, about the appropriate and proper way of carrying on our business in this House, would be so 

hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, as to put this letter on the record to Mr. Speaker, which indeed calls into 

question the whole office of the Speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, one has to look at some of their other actions to understand why the Conservatives 

have taken this particular action. You know, Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest in a similar sort of 

circumstance to the Conservatives issuing, just before this Session came into being, a press release 

saying they weren’t 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

102 

 

going to smoke in the House. Now, Mr. Speaker, I was interested in the way in which the press reported 

this as a straight news item. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I tend to be something close to a chain smoker. 

(I am not particularly proud of that – it just happens to be a fact.) I would like to get rid of it but I 

haven’t and if I had sent before the press and issued a statement that I was somehow sanctimonious and 

holy and not going to smoke in this House, and the press, knowing me as well as they do, had accepted 

that and reported it sort of straight and level, I’d have wondered about the press. Consequently, Mr. 

Speaker, I have wondered about the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) and I have wondered about the 

press. The only word that sort of pops into my mind is ‘hypocrisy’. But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

where it is at. I think the Conservative Party in this particular issue, and in some which I have outlined 

before, have shown the rankest kind of hypocrisy in this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — They take one issue in this House, the debate goes on, and they have shown, almost 

without fail, that their charges are totally without foundation. Yet, outside this House and in the press of 

this province, they end up as being the defenders of some kind of sanctimonious position. Mr. Speaker, I 

for one am getting very tired of this. I am tired of the Conservatives being shown up for hypocrites in 

this House and outside this House, thundering off as if they have some kind of a halo around their heads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I am not prepared to allow the member for Souris-Cannington, or indeed if all 

his colleagues stand in their place, for them to withdraw their remarks and have this motion struck from 

the books. I think they have done that time and time again. They came into the House on a 

fundamentally weak position, they have been exposed in this House by members on this side of the 

House, they have withdrawn, they have run away, and then they went out in the corridor and said the 

same thing they were saying in the House, that they couldn’t defend here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there are 18 to 24 months (somewhere in there) 

between now and the next election. I don’t care how much money the banks and the press of this 

province give to the Conservative Party. I don’t care how many lies the Conservative Party tries to 

spread, I am dedicating myself in the next 18 months to telling the story of the incompetence, the 

hypocrisy of that party opposite and there won’t be one over there in 1979. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I have never in all the time I have 

sat in this Assembly seen an individual or a party attacked, drilled, criticized, vilified as the member for 

Souris-Cannington has been this evening and not one single party member in his party would stand up in 

defence. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What really bothers me is that Dick Collver, or if you want, Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Nipawin, is not even here tonight when he knew that this 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

103 

 

particular resolution would come to a vote. Mr. Speaker, he sat here — can you imagine the member for 

Thunder Creek’s father standing in this Assembly and letting a member be attacked to the degree that 

that member was attacked without getting to his feet? Mr. Speaker, that is a sign and the sign is 

indicating the truth and veracity of what has occurred in this Assembly in the last few days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party has made fools of the press, made fools of them. I tell 

you in all honesty when I watch some of the reporting, made fools of them. The party has no respect for 

the Legislature, they walk out in the corridors and issue a letter or a press statement and I have heard 

them say, “It doesn’t make any difference what you say in here just mouth off in the corridors.” And you 

have got a front-page story where rural Saskatchewan did not even have the reporting of the Throne 

Speech of this province. Then the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) says, “Why are we 

debating this, why are we wasting our time?” The members of the Conservative Party sit and worry 

where their wives sit, where they sit themselves. Someone reported, sulking “like children,” as I said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a sad day in this Assembly and I say this in all honesty. I had hoped that this 

resolution this evening, that I could have stood up and withdrawn that resolution and I say that in all 

honesty. I have been listening to the member for Souris-Cannington today and I felt, first of all, he was 

tricked. I know the member for Souris-Cannington. He signed the letter as the whip of the caucus of the 

Conservative Party. There is no question that the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) wrote the letter 

and it will be interesting when we get to the committee and ask who originated and drafted the letter. It 

will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, as to who wrote the letter, but what bothers me most, is that he was 

tricked and doped and I thought he stood up with some genuine degree of apology to the House. Then at 

4:30 he withdraws the statement and at 5:00 o’clock he refuses to withdraw it and says that it is the 

truth. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, and with all due apology, did he lie at 4:30 or did he lie at 5:00 o’clock? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think I cannot allow the member to ask a question which contains an 

unparliamentary term and I would ask the member – it’s a dilemma no matter which way it’s answered 

and it casts aspersions and I would ask the member to withdraw the use of the word. 

 

MR. MALONE: — On a point of order. Surely, surely it is up to the member that is being referred to to 

get on his feet and ask for a withdrawal. If he is going to sit there like a lump and not get up and ask for 

a withdrawal surely you are under no obligation to do so on his behalf. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

silence in this case can be construed as guilt and surely it is not up to you to determine what is going 

through the mind of the member who is being referred to. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw. I will merely ask again the question. If it makes 

your decision easier I will be glad to withdraw it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — There was a point of order raised by the Leader of the Liberal Party. I recall this 

afternoon that the Leader of the Liberal Party made a citation to me, Citation 156, and in Citation 156 it 

says: 

 
The proper time for interference is when the offensive expressions are uttered and not afterwards and it may 

take place either on the Speaker’s 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

104 

 

voluntary motion or on the call to order of the members assailed or some other member or the general 

call of the House. 

 

I took it upon my authority to bring the member to order and I accept the member’s withdrawal. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, may I say again, was he sincere at 4:30 or was he sincere at 5:00 

o’clock? Was he being truthful at 4:30 or was he being truthful at 5:00 o’clock? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what really bothers me is that this particular problem was a planned strategy . . . 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I think that the innuendo is there and in any 

language I think that I would ask the Speaker to ask the member to withdraw it as being 

unparliamentary. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I agree the member was improperly addressing the House before but I don’t 

believe he was later. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — May I rephrase the comments I made and could the member tell me what did 

he mean at 4:30 and what did he mean at 5:00 o’clock? I happen to know . . . 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I am sure that if the members of this House 

got a true transcript of the press at 5:00 o’clock they will find that the comment was, ‘between parties 

certainly’. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I will read the exact words of the member for Souris-Cannington, 

the exact words that are on the record. Question: Do you now state that no deal was made. Answer: I 

can’t say that. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What does that mean? That means no. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Why can’t you? Because only they will know for sure, I guess. Question: Well 

you obviously felt that when you wrote the letter there was need, are you changing your mind now? 

Answer: I am suggesting and I suggested before that in light of past activities such as two by-elections in 

February and the by-election in Pelly they worked hand in hand together and there is no reason to 

believe that they wouldn’t do the same thing here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the great tragedies of life today and in public affairs in Canada is that there are 

many people who vilify people who stand for public office. They stand up and vilify them. What bothers 

me is this was a deliberate planned strategy of the Conservative Party to destroy the public confidence of 

people in public life. I have watched people who stood in public life lose their lives including the father 

of the member for Thunder Creek because he devoted his life to public life in this province. I have seen 

people go to the poorhouse because they had devoted their life to public life. And they have some idiot 

stand up here and attack their integrity and their honesty. I say to you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I wonder who the member is 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

105 

 

calling ‘some idiot’. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, if the shoe fits, wear it. Let me go back again, this is the third 

time in less than 12 months that this House has faced the question of honor, integrity, devotion to 

Saskatchewan of members of this Assembly. Never before in 20 years, or 20 sessions or 18, has this 

ever been brought forward before. Never before. First of all we had the attack on the honesty of the 

word of the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter), then we had the filthy hospital debate. Mr. Speaker, what 

it really boils down to is a question of leadership, because believe me this resolution could never have 

been proposed or the letter ever written without the consent and the approval of the member for 

Nipawin. Mr. Speaker, that is unfortunate because believe me never will the people of this province 

elect a Premier whom they can’t trust in this Legislature in his personal affairs, in the affairs of the 

public of this province. Mr. Speaker, that is unfortunate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I want to review very quickly, I think enough has been said and I 

am embarrassed to stand up here tonight and make this kind of a defence . . . 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Sit down! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, sit down, you would like that the member for Saskatoon. ‘I concur in that 

letter’, and believe me you do. That’s what bothers me. I had hoped that you would stand up . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I wonder if the member would address his remarks through the Speaker. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, let me review very quickly the observations of those colleagues. 

What bothers me, it was not only a conclusion of the member for Souris-Cannington, then the member 

for Rosetown-Elrose got up and said, “Yes it was a deal,” that the deal went on last year. Then the 

member for Saskatoon-Sutherland said, “I concur that it was a deal.” Then the member for Qu’Appelle 

got up and said, “It’s a deal,” a traditional deal. Mr. Speaker, they went on and on and on. 

 

There are two or three things which are very obvious. One, not one single member offered one shred of 

evidence. Is that what people who get elected to public life in this province are going to be subjected to, 

that you can get up and tell the big lie, you can get up and tell the big accusation, you don’t have to 

substantiate it in any way shape or form. You just need to get up and say what you like, say it in here 

under the immunity of the Legislature which is really bad, then turn around and shrug your shoulders. 

 

Let me very briefly go through — first of all the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher). I got a kick 

out of this. He said, “Let’s get on with the business of the House.” Let’s get on with the business of the 

House, when they think the biggest political coup ever planned was the fact that they made such fools of 

the Leader Post and the other members of the media. What any honest reporter would have known was 

the deliberate falsehood, a deliberate falsehood. He said, “. . . get on with the business of the House.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, then I turned to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. What does he say? 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

106 

 

Why our wives were forced to sit in a corner. Then we came to the member for Qu’Appelle — this is the 

one that really got me and I wonder what the member for Thunder Creek thought. When I was a member 

of his father’s Cabinet, there is one thing that the Premier always said. We have got to have 

Conservative members for candidates running or we’ll never beat the NDP, because if there are no 

Conservative candidates, the Conservatives will vote NDP. He knows to the great extent that the Liberal 

Party and his father went to ensure that there were Conservative candidates in 1971 and 1967. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s Wipf! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to tell you about the traditional story of politics in 

Saskatchewan. In 1934 when all of a sudden the Conservative Party was destroyed they became the 

NDP. Then, Mr. Speaker, do you know that in 1967 when we formed the government, in 1971 when we 

lost it, there was absolutely no difference in our vote. The Liberals were absolutely straightforward, 

stable and steady. The difference was that those Conservatives all jumped to the NDP, from about 39 per 

cent they went to 55 per cent. We stayed at 40 per cent, because as Ross Thatcher always said, four out 

of five Conservatives will vote Socialist every time. There are only two kinds of people in 

Saskatchewan, Liberals and anti-Liberals. Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that the Conservative Party 

today is doing exactly that. They are not interested in defeating you people across there. All they want to 

do is to replace the Liberals as the members of the opposition. The member for Thunder Creek said 

once, I read something about he had one more score to settle. I wonder if he is settling the score with the 

Conservative Party by joining them? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I want to tell you, if it was his father here today, his father would never accuse 

the Liberals and the NDP of making a deal. He would have said the Tories and the NDP have been 

electing the Socialists provincially and the Conservatives federally since 1934. I would like the member 

for Thunder Creek to stand up and deny that! Then we listen to the drivel of the member for Qu’Appelle 

who stands up and says, there’s been a traditional deal. It goes a way back to the ‘30s, a traditional deal. 

I have never heard of such drivel. 

 

I am going to tell you another thing that Ross Thatcher said, and maybe per se Dick Collver might listen 

to, and maybe the member for Thunder Creek might tell his leader. He said, if there is ever a clear cut 

confrontation they’ll never elect a Liberal government or a free enterprise government in Saskatchewan, 

if it’s Liberals against NDP, because those Conservatives will always elect the NDP. He said the most 

important thing is to give that third party option. I’m going to tell you, Mr. Thatcher, the present day, 

you had better think about what your father said, because if there is a clear cut confrontation between 

Dick Collver and Allan Blakeney and Ted Malone isn’t there, God help you people. I mean that! If there 

is anybody that should be promoting the third party and the Liberal Party as a strong and viable 

alternative it should be the Conservatives. I’ll tell you something, you’ll do nothing but elect the NDP 

for the next 20 years and that’s all Dick Collver will ever do, is elect the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then I want to talk for a moment about the member for Rosetown-Elrose because that was 

a tragedy. I kind of respect him. He went back and said, why last year 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

107 

 

there was a deal, you know that they got the caucus room over there. They sat in the Leader of the 

Opposition’s office. We got the first question of the day. He said that was a deal. My God, Mr. Speaker, 

my God! I was always under the understanding that at that time the Liberal Party had more members 

than the Conservatives and surely to heavens Mr. Bailey isn’t expecting the Speaker of the House to 

contradict The Legislative Assembly Act and the parliamentary tradition from Ottawa. Are you 

suggesting that the Speaker had any alternative? Go to Ottawa and sit and watch what goes on in the 

House of Commons. The Conservatives are the official opposition. They get the first question, they sit in 

the opposition desks they have the opposition offices. You go to Manitoba where there are three parties. 

The NDP today have the official opposition offices. They sit in the opposition seats. They have the 

lounge that’s so important to them. 

 

What did you expect the Speaker to do, Mr. Bailey, last year? Contradict the traditions of the British 

Parliamentary System and then turn around and put yourself in his position today. What is he to do 

today? All of a sudden we find ourselves in a position that there are nine and nine — or eleven and 

eleven. I keep thinking that Qu’Appelle and Thunder Creek shouldn’t be there. So what happens, we 

have eleven and eleven. So please tell me what the Speaker is to do. Is he to go to Mr. Malone my 

seatmate and say, move out of that office, the Conservatives are moving in. Get out of that lounge, the 

Conservatives are moving in? Can you imagine what the people of Saskatchewan would have said if 

that’s fair play? All he said, and everybody, all the indications in the press that there would be fair play. 

From what I understand Mr. Malone is going to move the Speech from the Throne. Mr. Thatcher is 

going to reply to the Budget. I told Mr. Malone, for God’s sake take the Budget! Don’t worry about the 

Speech from the Throne. The Budget is the most important one. No, it was decided that he would have 

the Throne Speech and they would have the Budget. They decided they would alternate questions. What 

could be more fair? So I suppose he decided that the very first question of the session — if Dick had got 

up we might have even had a little bit of an issue, but Dick was still asleep when Malone was on his 

feet. What are we supposed to do, and what is the Speaker supposed to do, when you treat them fair. Mr. 

Speaker, the whole and entire argument is so unbelievable. Mr. Collver is so determined. He is 

consumed with passion and desire to be the Leader of the Opposition, not the Premier of this province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what really bothers me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on talking about this resolution. I could go on talking about this debate. It is 

indeed very, very disappointing. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say it honestly, the real guts of this 

argument according to the Conservatives is that there are two members here, the member for Regina 

Wascana (Mr. Merchant) and the member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) and pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker, for speaking that way, that they shouldn’t be here. Can you imagine that they shouldn’t be here 

and they were elected. Mr. Collver, he’s God Almighty, says that the member for Regina Wascana who 

ran in an election and got elected and the member for Regina South with the two biggest majorities in 

Saskatchewan shouldn’t sit here. You know something, Mr. Speaker, when the next federal election may 

be, 1979 some are predicting. You know something the provincial election may well be over before that. 

I want to tell you something, there are no two members who have more communication with their 

constituents than these two. They are knocking on doors every night. Go and phone up somebody in 

Tony Merchant’s constituency and ask him if he thinks that Gary Lane or Colin Thatcher is a better 

member than he is. They’ll soon tell you. In five minutes you call one of these two people and they are 

there. They were elected by their constituents, they are sitting here and not only that, surely to heavens, 

they are not naive and silly enough to think the Speaker is going to go against the law of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Dominion of Canada. Do you know what the Dominion of 



 

November 21, 1977 

 

108 

 

Canada says? That until such day as the federal writ is issued they don’t have to resign; they are still 

members of the provincial Legislature. Surely no one with an ounce of common sense could make that 

analogy, and if you asked me what I thought, I would take the opposite viewpoint and say that these two 

members have every right to sit in here, but there are two members over there who don’t; that morally, 

the member for Thunder Creek and the member for Qu’Appelle should have resigned because they 

weren’t elected as Conservatives. That’s what I would have said, Mr. Speaker. But I am also not naive 

and silly enough to suggest that because I think that, the law of the province is going to say that, and I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty, that there are eleven and eleven, and your responsibility is to 

treat them as fairly and equally as possible. And although you and I don’t always agree, in fact I think I 

get slammed down more than most people, like I did today, but I want to say that I do have enough 

confidence to know that the people of Saskatchewan and the public will not stand for unfair treatment of 

a third party or equal parties in the opposition. At the end of this Session it will be up to the members of 

the gallery to make that determination. Not the good Lord Himself, the member for Nipawin, and I say 

that in all honesty, and I would hope that all of us in this Assembly would sit down and remember that 

some of us, most of us, all of us I hope, are here as members of this Assembly on behalf of the 

constituency they represent with a desire to do something good for the province of Saskatchewan. 

Really, I want to tell the member for Souris-Cannington that I’ll gladly exchange seats with him and I’ll 

guarantee that I’ll do a better job from there than he will from here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now come to the crunch of the matter. Do we support this resolution or do we not? Mr. 

Speaker, I have proposed an amendment this afternoon which I hoped we might have brought in this 

evening. After the comments at 5:15 outside of the House, which means that a withdrawal in order to 

eliminate mechanical problems of the House is all that is required, and that the Conservative Party can 

go on to the media and across the province and make the kind of accusations they have. This is 

completely unacceptable to me. I have yet to hear the member for Shaunavon as angry, as hurt as he was 

this afternoon, and with very, very good reason. Mr. Speaker, I am going to urge everybody here to vote 

for this motion, and I’m going to ask the member for Souris-Cannington to come into that particularly, 

and I don’t care what he believes. You know that’s the funny part about some people. I believe a lot of 

things about you fellows. I’m not going to make a public accusation about your honesty and integrity, 

not a public accusation here where I don’t have to verify it outside of the Assembly. I am going to ask 

that you people vote for this particular motion and that the member go in and substantiate and clear up 

once and for all, whether or not a member can stand up in this Assembly and attack his colleagues 

regardless of what party they sit on, in relation to their honesty and integrity and their loyalty to the 

democratic system of this province. That’s what really is at issue. It’s unfortunate that he is going to 

have to make the decision because I know there is no truth in his statements. Mr. Speaker, if we do this, 

regrettable as it may be for the member for Souris-Cannington, regrettable as it may be for the 

Conservative Party, I suggest to you that it will never happen again, that a member will stand on his feet 

with a deliberate planned strategy to vilify a political party or political individuals in order to benefit his 

own political advancement. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:21 o’clock p.m. 


