



















































Hansard: March 16, 1977


 

 

859 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 16, 1977. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. SPEAKER (Saskatoon Westmount): — I should like at this opportunity to introduce to the 

Chamber in the Speaker’s Gallery a group of 35 Grade Eight students from Confederation Park School, 

in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount. 

 

They are accompanied today by Mr. Terry Husulak, Nora Sutherland and Larry Klopoushak, teachers 

and assistant teachers. I want all Members to join with me in welcoming this group of students from 

Saskatoon Westmount. They attend Confederation Park School which is a relatively new school in 

Saskatoon. I would suspect that a number of them come from and actually live in the constituency of 

Biggar but the majority live in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount. I know Members will join 

with me in wishing them a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — I should like to introduce to you and to the Members 

of the Legislature a group of 37 Grade Eight students from St. Michaels School. They are accompanied 

by their teachers, Mr. Peter Bresciani and Mr. Jerry Adams. We hope that their afternoon will be a 

pleasant experience. I do hope to be able to meet with the students between 2:45 and 3:00 o’clock in the 

Members’ dining room area. To all those 37 students, a pleasant afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Elphinstone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bid welcome on your 

behalf and on behalf of all Members in the Assembly to a group of students sitting in the west gallery 

from Kitchener School. They are from Grade Seven and Eight in Kitchener, a large group as you can 

see, accompanied by Mr. Samways, Mr. Russell, Mr. Erb, and the Vice-principal, Mr. Zalinko. 

 

I know that they will have had an opportunity to tour parts of the Legislative building or will do so 

following their visit with us here. I too look forward to the opportunity to meet them a little later on in 

the Members’ dining room. I trust that they will find at least part of their visit to the Legislative building 

entertaining and fruitful. I bid them welcome and wish them a pleasant stay. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

860 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Biggar): — I would just briefly like to join Mr. Speaker in welcoming the 

students from Saskatoon from Confederation Park. I too, hope they have an enjoyable afternoon in the 

Assembly and in Regina. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I found my Glenavon students who 

were unable to make it yesterday and I should like, on behalf of all the Members of the Assembly to 

extend the welcome to 20 Grade Ten students with their teacher, Mr. Preikchat and accompanied by 

Mrs. Gladys Inglet. I certainly hope that they have a very enjoyable day in the Legislature and I look 

forward to visiting with them at the conclusion of their visit in the Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

OPERATIONS OF POTASH MINES 
 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to 

the Minister in charge of the Potash Corporation. Mr. Speaker will recall that a few days ago I was 

inquiring about a profit and loss statement on a quarterly basis. By now, Mr. Speaker, though, your 

Government has invested $272 million, received the annual statement from the Potash Corporation, (a 

two-page document which neglected to bother with a profit and loss statement, no income or loss 

statement. I notice, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder if the Minister could assist me, there are two statements 

in the balance sheet, they show assets of charges to future operations of $3.2 million, then liabilities and 

advances from government finance of $2.9 million, a decrease in working capital of $2.9 million. I 

wonder whether we are justified in assuming that the losses this year are $3.2 million or the $2.9 million 

that recurs more than once. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Potash Corporation): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Member is not 

justified in assuming that either of them are losses. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, I wonder if the Minister would indicate why we have the 

Potash Corporation with a $272 million investment that we know of and that no profit and loss statement 

is shown in an annual report or has the Minister perhaps not seen annual reports in the past? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I have seen more annual reports than the Member opposite, 

but I don’t intend to debate that. With respect to the annual report that he has before him it is dated June 

30, 1976. At that time the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan had acquired neither the Duval mine nor 

had it entered into a preliminary agreement to acquire the Sylvite mine and consequently, Mr. Speaker, 

there was no $272 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

861 

 

million invested as the Member suggested at that time and there was no profit and loss statement 

because the Corporation was still in the stages of being set up. The items which the Member refers to 

obviously will be charged to future operations that have been capitalized in line with generally accepted 

accounting principles which I know that all the Members opposite support fully and wholeheartedly. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister indicate then whether the 

charges to future operations of $3.2 million means that the Potash Corporation before it had purchased a 

single mine or done a single thing, really, had spent $3.2 million? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation had spent some of that. Some of that is not 

related to the acquisition of the two potash mines. For example, some of it concerns properties which 

might be developed at a future date and as long as the potential for those properties is there to be 

developed, it’s treated as a capital asset charged to future operations. In the event that they were 

dropped, they would then be charged to that current year’s operations. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the notes to the financial statement the 

Minister indicates that all operating costs have been deferred, these costs are to be amortized over a 

reasonable period when revenue generating operations begin. Can the Minister even indicate to this 

House that the Potash Corporation at this time is making a profit? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t checked today to see whether today’s operations are 

profitable or not. I want to assure the Member that I believe that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan will be, when we bring the next annual report before this House, a profitable operation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

BASE HOSPITALS LACKING EQUIPMENT 
 

MR. G. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 

Minister of Health. Yesterday during the question period, the Minister complained that the generalities 

of questions asked by us, generalities of statements made by doctors, nurses and hospital boards, 

hospital administrators in the province were such that everybody else was wrong and the Government 

and he were right. 

 

I want to be more specific with a question to the Minister today and ask what the Minister’s reaction is 

to the charge that some base hospitals in Saskatoon and Regina are still lacking essential equipment, 

equipment such as auto staplers, culpascopes, lung scanners, exercise electrocardiographs? 

 

MR. W. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member for Eastview read 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

862 

 

the paper last night he would realize that a number of those items are now in the process of being 

purchased. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, if I may. Isn’t it true that the lack of this specialized 

equipment which you admit has been lacking in our hospitals, has not only affected the quality of care 

negatively but has also seriously jeopardized the specialty training program in the province? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — This is a subjective judgment, Mr. Speaker. Frankly, I do not apologize at all for 

delay in the purchase of computer axial tomography equipment. That kind of equipment is a new item, 

large quantities of those are now being ordered across America and even in the last three years some of 

them ordered are now obsolete and they have to be replaced. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Final supplementary. What is the Minister and his Department prepared to do to 

ensure the laboratory technician training programs will not lose their accreditation as is expected 

because of a lack of funding? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, six out of seven of the training programs in Saskatchewan received 

unqualified approval from the National Accrediting body which is associated with the Canadian Medical 

Association. There was a problem concerning the program at the University Hospital, however there is 

now an informal understanding and a verbal confirmation that accreditation is forthcoming for the 

University Hospital program. Five staff members have been added to the University Hospital program 

during the current fiscal year and students are currently being selected for next year’s program. The 

problem should be fully resolved in the near future. 

 

INCREASE IN STAFF AT MOTOR CARRIER ADMINISTRATION BRANCH 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Attorney 

General in the absence of the Minister responsible for the Highway Traffic Board. Mr. Attorney General 

I note the Estimates of the Highway Traffic Board show a 30 per cent increase in the number of 

positions in the Motor Carrier Administration Branch. Traditionally in the past that Branch has had a 

very small staff complement, in fact, we have had situations in Saskatchewan where weigh scale 

personnel were brought in to train drivers for driver licensing tests, all of a sudden we have a 30 per cent 

increase. Would the Attorney General not admit that this 30 per cent increase in staff is really to enforce 

and administer the new load limit policy as announced by the Minister responsible yesterday at the 

SARM convention? And in fact this sudden and dramatic increase in the number of personnel is really 

the establishment of a grain gestapo to monitor the discriminatory . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I do know that the Conservatives are locked in totally with Cargill 

and the CPR on this whole grain dispute but I am not going to get into 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

863 

 

that debate or get into that type of issue that the Member does. The answer to the question is, No, to the 

Hon. Member because the Minister in speaking to SARM yesterday, and I have a copy of his speech 

here before me, said that what had happened was consultations had taken place between himself and his 

Department and various local authorities and the basis of their conversations here was his thinking or his 

proposals. No firm policy, decisions or announcements were made and accordingly the question, which 

was presupposed on that, is erroneous. The Hon. Member should think carefully before he asks that kind 

of question. 

 

MR. LANE: — A supplementary. Is the sudden backtracking of the Government from a firm position of 

policy have something to do with the unanimous resolution passed by SARM today condemning the 

Government’s policy and opposing the Government’s policy? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose the press will pick this up and sort of assume that 

the statements of facts upon which that question is based is correct. It is not correct. I have a copy of the 

speech here. The question assumes that there is some kind of a backtracking. If the Member looks at the 

speech and is honest and truthful in basing the question, he will see that there was no announcement of 

policy. It is, therefore, a shallow and a phony basis to ask a question and, Mr. Speaker, how am I to 

respond to something like that. I simply ask the Conservatives to please change and elevate the level of 

questioning in this House. 

 

PROPOSED POLICY FOR TRUCKS AND ROADS 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Would the Attorney General give the assurance of the House on behalf of the 

Government that the unanimous resolution of the SARM convention against the proposed policy of the 

Government will be taken into consideration and the policy will be dropped and not discriminating . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, this Government, unlike former governments of the Liberal Party 

and unlike the Conservative Party, is very sensitive to the interests and communications of the local 

governments and the organizations that speak for local governments. Of course, the Minister will and 

the Government will very seriously consider the resolution. But I have to remind the Members of the 

House that it is SARM, among other groups, and I believe that they are still concerned with the costs for 

roads and for the costs of construction and maintaining roads especially in the light of the heavy 

trucking costs which are a consequence thereof. They may not like the proposal, if they don’t I’m sure 

we’ll take a look at it, but the general need to look at the question of protecting roads because the cost is 

as current today as it was prior to the motion being passed. Yes, we will very seriously consider the 

SARM motion. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One more supplemental. Will the Attorney General tell me whether it is 

Government policy as indicated in the front page story of the Leader-Post and the remarks of the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

864 

 

Minister after the speech, that the policy was not directed towards the protection of rural roads but was 

directed at the inland terminals in Weyburn and in Rosetown, and is that Government policy? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to debate and we will debate the Liberals and 

Conservatives commitments to Cargill. That is a debate which has to be considered and the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to face that one. I answered that question to a Member from your side yesterday 

when I said that the overall intent of this proposed policy - in fact it was the Member for Thunder Creek 

(Mr. Thatcher) - was to give protection to the roads and the costs that all taxpayers and all local 

governments bear and all politicians of all political parties should be concerned about. Now you say that 

the taxpayers should simply be ignorant of that. I don’t agree with you. 

 

DEBATE ON PROPOSALS TO SARM 
 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, in the event that the proposed suggestions made by the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs yesterday, in the event that those proposals are going to be enacted by the 

Provincial Government, can they assure this House that all of us in this Legislature will have an 

opportunity to debate those changes by your Government introducing an Act or will it be done by Order 

in Council? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I gave a tentative answer to that question yesterday and the answer 

was that as a government and as a lawyer in the Government advising the Government we would do it 

the way which is legal and proper and expeditious in the interests of the Government and the local 

authorities. If it can be done by Order in Council, whenever it is done, that is likely the route that is to be 

taken. You have full access to Orders in Council. You people look at them every week. If you don’t like 

it, your approach to the Assembly is very simple: put on a resolution and debate it on Private Members’ 

Day. There are three more days left of the Budget Debate. Debate any kind of proposals you want, that 

is the approach that is taken. Now it may very well require legislation later on down the line, but I can’t 

give the Member that commitment or that assurance today because we haven’t progressed that far as of 

today. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question. Will the Attorney General give this House the assurance 

that if the Order in Council is passed after the House is adjourned that he will then reconvene the House 

to allow us to debate that issue by a Private Member resolution? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only thing I can say, I guess, to that is that it is a 

hypothetical question. A copy of the Minister’s speech is here in front of me and I think that that speaks 

for itself. The proposals are there. He read that speech. The proposals are before all the Members of the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

865 

 

House and for the public to see. The public knows what he said, I can’t answer a question based on that 

kind of a hypothetical approach. 

 

SHERIFF’S LETTER - INCREASE IN STAFF 
 

MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon-Southland): — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Attorney General. Preliminary 

to that I’ve delivered a photocopy of a letter, dated December 21st, 1976, which I received at my office 

and which all other solicitors reportedly of Saskatoon have received and I should like to table a copy of 

the letter, there is a photo copy in the hands of the Clerk. 

 

Now the letter indicates, it speaks for itself, but I in leading up to my question would like to highlight 

several things. One of them is that the sheriff for the judicial centre of Saskatoon over whose hand the 

letter is written, indicates an increase of 31 per cent in the number of documents to be served by his 

office. It also indicates a 22 per cent increase in the number of persons and corporations to be served. 

Further, the sheriff states at the centre in Saskatoon that he is unable to carry out his duties specified by 

the rules of court and he invites people of the legal profession in Saskatoon to get private solicitors. Now 

my question is in light of the increase in staff outlined in the Estimates, which I believe to be 11, what 

number of that increase are being assigned to the sheriffs’ offices at the various judicial centres in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another example of the false and erroneous basis on 

which a question is based. He is going to table this letter I just read a few seconds ago. I may be in error 

but nowhere does the Sheriff say that he is unable to do the job. He is asking for the co-operation of the 

solicitors in making sure that any process that they give him that that kind of a process is one that can’t 

be handled elsewhere say through a private bailiff. Now that’s the situation on a quick glance that I have 

seen. In any event I think that that is a reasonable request. I think that a sheriff is entitled to say to the 

solicitors, make sure before you ask a process to be served that it can’t be done somewhere else before 

you tax a very busy operation here. 

 

Now I can’t give you the exact percentage. During the Estimates if you want to ask for the details on 

sheriffs and the allotment to them I will be prepared to handle it. I do know there is a substantial 

increase in the court services portion of the Attorney General’s budget and for which I am very pleased. 

 

MR. LANE: — If all 11 of that increase had gone to the Sheriff’s Department that still wouldn’t 

account for a 31 per cent increase in service of process just last year. Now surely what the Minister is 

admitting at this point in time is that we have come to a stage in Saskatchewan where court orders, once 

you have them, can’t be enforced for lack of staff. Is that not correct? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The answer to that is that 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

866 

 

it is totally incorrect because the person who has raised it, first the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) 

from the left Lane to the right Lane, now in Saskatoon-Sutherland. You are the only people who have 

raised it. I have received nothing from the Law Society of Saskatoon or the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan or from individual listeners and I am not just going to take that kind of politicization of 

terrifically hardworking sheriffs and court services staff in the Province of Saskatchewan. So you Tories 

can keep on making all the issue you want, until the Law Societies give me a form of communication 

which requires some need of urgency on this operation, I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan will 

give any credence to that kind of phony allegation. 

 

RENT CONTROL 
 

MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the 

Rentalsman’s Office. 

 

During the Budget Speech last week the Minister of Finance indicated that the price and wage controls 

are likely to be lifted September next. I wonder if the Minister would care to comment on what effect 

that announcement has with regard to his department to the continuation or the cessation of the role of 

the Office of the Rentalsman? 

 

HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I believe I answered this question 

before when the Hon. Member asked it about one week ago. 

 

We are constantly monitoring the vacancy rate in the different cities across the province and as yet we 

have made no decision. 

 

MR. PENNER: — If I may, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister not agree that the rationale given for the 

introduction of rent control legislation last year was to fit with the broad concept of Price and Wage 

Controls? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — No. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I submit to the Minister that if he were to check 

the record that the Minister in charge at that time put forward as a strong argument for the inclusion of 

the Rentalsman Office with rent control legislation, the need to move into the philosophy of wage and 

price controls and that because the wage and price controls are coming off, that there is no further need 

for the Rentalsman’s Office to continue. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct my question to 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

867 

 

the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I have been informed that there is a serious breakdown of communications between the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan and the people in northern Saskatchewan. You are aware of that? Examples are 

such decisions as closing of the school at Cole Bay and the water pollution problem there and unpaid 

school taxes, at Ile-a-La-Crosse because of the provincial Government’s restraints, and the often 

criticized refusal of the Government to listen to the local officials. 

 

Would the Minister not admit that the DNS is falling into the old semi-colonial approach of the previous 

governments. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I hesitate to interrupt a new Member but I think he is distinctly inviting 

debate and I shall take the next question. 

 

RENT CONTROL 
 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Minister 

in charge of the office of the Rentalsman. 

 

Do I take it, Mr. Minister, from the answer to the Member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) that at 

such time as the vacancy factor in apartments reaches a certain stage, that the rent control legislation will 

be repealed? And, furthermore, will you tell me what vacancy factor you are looking at, what 

percentage? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — I am sorry if the Hon. Member took that inference from my comments. There are a 

number of factors that will be considered and as yet we have made no decision as to whether we will 

continue or discontinue rent control. No decision has been made and I indicated that in my first 

statement and that is still the position. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. What criteria then are you looking at to 

determine whether or not rent controls should be lifted? Is it on the basis of wage and price controls; on 

the basis of vacancy, or what? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Well, there are a number of factors and of course the vacancy rate is one of them. If 

there are no places for people to stay, that is one good reason for keeping rent control, but there are a 

number of other factors. We will take them all into consideration before we decide and as yet no 

decision has been made. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary. Are you prepared to tell this House today what those factors are? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — No, because as yet we are not sure what position the Federal Government is going 

to take on wages and prices and we are not sure when they will be discontinued. If you read the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

868 

 

paper from day to day, God only knows what the Federal Government has in mind. 

 

ELECTRICAL AND GAS RATE INCREASES 
 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask a question even though I 

realize I run the risk of having the Attorney General rate it category X or that he may have to make 

necessary explanations to the press gallery so that they understand my question. 

 

I should like to direct a question to the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation before 

he gets out of the Assembly. 

 

Recent reports indicate further electricity and gas rate increases. We will assume, Mr. Speaker, that any 

rate increases will not be announced until after the Pelly by-election if present government policies 

continue. When after the Pelly by-election can we expect the rate increases and can the Minister give us 

an estimate as to the predicted rate increases? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Saskatchewan Power Corporation): — Mr. Speaker, the policy of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation in regard to increases both for electricity and natural gas have been to 

announce them in the summer of the year, if a rate increase is required. That has been the case in the last 

two increases. There have been no decisions made as to whether there will be an increase in either gas or 

electricity in the Province of Saskatchewan. If the Member would look around he would see that energy 

costs are going up everywhere in Canada, including Alberta, where in many instances electrical costs are 

higher than they are in the Province of Saskatchewan. He should also be aware that 60 per cent of the 

natural gas that is consumed in the Province of Saskatchewan comes from the Province of Alberta and 

we have no control over the pricing of that gas, consequently, if the Province of Alberta which is now 

governed by a Conservative Government undertakes to increase the cost of that gas, we will have no 

alternative but to pass that cost on to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 

We have some of the lowest electrical and natural gas costs anywhere in North America. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Instead of any increases would the Minister be 

prepared to have funds diverted from the Energy Fund to our senior citizens so that they are not faced 

with further utility rate increases? 

 

MR. MESSER: — That, Mr. Speaker, is not the intention of the Energy Development Fund and we try 

to convey to the Conservative Caucus and its Members that to use that fund for that purpose simply 

depletes the fund and we would have no benefit in future years. It is our intention to undertake to invest 

that fund in wise investments which will have some long-term return to the people of Saskatchewan, 

such as potash and the development of other minerals in this province. I think that he simply shows his 

ignorance continuing to request the Government to use that fund in such a short-sighted manner. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

869 

 

REQUEST FOR PRIORITY OF DEBATE ON ROAD LOAD LIMITS 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, with leave I should like to ask you a question on the 

procedure. We have requested Priority of Debate and we would just like to ensure that our motion 

requesting leave for a matter of Priority of Debate be debated today and we’d like the Speaker’s 

direction as to when that matter would come up. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I can give the Member the direction that if the Member objects to passing on to 

Special Order at this time, then we will proceed down the agenda to Orders of the Day and the matter 

will be dealt with. However, if the Member does not object to passing down to Special Order, the matter 

will be dealt with later on today when we raise the balance of the agenda and get to Orders of the Day. 

 

MR. LANE: — You are saying that if I do object, it will be dealt with later on today. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — No, if you do object to giving leave, it will be dealt with very soon. 

 

MR. LANE: — Well we are prepared to have the matter dealt with after radio time, in the normal 

course, if that’s acceptable. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That’s fine. Then I would advise the Member not to object to passing to Special 

Order at this time. Do I have leave? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, may I direct a question. Are you suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

this important matter may never come up today, because if the Special Order continues until 5:00 

o’clock this afternoon, there will be no opportunity to debate this or no opportunity to give it 

consideration? Is that the process we’re now going through? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I’m always in the hands of the House, because we’re dealing with subject 

matter and we’re accepting leave from the House and I’m going to try to follow the usual practice before 

the House adjourns today, of dealing with the balance of the agenda that we have skipped over at this 

point. So I can only give you my assurance that I will attempt to deal with it in that way and I assume 

the Members will attempt to follow me. 

 

MR. LANE: — Are we on the firm understanding that after radio time today that the matter will be 

taken up, that this matter will be dealt with today? We think it is a matter of urgent importance and we 

want it dealt with today. Now we’re prepared to allow the speakers who are committed to radio time to 

go ahead and we don’t want to disrupt that, but we want a full debate on this matter today. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

870 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I cannot give the Member that assurance. I can only ask the Attorney General if 

that is contained in his request for leave? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, you know, this matter has come up before the House before. The 

Member for Regina South put a Priority of Debate on, I think it was Monday of this week. And when I 

asked that the proceedings of the House be stood so we could get on with the air time which we are on 

now, as a common courtesy on the day, the Conservatives agreed on that day because it wasn’t their 

motion, but so did the Liberals. Now because it’s their motion, they don’t agree. Being obstructive, 

because they want to get into the air time operation. What more can I say, Mr. Speaker, except from past 

precedent of the operation that’s the way it’s been going. Now I wish the Conservatives would stop 

playing games in this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think it’s fair to draw from the Attorney General’s statement that he 

intends to follow the usual practice of completing the balance of the agenda that we skip over to get to 

Special Order. I think I’m correct in assuming that therefore, the question before the House is this; at 

this time do we have leave to pass to the Special Order? 

 

Agreed. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. W. E. Smishek 

(Minister of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance and the 

proposed amendment by Mr. W. C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek). 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I rise 

to take part in this debate on the Budget. I want first of all to congratulate the Minister of Finance for an 

excellent job of preparing and presenting this, the sixth Budget of the New Democratic Party 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the two new Members to the Assembly. I’m sure that they will 

soon enter into the fray in this Chamber and I promise them, in true parliamentary tradition, as warm a 

welcome as I can muster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Budget is a sound budget. It takes a reasonable approach to the economy, 

to spending and to revenue. Nothing that has been said by the Opposition spokesmen has shaken my 

belief in this Budget. The Member for Thunder Creek’s speech certainly didn’t lack enthusiasm, but it 

was sadly short in substance. The House should now know how the Member has garnered so many 

awards for his bull. In fact, one of the prize members of his herd might have enlightened this Assembly 

as much as he was able to. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

871 

 

The Opposition assaults on this Government are a mass of confusion. They oppose government 

spending with all their heart, except where they want more spending on health, bigger pensions, bigger 

welfare payments, more funds for the auditors. They say spend more on everything, buy less altogether. 

Mr. Speaker, this is rank hypocrisy. It’s typical free enterprise schizophrenia. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I will, Mr. Speaker, return to these contradictions later. 

 

This Government will not fall prey to the cries of the wolves opposite. This province has the best health 

care in North America, the finest educational system, and our record of financial management is 

unmatched. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Our resource policy is designed for the citizens of this Province, for their children 

and for their children’s children. We won’t listen to those in the Opposition who fought our every 

attempt to obtain a fair return from the province’s resources, who wanted to see the revenue from 

Saskatchewan resources line the pockets of their corporate friends and who now say forget the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) who is in the process of leading the Liberal Party 

out of the wilderness and into oblivion and the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) are birds of a feather. 

Their only difference is that one is a lawyer, while the other needs a lawyer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Both would sell us out to foreign corporations. Both to their corporate friends, we 

in the New Democratic Party have never approached government in that manner, nor will we do so in 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking in this Assembly in the Throne Speech debate, I dealt at some length with the 

people and the groups that finance the Progressive Conservative Party in this province. I outlined the 

little guys who pay the piper and call the tune for the Tories. Little guys like oil companies, mining 

companies, banks and trust companies. I listed a number of these and the level of their contributions. I 

also listed a few interesting individual contributors, such as the Drs. Baltzan of Saskatoon. 

 

I questioned the contributions of CKCK to various Conservative candidates. This portion of my remarks 

seemed to attract some public attention. It even brought a response from a member of the senior 

management of CKCK and of Armadale. He admitted they’d made contributions to two political parties. 

Now I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that we all know who they were. He also said that he saw nothing wrong 

with this whatsoever. Well, Mr. Speaker, if CKCK felt that making these contributions was justified and 

was perfectly acceptable, then why was it that 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

872 

 

they chose to make the contributions to the Tories in the nice round figure of $99, a figure which 

happens to be just under the level which would bring about public disclosure? 

 

Now the Member for Nipawin, the Leader of the Conservative Party, wasn’t pleased that I’d obtained 

these figures. The Member for Swift Current, he went so far as to accuse me of using information which 

was somehow privileged. For the record, for the benefit of the Conservative caucus in particular, I 

should like to read a passage from the Election Act. The passage deals with the responsibility of the 

Chief Electoral Officer, with respect to the returns filed by political parties and by candidates. The 

passage is in Section 203 A (1) (C). It says and I quote: 

 

Shall at all reasonable times during the six months period next after they’ve been delivered to him 

permit any elector to inspect them and to make extracts therefrom. 

 

Now, I don’t know whether the Members of the Conservative Party can’t read or didn’t take the time to 

look it up, but whatever the reason, I feel that the allegations made by the Member for Swift Current, 

that I’d obtained the information in a manner somehow less that straightforward, were uncalled for and 

unworthy of a Member of this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — The other comment I made in my remarks last November dealt with the credibility 

of the Member for Nipawin’s membership claims. I said at that time and I repeat today, that the 

Conservative Leader, in the June 9, 1975 edition of the Regina Leader-Post, claimed a membership of 

more than 10,000. This was at the same time as the official records of his party, as filed with the Chief 

Electoral Office, indicated that they had a membership of only 5,184 on May 12th, plus 210 youth 

members. On June 9, 1975 the same day as the newspaper article, they had a membership of only 5,803. 

That’s only slightly over one-half of what the Party Leader claimed. 

 

The Member for Nipawin rose to challenge my statement. He accused me of producing a falsehood. He 

asked me to withdraw the remarks and tried to wiggle out of his web by saying I referred only to 

memberships sold during the election period. Mr. Speaker, I was not referring to only those 

memberships sold in the course of the election. That figure was filed separately by the President of the 

PC Party in January of 1976. In just a moment, Mr. Speaker, I will table the documents on which my 

statements about the Conservatives misleading the people of this province, were based. The documents 

that I am about to table consist of two receipts which were filed by the Progressive Conservative Party 

along with their election return. The receipts are from Computer Services Western Ltd. 201 - 416 21st 

Street East, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. They are billings to the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan. Bills for the production of mailing labels. On the first receipt, a certified true copy of 

which I now table, there is a charge for labels, all members. May I repeat that, Mr. Speaker. Labels, all 

members, 5,184 at 3.5 cents each. And a second charge PCYF 210 at 4.5 cents each. PCYF is the initial 

form for the Progressive Conservative Youth Federation. This receipt is dated May 23, 1975. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

873 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second receipt, a certified true copy of which I now table, is dated June 9, 1975. 

Another bill from Computer Services to the PCs. This bill contained the charge of 409 additions at ten 

cents a piece. If you add the May 12th figure of 5,184 to the June 9th addition of 409, plus the 210 

young Tories, you come up with a grand total, 5,803, nowhere near the more than 10,000 deliberately 

exaggerated figure used by the Conservative Leader. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Just so the record is straight, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to document the other 

comments I made regarding the Conservatives’ dubious financing. I table first, a certified true copy of 

the original election return filed by the Conservative candidate in Last Mountain-Touchwood. The return 

shows contributions from Murphy Oil Company of Calgary, Alberta in the amount of $99.50, a 

contribution from CKCK radio in the amount of $99, and a contribution from Canada Permanent Trust 

of $100. This return was filed on July 24, 1975. Just to show that a Conservative can be smart enough to 

know he made a mistake, I would also like to table at this time, a certified true copy of the second 

election expenses return filed by the Tory from Last Mountain-Touchwood, this one dated August 14, 

1975. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the Murphy Oil Company contribution is nowhere to be seen. The CKCK 

contribution has disappeared. The Canada Permanent Trust entry is mysteriously gone. Mr. Speaker, it 

would appear that the Tories are ashamed of their friends and well might be. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Entered on the second return is a simple entry. Twelve donations $100 or less, 

names not revealed, for a total of $725.50. Mr. Speaker, this may go down in political history as “the 

case of the disappearing donors.” Just so that no one thinks this was an isolated case, I also table a 

certified true copy of the return filed by the Conservative candidate in the Morse constituency. This 

return also shows a CKCK contribution of $99. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to burden the House by tabling too much information, so I end the 

documentation of my case by laying on the table a copy of the June 9, 1975 Regina Leader-Post story on 

the Conservative Leader’s comments in Humboldt. It says, and I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party is working with only the money received from within the province on a 

day-to-day basis, Mr. Collver said. 

 

I ask the Hon., (and I use the description somewhat loosely), Member for Nipawin, what about Murphy 

Oil of Calgary, what about the PC Canada Fund, what about Canada Permanent Trust and on and on and 

on? 

 

I could only offer to the Conservative Leader an old adage, 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

874 

 

Oh what a tangled web we weave 

When first we practise to deceive. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought the Conservatives Leader would have 

been more careful after last fall. However, on February 10, 1977 it’s reported in the Prince Albert 

Herald, and I quote, and Id like to table this as well: 

 

Responding to the NDP advertisement linking the PCs and the Liberals to the giant corporations, Mr. 

Collver said his party has not received a dime from such corporations. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Not a dime, but millions, yes. Not a dime. That’s true, not a dime. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — The Member for Saskatoon Centre says not a dime, just millions. Mr. Speaker, one 

could say about the Conservative Leader that he seems to dance to that old tune, “don’t let the facts get 

in your eyes. 

 

Let there be no mistake about it, Conservatives have always been financed by Bay Street. They’ve 

always represented the privileged interests in our society. They’ve always pretended to represent the 

little guy while protecting the rich and the powerful and they haven’t changed, Mr. Speaker, they 

haven’t changed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I intend to devote the bulk of my comments in this Budget Debate to 

dealing with the criticisms offered by the Leader of the Conservative Party and examining the few 

proposals he and his party have put forward. 

 

You know, for over two years he’s been speaking in generalities, without any examination of either his 

or his party’s position. I suppose it was too much to expect the press of this province to analyse the Tory 

Party, given their obvious commitment to see them elected. Nevertheless it’s still disappointing to see 

the press continually plugging the Member for Nipawin and ignoring anything negative with respect to 

him or his party. 

 

I expect, Mr. Speaker, that any comments I may have will be ignored by the media, nevertheless, I can 

tell you one thing, I don’t intend to be accused of not having tried. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — In the debate yesterday, the Conservative Leader gave us the benefit of his 

financial wisdom. He spoke mostly of gloom and doom, of what terrible things deficits were. I was 

convinced, listening to him, Mr. Speaker, that no self respecting Conservative would ever have even a 

“teeny weeny” deficit. Mr. Speaker, I decided then to see how Conservatives 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

875 

 

do it in other places, and I checked Ontario. I looked at 1972-1973 because I wanted to see how big a 

surplus they had in that year. You know what surprising information I came across? They had a $365 

million dollar deficit that year. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, even Tories can be given one mistake. So I checked the next year, and you will 

never guess at the surprise I received. A 379 million dollar deficit. On to the next year and another 

shock. A $546 million deficit in Ontario. Mr. Speaker, that would buy several potash mines. I didn’t put 

them out with three strikes, so I thought I would give them one more chance, and I looked at the next 

year, 1975-1976. Lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, a deficit of $1,480,000, Mr. Speaker that was larger than 

our entire budget was that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say that people in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones; well I want to say to the Tories 

in their saran wrap house, they shouldn’t even breathe. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader went on to decry the fact that this 

Government has just a little over half of our cash forward in cash or marketable securities, as of March 

31, 1976, and he said Mr. Speaker, that was fiscal mismanagement. That is what he said. Those are his 

words. I wondered how the Tories do it in Ontario. 

 

You know he is criticizing us for having only a little over half of our cash in marketable securities, so I 

checked Mr. Speaker. In Ontario, at their year end on exactly the same date, they didn’t have even half. 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have a quarter. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even have a zero balance. No, Mr. 

Speaker, they were the grand sum of $155,124,000 in the hole. Not only that Mr. Speaker, those wise 

Tory financial managers had a bank overdraft of $463,460,000. Now talk about mismanagement in the 

Member for Nipawin’s (Mr. Collver) terms. It is no wonder that the banks contribute so much to the 

Tories, they can’t afford to let them go down the tubes. 

 

Now I can hear it coming and I know the Member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver, will say “look to Alberta.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I did, and I used the Leader of the Conservative Party’s very own patented method. 

One by the way I don’t agree with, but it is his method, so I used it. I am reminded of another 

Legislative sage whom we had in this Chamber, who happened to be a Liberal, who had his own 

method. He said that population was the acid test of the Government. That got him. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

will use the Conservative Leader’s special and unique technique to examine Alberta. As of March 31, 

1976, the Conservative Government in Alberta had a surplus of $516.6 million, like our cash carry 

forward. They also had an amount due to Heritage Fund, like our Energy and Resource Development 

Fund, of $1,500 million. The total surplus was shown as $2,016,600,000. But, Mr. Speaker, they only 

had in cash and short term deposits $933.3 million. 

 

Now, using the Member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver’s simple minded and illogical approach, they had a 

short-fall. 

 

MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, I understand 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

876 

 

it is proper Legislative procedure not to use a Member’s personal name. 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order! Order! Please order! I suppose the point is well taken and I ask 

all Members to bear this in mind when they are addressing the House and the Assembly. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the Members opposite don’t want anyone to 

know the name of their Leader. 

 

I want to point out that I was very careful at all times to say the Member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver, 

which I believe is quite appropriate in this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, If we mismanaged our affairs, which we didn’t, then Alberta, that 

Conservative mecca, by the Collver standard has been a colossal disaster. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader’s criticism wouldn’t hold up to scrutiny 

before a kindergarten class. It is shallow and erroneous and I’m disappointed that the press of this 

Province, some of his best contributors, didn’t take him apart before the cameras. Surprise! Surprise! 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives bemoan the fact that we had advanced some of the Energy and Resource 

Development Fund to Crown corporations. I want to tell him and Members of this Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan that we are not alone in this regard. Alberta has advanced more from their 

Heritage Fund to one Crown Corporation than we have to all of ours, $424.4 million. Not only that Mr. 

Speaker, but they have sunk, and I believe that is the appropriate word Mr. Speaker, sunk, $320.1 

million into Syncrude, that gigantic sellout. Mr. Speaker, $320.1 million and they don’t even own it. 

And the Leader of the Conservative Party criticises or acquisition of resources which the people of 

Saskatchewan now own. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Sure he would sell them, to his friends. Who would get Saskoil? Maybe Murphy 

Oil who contributed to the last Saskatchewan Conservative campaign. Perhaps the Province would put 

up the money and Murphy Oil would get the ownership a la Syncrude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to one of the common criticisms of this Government, and one the Leader of 

the Conservatives used yesterday in his speech on this Budget debate. That we are spending too much 

money, that the Government is too big in Saskatchewan, that there is too much bureaucracy. The 

criticism comes from both Liberals and Conservatives who suggest that somehow they would do better. 

Well, let’s look at the facts. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

877 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to give this House some figures on per capita spending based on the various 

Provincial Government addresses and estimates for 1976-77. Expenditures are gross and include 

government department current and capital spending. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, who do you suppose is the biggest spender of them all? None other than good old 

Conservative Newfoundland at $1,956 per capita. In second place trying hard to be the biggest spenders 

of all, is Liberal Prince Edward Island at $1,710. Next come two more Conservatives, New Brunswick 

and Alberta, $1,679 and $1,622 respectively. And just so the Liberals don’t feel left out, numbers five 

and six are or were at the time, two Liberal Governments, Quebec and Nova Scotia, $2,569 and $1,538 

respectively. Ontario is in seventh place, undoubtedly because of minority government, and NDP 

opposition, followed by British Columbia, still benefitting from NDP policies. And who are the best, 

two best managed Provinces Mr. Speaker? Why, for gosh sakes, it is Manitoba and Saskatchewan at 

$1,400 and $1,420 respectively. 

 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba provide more and better services in health care than other provinces, they 

provide them more efficiently. It is obvious that some people opposite just talk a good fight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the same two Opposition Parties continue continually attack the 

growing bureaucracy in the Province as they call it. Again, one needs to look at the facts to sort the 

wheat from the chaff. No one denies that we have more programs in Saskatchewan than in other 

provinces. For example, a children’s dental program, a hearing aid plan and a drug program. Mr. 

Speaker, people are required to run these programs, but the Conservatives have suggested that they 

could in some way do better. Well, a comparison with Alberta is enlightening for those who take the 

Tories at their word. As of December, 1975, according to Statistics Canada, there were two and one-half 

times as many civil servants in Alberta than in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that, for a province with fewer programs and fewer services than Saskatchewan. Well Mr. 

Speaker, I know what someone is going to say, “but they have more people to serve”. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I compared them on the basis of population. Saskatchewan had 1.8 per cent of its people in the 

civil service compared to 2.4 per cent in Alberta, 33 per cent more. Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder 

than words. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, where are our free enterprise friends across the way when it comes to 

auto insurance? Somehow they are strangely silent. Perhaps it is because here the facts are too well 

known. They can’t bluster their way around with vague criticisms. For example, look at a single 

twenty-one year old who has no accidents and is driving a 1975 Chevrolet. For a policy with a $200,000 

public liability and $100 deductible he would pay over $800 in Calgary or Toronto. In Saskatchewan it 

would cost him less than $300. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

878 

 

Mr. Speaker, are the Conservatives and Liberals committed to public auto insurance or would they move 

in the wrecking crew here, too? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, if they are committed to public auto insurance why are there so many 

general insurance companies listed as contributors to the PC Canada Fund? I would suggest Mr. 

Speaker, that since the Tories are committed to selling our potash to their corporate friends and 

committed to selling our oil resources to their corporate friends, SGIO can’t be far down their list. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — They won’t be any kinder to public insurance than their free enterprise friends in 

British Columbia. Indeed it may be that the Bailey buggy would become the 1980 version of the Bennett 

buggy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn now to examine one of the few proposals the Conservatives and their Leader, Mr. 

Collver, have put forward. Indeed it only consists of three words, a catch phrase they have used from 

time to time, zero base budgeting. It is a term that I doubt any of them understand, but nevertheless it 

does give the impression to the public that the Conservatives have an alternative. 

 

Traditionally in Saskatchewan, and virtually all jurisdictions in North America, budget control has 

focused on incremental evaluation. In this approach certain programs are assumed to be built into a 

budget before one starts. One starts with certain assumptions. Assumptions such as that we will have a 

hospitalization and a medicare program, we will run an education system, and will make grants to 

municipalities. Then we deal with incremental spending, adding or subtracting to existing programs. 

 

I read the Conservative literature distributed during the two recent by-elections, and noticed that they 

would introduce this zero base budgeting. I had a general understanding of the term, but I couldn’t 

believe that even they would propose it. So I obtained a detailed explanation to make sure I hadn’t 

missed anything, and it really only verified my fears. I should like to explain to this House, and to the 

Conservative Caucus in particular, what zero based budgeting means. 

 

Zero base budgeting doesn’t acknowledge the existence of any base. It starts out assuming there aren’t 

any programs. What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that the Conservatives are committed to no existing 

programs. Let us be perfectly clear. A conservative Government is not committed to providing a medical 

care program. They have said so, “Put the care back in medicare”. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, how can a party 

whose budgeting process commits it to no programs put the care back in medicare? Empty words Mr. 

Speaker, empty words. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

879 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, farmers should know that the Conservatives’ zero base budgeting 

means there is no commitment on the part of the Conservative Leader to FarmStart, community pastures 

and ag reps or any other agricultural program. A Conservative Government would not be committed to 

any of them. Consumers should know that Conservatives are not committed to consumer protection nor 

to enforcement of consumer legislation. 

 

Workers should know that Conservatives are not committed to occupational health programs, labour 

standards enforcement, nor indeed, I suspect, Mr. Speaker, to much of the labour legislation now in 

force. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, zero base budgeting means the Conservatives are committed to nothing 

except power, something many of us have suspected all along. 

 

Mr. Speaker, significant advances in budget reform have already been made in Saskatchewan. 

Program-based Management Information System is the focal point of this reform. This method holds out 

more promise than the zero base approach. Total information is generated relative to selected programs 

and input-output analysis is more refined than any known zero based applications. The name of the 

game is to provide improved information to support allocative decision-making. Saskatchewan is miles 

ahead of any jurisdiction in Canada in this respect. Zero base budgeting if applied in Saskatchewan 

would be outdated, destructive and irrelevant, from the standpoint of budget analysis and control. 

 

The concept of zero base budgeting has been dismissed by this Government and by leading budget 

theorists throughout the world. Basically because there is no budget system anywhere per se which is 

non-incremental in all applications. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Conservatives know what they 

are talking about. I don’t think they really understand the meaning of the term. And I ask them as they 

take part in this debate to expand on this proposal and to explain fully to this Assembly and to the people 

of Saskatchewan how they would implement such an approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday speaking in this debate the Leader of the Conservative Party said the people in 

Saskatchewan should be given the opportunity to participate directly in the future of the potash industry. 

Well, what the Conservative Leader proposes is that the Crown corporations of the Province which are 

involved in the resource industries will be formed into a public corporation which issues shares. It is our 

position that every citizen of Saskatchewan already has a share in this Corporation. An equal share, a 

share regardless of their financial position, their geographic location or any other considerations. 

 

He proposed that every Saskatchewan citizen would receive one voting share. Now, Mr. Speaker, these 

shares would have to be transferable or they wouldn’t be worth any more than the paper they are written 

on. If they are transferable that means that I or anyone else would be free to sell that share to whoever I 

wish. I could also give voting rights to whoever I wanted to in the form of a proxy. 

 

Now if the Member for Nipawin or anyone else in his caucus had a knowledge of corporate structure or 

so-called “theory of the firm,” they would see the folly of their proposal. For any company, such as this 

where the shares are widely distributed, it would only take 4 or 6 per cent of the shares for a group to 

take control of the company. Even for companies whose shares 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

880 

 

are less widely distributed, the figure seldom rises above 20 per cent. What could happen then would be 

that some corporation could buy 10 per cent of the outstanding shares of the company and have 

succeeded in taking control of it, for only 10 per cent of the cost. You know, at least the Liberal Leader 

would try and negotiate the price for selling our birthright. The Conservative Leader would virtually 

give it away. 

 

Now I know the Conservatives may respond by saying the shares would be restricted. They couldn’t be 

held by non-residents. That would partly blunt the point of the whole exercise, but it could probably be 

done, even if it were done there are definite problems. A large group based in the province could take 

over the new corporation. They could do so either by acquiring shares from individuals or by voting as a 

block or by obtaining the proxy vote of their members. 

 

I sort of contemplated this, Mr. Speaker, and I wondered if the Conservative Party might not object to 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour electing all the members of the Board of Directors of this new 

corporation, and perhaps they wouldn’t but it certainly would be a very likely possibility, given this 

particular structure. As it is now no one citizen has excess say on how these Crown businesses are 

operated nor does any particular citizen receive more benefits simply because he belongs to a group or 

because he has enough funds to purchase other people’s shares. Under the Tory proposal those who are 

wealthy, those who belong to special groups or organizations would have disproportionate power to the 

detriment of the average citizen of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I would suggest to the Conservative Leader that he listen to his convention, which 

for all the wrong reasons, made the right decision in rejecting his proposal. While it may sound 

appealing on the surface it is typical of all the proposals that emanate from the Members of the 

Conservative Party, it is shallow and doesn’t stand up under scrutiny. I suggest that they stick to vague 

generality and to corporate planning at the level of “Mismanagement Associates” and not wander into 

the dangerous areas of actually making specific proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I only have a couple of brief areas I should like to cover before closing. Yesterday, I was, 

along with most Saskatchewan residents, pleased to hear unemployment figures for this province 

released. Unfortunately, it wasn’t as pleasant a day for the rest of Canada. It was interesting to note the 

usual apologetic way that the press mentioned Saskatchewan’s relatively excellent showing. I first heard 

the reports yesterday morning about 8:00 o’clock on CKCK. I was surprised that the only provincial 

comment that they had was from the Conservative Leader, the Member for Nipawin. I tried to catch it 

again but they didn’t replay it as far as I could find out. Even CKCK, an acknowledged supporter of 

Conservative candidates, didn’t think it was worthwhile re-airing the inane comment he had made. He 

said something like this: — the reason Saskatchewan has such good results is because we don’t have 

such secondary industry. Then he went on to say that we need to develop more secondary industry to 

reduce unemployment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t make any sense at all and even CKCK was too analytical to replay it. I 

would suggest that the Leader of the Conservative Party spend his time talking about vague generalities 

and not try to give specific comments like that. Perhaps he should follow Joe Clark’s example - hear no 

policy, see no policy, speak no policy, have no policy. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

881 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — . . . and going down in the Gallup Polls every day. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — The Attorney General says, and going down in the Gallup Polls every day, only 

going down slower than the Members for the Conservative Caucus opposite. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I know the Members of both opposition parties with their blind 

commitment to free enterprise, will fail to see the merits of our Budget and our resource policies. 

However, I am convinced that the people of this province will support our Government and its 

endeavours to obtain the maximum economic return from our resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can look at the potash industry as an example. To all those free enterprisers opposite I 

ask: how many young Saskatchewan people do you know who worked hard, built up an enterprise and 

now own a potash mine? I guess we all know the answer, Mr. Speaker, none. If we are going to have 

Saskatchewan ownership, it is going to involve the Government. Either it will be through a Crown 

corporation, where all share equally in the ownership, or a private company heavily backed by the 

Government where all will share in the risk, but the few with the money will share the profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has chosen the first option, the Conservatives have chosen the second 

which should surprise no one. They don’t believe in the public sharing the profits, only the risks. One 

need only look at Syncrude and Churchill Forest Products to see how their policies would operate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that this Budget and our policies will be supported by the people of this 

province and consequently I will oppose the Liberal amendment and support the main Motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in entering the Budget 

Debate at this time. I should first like to congratulate the Minister of Finance on the presentation of a 

good, sound document in line with economic situations as they currently exist. 

 

I should also like to take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate two new Conservative Members, 

the Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf) and the Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. 

Lane). I hope they will make significant contributions in the House. I have often wondered in the last 

few days if the Conservative Party would be over there at all if it wasn’t for the two new Members, all 

the rest of them were out of their seats. 

 

I note the elation in the Conservative ranks with respect to the two by-elections. I suppose that is 

understandable. One characteristic, particularly of the Leader of the Conservatives, 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

882 

 

is that he doesn’t possess much humility. Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand that simply because he has so 

much about which he should be humble and could be humble. I take a look at the Conservative Leaders 

across the country, Mr. Speaker. If I go to Newfoundland I find Premier Moores, a very nice fellow, I 

have met him. I see Mr. McQuaid in Prince Edward Island, a very nice fellow; Mr. Buchanan in Nova 

Scotia, very nice fellow; Premier Hatfield in New Brunswick, very nice fellow. I suppose, in Quebec, 

because one can’t find a Conservative Party there I have to look at Mr. Biron, the Leader of the Union 

Nationale. If I come to Ontario I find Premier Davis, well known to the Canadian public and who has 

been in the public eye for a long time. If I come to Manitoba I find the Conservatives are led by a person 

named Sterling Lyon. I have talked to some people in Manitoba and they think those names should be 

switched around. If I come to this province I find the Hon. Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) as the 

Leader of the Conservatives. I look at Alberta and I find that they have Premier Loughheed, who has 

been in the news, not so much recently but quite a bit in the last few years. The Leader of the 

Conservatives in British Columbia is Doctor Scott Wallace, a very nice fellow, but the trouble is he 

hasn’t anyone to lead, he is the only one in the House of the Conservative persuasion. Now if I go back 

to Ottawa and look at their national leader, Joe what’s his name? I find that the group as a whole are a 

pretty mediocre lot, but the Leader of the Conservative Party in this province, Mr. Speaker, stands head 

and shoulders below them all. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — A great deal has been said in this debate with respect to the budget brought down in 

March one year ago. 

 

The financial critic from the Liberal Opposition and the Leader of the Conservatives have attempted to 

make much of the projected shortfall of approximately $45 million between estimated expenditures and 

anticipated revenues in the fiscal year which will end on March 31st next. They intimate they looked in 

their crystal balls and accurately prophesied such a short fall. Rubbish, Mr. Speaker, complete and utter 

rubbish. In both cases it was simply a shot in the dark. A year ago in his budget presentation the Minister 

of Finance suggested a probable addition of some $2 million to cash carry forward. The estimated 

excess of $2 million is now predicted to be a shortfall. It is readily explainable. 

 

When the budget was presented a year ago, no one, Mr. Speaker, not even the so-called prophets across 

the way could predict a payment of $8 million in disaster allowances related to spring flooding in April 

and May and a disastrous windstorm in central Saskatchewan in June. How, I ask this House, Mr. 

Speaker, could any one predict a payment of some $31 million to cow-calf producers some seven 

months after the budget for 1976-77 was presented in this Assembly? 

 

In May 1976 there was a nurses’ strike some two months after the budget presentation. The settlement 

resulting in an increased cost of some $8 million. Even the Hon. Member for Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, 

should be able to total additional expenditures for these three items and come out with a figure of $47 

million. These expenditures eliminated the estimated $2 million excess and created the $45 million 

anticipated shortfall. Even a printout from a computer operated by 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

883 

 

Management Associates - or is that managed associates - and the management processes advocated by 

the Hon. Member for Nipawin should lead him to believe that $31 million plus $8 million plus $8 

million, totals $47 million and had those expenditures not been made a $2 million excess in cash inflows 

over cash outflows would have resulted. Does he disagree with these expenditures? If he does let him 

say so. Does the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) oppose them? If he does, let him 

admit it. 

 

The Hon. Member for Nipawin suggests the results of the two recent by-elections, Mr. Speaker, resulted 

in increases in the health budget for fiscal 1977-78. Wrong again! His crystal ball is still cloudy. He sees 

through the glass darkly. 

 

In the 1976-77 budget we estimated health expenditures of $338 million - an increase of some $44 

million over the actual expenditures incurred in 1975-76. The estimate will be exceeded and actual 

health expenditures by March 31, 1977, will be in the range of $344 million to $360 million. The actual 

increase in expenditures over the preceding year will be in the range of $60 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he asserts we are appreciably increasing the allocation to health as a result of the 

by-elections. The Budget presented last Thursday was complete and in print prior to the March 4th 

by-election result tabulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1977-78 Budget is a responsible financial document which realistically reflects current 

financial indicators. It has made reasonable provision for sustenance of our major provincial programs. 

It provides some new additional services. I am, Mr. Speaker, particularly pleased that a major expansion 

of home care services is to be launched in the 1977-78 fiscal year. The Budget provides $6,300,000, an 

increase of some 50 per cent and I wish to make it clear that this is the first stage in implementing this 

major community-based health and social services program. As needed, services are provided to people 

in their homes, we believe it will in time reduce the demand pressures for additional nursing home beds 

and Level 4 facilities. 

 

We believe that this program will be of major benefit to the elderly as well as the handicapped, disabled 

and other chronically ill persons. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, this Budget provides for major increases in funding for health care programs 

to an estimated total of $403.7 million. Funds provided to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan are 

estimated at $232.4 million, an increase in excess of 20 per cent over the preceding year. Mr. Speaker, I 

invite the Members opposite to compare this increase with the 8 1/2 per cent to 11 per cent ceiling 

increases imposed by other provincial jurisdictions through the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Budget provides $23.5 million for hospital construction. That figure includes $16 million for 

construction and equipment at the University Hospital in Saskatoon. I want Hon. Members to note the 

University Hospital project will have a total cost of approximately $41 million when completed in 1978. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also budgeted $3.1 million for the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

884 

 

beginning of the regeneration program for Regina hospitals - a program totalling some $66 million over 

a ten-year span. In addition, we have an allocation of $4.3 million for a variety of construction and 

renovation projects in the health field throughout the province. Saskatchewan Provincial Health 

Programs have always been the model for all of North America, Mr. Speaker, and we intend to keep 

them in that position. 

 

As Saskatchewan people we have every right to be proud of these programs. We expect the health 

benefits in our province will continue to remain a model for other jurisdictions. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — These expectations are a direct result of our commitment to the maintenance and 

expansion of health benefits designed to improve the well-being of Saskatchewan people. We have 

managed to expand the range of our health programs and to do that during a Canada-wide restraint 

program in relation to health cost escalation. In Saskatchewan we do not pass on directly to the 

individual consumer of heath care, the burden and pressure of escalating health costs and we do not 

intend to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a government, we have been subjected to a great deal of criticism for taking responsible decisions in 

health expenditures. Much of that criticism is totally unwarranted. For example, in 1971-72, 53.3 per 

cent of provincial health expenditures went to hospitals. Today hospital expenditure is approaching 58 

per cent of the total budget. If one includes capital grants for hospitals, hospital expenditures consume 

almost 63 per cent of our health budget. Hospitals are receiving a fair share of our health dollars. The 

adequacy of our hospital facilities is reflected in the availability of hospital services in Saskatchewan 

when compared with the rest of Canada. 

 

I ask the Members of this Assembly to take note that Saskatchewan has the highest number of rated beds 

per thousand of population in Canada. That is from Statistics Canada. Saskatchewan has the highest 

number of beds per thousand on an approved basis anywhere in Canada. Saskatchewan has more 

separations per thousand population than anywhere in Canada. Saskatchewan has not reduced the quality 

of its services. Actual staffing available expressed in paid hours per patient day is at 12.7 today - that is 

the end of 1976 - compared to 11.4 in 1971. This general increase in staff allowance is evident in major 

categories of staffing including nursing service, which stood at 5.9 in 1971 and stands at 6.5 today. 

 

Those statistics, Mr. Speaker, come from the federal authority in this country and should be taken note 

of by the Members of this Assembly. 

 

On a per capita basis we have more occupied hospital beds than any other province - 5.6 per thousand 

compared with 4.1 nationally. We also admit more persons to hospital each year and we provide the 

most days of patient care. If we had hospital admissions at the national average last year we would have 

had 40,000 less patients hospitalized. Overall, the gross expenditures of the Health Department have 

risen from $156 million in 1971 to just under $404 million in the coming fiscal year, a rise of 158 per 

cent in six years — an average annual 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

885 

 

increase in the range of 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past these costs have been shared with the Federal Government through cost-shared 

programs. These are now being replaced by block grants and tax point transfers. The federal authority is 

opting out of its responsibility to share the financial burden in developing much-needed community 

programs which would provide some alternatives to higher cost institutional services. Ceilings have 

been placed on federal contributions to provincial health and social service programs. The ceilings are 

restrictive - they shift the burden of escalating costs on to the provincial economies and that new policy 

will cost this province many millions in the next five years. 

 

To sustain Saskatchewan health and social programs and provide new services which are most important 

to the elderly and the chronically ill new resources must be found at the provincial level. The only other 

alternative is to redirect funds from existing health and social programs. The policy in this field of the 

Liberal administration in Ottawa is totally insensitive to these facts. Virtually all new federal money will 

be directed to the wealthier provinces of Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia. They appear to follow 

the biblical exhortation: — “To him that hath shall be given - to him who hath not, even that which he 

hath shall be taken away”. This applies to at least five of the provinces of Canada and will create 

particularly grave difficulties for the Maritime Provinces. 

 

Our provincial health budget, Mr. Speaker, is constructed after a careful review of needs and priorities. 

We intend to regularly review those requirements to enable us to most appropriately meet community 

needs. We invite comparisons with other provinces and their healthy programs. We have not imposed 

ceilings. We have conscientiously assessed needs and arrived at a prudent budget to appropriately meet 

those needs. Evidence of such review is the Saskatoon situation where additional hospital service needs 

were recognized. We authorized day surgery units at the City and St. Paul’s hospitals and provided some 

$479,000 additional in operating grants to meet that established need. That is an example of 

responsiveness, Mr. Speaker, from this Government. 

 

The 1977-78 health budget remains responsive to the needs of special groups. The increase of the 

elderly people among us is apparent and will continue with their needs for special services. Some 25 per 

cent of all the medical services in this province and 40 per cent of all hospital days are required for 

treatment of persons 65 years of age and older. 

 

We hear much from Opposition Members of deteriorating health services. Yet the Executive Director of 

the Saskatchewan Health Care Association denies Opposition Members’ assertions that there has been a 

reduction in health service levels in 1976 because of the restraint program. We suggest that as Executive 

Director of the Hospital Association he is in a position to know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some brief comment on tax changes in the Budget. Tobacco taxes are 

increased. The increase in tax may, to some degree, discourage the habit. If it does not, at least it will 

provide revenue to help meet the high medical and hospital costs associated with lung cancer 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

886 

 

and emphysema cases which are directly derived results of that habit. 

 

Opposition Members decry the gasoline tax returning to the 19 cent per gallon level. I want them to take 

particular note that it is at the same level now, 19 cents per gallon, as it was in 1970 when the Liberal 

Party occupied the Treasury Benches. The gasoline tax today is some 22 per cent of the average price of 

a gallon of regular gasoline. In 1970 it was some 33 per cent of the price of a gallon of regular gasoline. 

 

Opposition Members praise the repeal of the Succession Duties and Gift tax. There is nothing wrong 

with such a tax except that it should be applied at the national level where it can be uniformly 

applicable. Opposition Members used to decry what they termed an exodus of people of substance to 

Alberta and westward. I have talked to many of those people. In 1973 they told me they were leaving, in 

1974 they told me they were leaving, in 1975 they told me they were leaving, in 1976 they told me they 

were leaving and they are still here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Budgets are based on estimates. What else could they possibly be based on? Does either of the Liberal 

financial critic and/or the self-styled management whiz kid for Nipawin (Mr. Collver), (some people in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, doubt the efficacy of that title - and have good reason to doubt it) have 

access to better information and analysis of the probabilities than do the highly skilled dedicated civil 

servants of the Budget Bureau - the Tax and Fiscal Policy Branch and the Financial Investment Services 

section of the Finance Department? The answer is crystal clear. They simply do not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to make just a few brief remarks with respect to the ‘Safety ‘77 Program’. In 

1975, 286 persons died in Saskatchewan in automobile accidents; 27,239 were injured in automobile 

accidents; 10,000 of those people appeared in our emergency wards of our hospitals. Mr. Speaker, had 

those people been wearing seatbelts we would have had 6,000 less people in our emergency wards. We 

would have saved approximately one-half of those 286 people who were killed in accidents. Some 

people will argue that the use of seatbelts is an interference with their freedom. Do these people argue 

that it is an interference with their freedom when they ride on an airplane and are required to do up a 

seatbelt. The chances of being injured or killed in an automobile accident are much greater than that they 

will be killed or injured in a plane accident. Do they, in fact, Mr. Speaker, consider it an infringement of 

their freedom because they have to drive their cars on the right hand side of the road? Their car will 

work just as well on the left hand side of the road, it will operate just as efficiently. The fact of the 

matter is you must have some established rules in relation to a society such as ours. We are hopeful that 

the Safety ‘77 Program will in fact do so if we gain the co-operation of the public generally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have liked to have made some additional remarks with respect to some other 

items, i.e. agricultural farm prospects, resource development implications for our economy and the 

merits of the long-term fiscal planning approach of our Government. However, I will not take up too 

much more time of the House but simply state that we must be cognizant of the fact that the farm 

income in this province will probably be 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

887 

 

one-half in the year 1977, of what was achieved on a net basis to the farming population in the year 

1975 when we had $1,470,000,000 in farm net earnings. Saskatchewan’s net income to farms was about 

$1,017,000,000 in 1976 and that could well be in the range of $750 to $800 million on a net basis in 

1977. A lot of that of course is obviously due to the fact that despite the fact we had the largest crop in 

our history, declining prices and rising input costs is squeezing the net income to the farm sector. I 

should have liked to have gone into that much more fully, however, Mr. Speaker, time does not permit 

me and I am sure that the Members of this House will have concluded by now that I have come to the 

decision that I will support the Budget and the main motion and vote against the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I would request your indulgence for a few 

preliminary remarks prior to the comments which I wish to make on the Budget. First of all, I should 

like to thank the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland for the very warm reception they gave me at their 

doors during a very hard-fought political campaign. There was a lot of political activity on the part of 

the three major parties and people in Saskatoon Sutherland certainly demonstrated some fair amount of 

patience in hearing our views. 

 

I should also like to thank them in addition to their patience for the opportunity granted me to represent 

them. 

 

In addition to the constituents I would like to make a comment about my campaign team out there led by 

my campaign manager. There are a number of people I should like to single out but in particular my 

campaign manager, Mr. Keith Lampart did an excellent job for me and I wish to thank him for the 

excellent job for me and I wish to thank him for the excellent team he put together and the long hours he 

spent on my behalf and on the party’s behalf. 

 

Now I can appreciate that with the entry of a new Member into the House that Members of not only your 

own party but the other parties wish to know where the new Member stands on various things and I 

think that is fair. In recognizing that when one attempts to analyze and find out your own self image it 

can be somewhat distorted in doing so, but believing firmly in the philosophy of “To thine own self be 

true”, I would have to classify myself, Mr. Speaker, as a moderate. I make no apologies for the fact that 

I fall squarely on the side of free enterprise. I think too many times in the past many have apologized for 

just that, for wanting to make something of themselves and for wanting to succeed. I don’t believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that profit is a dirty word. I believe that that is the reward one gets for taking risks, just as 

wages is a reward for labour and interest is a reward for saving money. 

 

I do believe that free enterprise carried to an extreme, and I hold this conviction honestly, would have 

fourteen-year-old children back in coal mines. I, therefore, am under the impression that the 

Government, any government, must demonstrate a social conscience and must use its inherent power to 

protect its poor, its elderly and its sick and so on. On the other hand I don’t believe that a government 

should be allowed to attempt 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

888 

 

to control every aspect of its constituents’ lives. 

 

A good example, in my opinion, of what happens when this is done is under the doctrinaire socialist 

government in England. Here is a country that survived the break-up of a colonial empire, it survived 

two world wars, it survived disaster after disaster and yet cannot survive socialism. Here is a proud 

nation that now is down on its knees begging for some money from the International Monetary Fund. 

And therefore, I intend to avoid the extremes. We have spent too much time in Saskatchewan tearing at 

each other for our political beliefs and it is time now that we take a common-sense stand and of course 

the common sense we tried to indicate to the people in our campaign. 

 

My commitment is to fight for my constituency and my constituents and where some wrong exists that 

needs remedying I am prepared to do that and there are no qualifications as to whether or not the 

constituents supported me at the polls. 

 

Now yesterday the Hon. Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) indicated that serving the people of 

Saskatchewan properly required the legitimate and genuine contribution of all 61 Members of this 

House and I concur with him. I think that he is absolutely right and I intend, Mr. Speaker, to do the best 

I have in order to add my contribution in some positive criticism and some constructive proposals. In 

this respect I should like to thank all Members of the House for the warm reception which they have 

given me although sometimes qualified. 

 

Naturally I am a little bit apprehensive at this time leading into my first speech in the House. The one 

thing that encourages me, of course, is the knowledge that every one of the Members here had to go 

through precisely the same thing. The other thing that encourages me, Mr. Speaker, is the front page of 

the Commonwealth Magazine, the NDP newspaper, which someone brought to my attention. The front 

page of the Commonwealth refers to me as “Harold Lane, the genius from Saskatoon”. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, they also have some other things to say about me and modesty prevents me from repeating 

those other things. 

 

A minute ago I referred to something from the speech given by the Member for Weyburn that I liked 

very much. He also did say something yesterday that shocked me a bit and I believe that this is a good 

point to launch into my comments on this Budget. The Hon. Member said that we here in Saskatchewan 

have unfortunately not been blessed with the sort of resources other areas enjoy and, of course, I 

couldn’t believe my ears. Here we are in Saskatchewan with a province that has more agricultural land 

than any other province. We have most of Canada’s potash, we have most of Canada’s uranium, we 

have a lot of timber, we have a lot of Canada’s oil, we have a lot of other mineral resources. In short we 

have the kind of resources that any of the other provinces or any country in the free world would give its 

eyeteeth for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a province about which our leaders should be generating unprecedented 

excitement. This is the future giant of this world, this is the place that people should be talking about, 

this is the place where people should be setting up new businesses and experimenting with new 

techniques in farming, in pulp and a host of other industries. And for the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

889 

 

record, Mr. Speaker, I emphasize that people should be doing all of these things, not the Government. 

We in Saskatchewan will be on the world’s moving edge when we have a government that is less 

government and when we have a government that is more optimistic about our future and when our 

leaders start to demonstrate some of the contagious excitement, like they have in Alberta, a province that 

has been mentioned a number of times here today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this regard I would point out that roughly 70 per cent of my graduating class in 

law were all excited about moving to Alberta or British Columbia or Ontario and, in fact, did move. The 

record is clear. The Hon. Health Minister speaks of the fact that the people have indicated they are 

moving away but they are still here and yet we know that the population of this province hasn’t changed 

significantly since 1939. Something is wrong, the priorities are wrong. 

 

In the recent by-elections we, of course, linked - as a Conservative Party we make no bones about that - 

we linked the lack of proper health care with the spending on potash, which of course dug up 

unprecedented wrath from the NDP. Partially possibly because it was true, they knew there was 

something wrong and partially because, of course, the NDP has the feeling that they have the copyright 

on conscience, on social conscience and believe me, Mr. Speaker, statistics aren’t any good, they don’t 

help those people that are sick and lined up to get into the hospitals. 

 

Now, of course, the Tories in Alberta were referred to and the Tories in Ontario and yet we have it on 

medical authority that the waiting list for elective surgery in Tory Ontario is something in the order of 

six weeks while here it is eight months. Tory Alberta was referred to and, of course, the mention of more 

expensive premiums in Alberta and so on but no time the mention that the provincial portion of the tax 

in Alberta is something in the order of half of what it is in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, the fact that we linked these two issues, as I said, did generate a whole lot of wrath from the NDP. 

We think from looking at the new Budget Speech that we are going to have lots more ammunition for 

the next general election two years down the road possibly and that is we are going to be able to link the 

municipalities and municipal governments with what this province does with the potash industry. We 

are going to be able to link the Attorney General’s department with the potash industry, we are going to 

be able to link education with potash. Can anyone believe after having heard this Budget Speech that 

potash and a dollar spent on potash are no longer related to such things as health care and so on. 

 

Let’s have a look for a moment at the Department of Education. The Minister indicates that the grants 

were increased by 10 per cent. I challenge the Minister to go to Saskatoon and ask them if they got a 10 

per cent increase. It seems that in the Province of Saskatchewan the grant structure has been designed in 

such a way to force all local jurisdictions to increase their mill rate with respect to education in 

particular at this point in time by about five to six mills just in order to hold the line. And the burden of 

increased taxes, of course, will be placed on local officials. In two pages of Budget 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

890 

 

reporting in Saskatoon’s paper, education got one line. 

 

Obviously this Government either has something to hide or it doesn’t have anything good to say about 

education. it appears that the Government didn’t have much at all to say in the line of education. The 

cuts, we understand, are starting now and I ask this House, Mr. Speaker, what will be cut, where will 

they cut in education in Saskatoon and the other jurisdictions around the province? Perhaps they will 

start by cutting Grades One to Six, perhaps by new school buildings, perhaps they will start cutting 

teachers or text books. Through legislation this Government sits here in Regina and negotiates teachers’ 

salaries then passes on the bill to the local school boards who have no input into the bargaining table and 

to my knowledge nowhere else, at least nowhere west of the Maritimes, in Canada does this exist. 

 

I am not advocating a change in the system, I am advocating a change in the Government’s attitude. If 

the Government wants a hand in the negotiation of salaries and putting the bill before the school boards 

let them, of course, have a hand in supplying the funds to run these school boards. More and more 

jurisdictions are being perplexed at this Government cutting into school building programs. Mandatory 

cuts in the size of classrooms, Mr. Speaker, in the size of gymnasiums and even the size of the total 

school plan in the size of gymnasiums, indeed in the size of the total school plan. In the next breath they 

are dictating that there should be at least one half hour of physical education per child per day. This 

course presents two dilemmas. Physical education will have at some point in time to be taken outside in 

snowdrifts in 40 below weather in order for each child to get half an hour in each day. With the 

compulsory physical education program of one half hour a day, plus sex education, music education, 

family education, outdoor I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how much time will be left to learn the skills, the 

basic skills of reading, writing and mathematics? 

 

School boards and teachers have been proud of the sort of record they have in education in this province, 

why does this Government then continue to attack teachers by telling them what to teach or attack 

school boards by how to build schools. There is more and more erosion of school board autonomy. 

Where is the school board autonomy when it comes to curriculum planning or to school construction or 

to hours of physical education to be taught per day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know where we stand, decentralization. More responsibility and more power to local 

school boards and local municipalities, not more tax burdens. 

 

When I looked at the Attorney General’s Department, during question period, I directed a question to the 

Attorney General regarding court services in this province. The whole idea as I understand it, the 

Attorney General may not agree with me, is that when you have a dispute you go to the courts, you 

appear before a judge, you have a hearing, at the end of the day one of the parties gets an order. Well, 

what the situation now is, one letter has already been tabled, I intend to table another letter, that when 

you have your order for enforcement, you can throw it in the garbage can. One letter here, I will table it 

in a few minutes directed from the Sheriff and Local Registrar, December 14, 1976, states and I quote: 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

891 

 

As we have no staff to investigate seizure at the present time, what good is a writ of execution if there 

is no staff to investigate seizure and enforce court orders. 

 

Another letter, the one that has been tabled, the Attorney General indicated a few minutes ago, that 

nowhere in the letter did it say that the sheriff could not provide the service. I should like to quote from 

the letter which is in possession of the Attorney General: 

 

At this time we are receiving approximately seven documents for service each day, accounting for 

approximately 10 services requested per day, we are gradually falling behind and cannot give the 

service that is required by the rules of court. 

 

If you are in fact lucky enough to get an order, if you are in fact one of those people who is lucky 

enough to get into court, then you of course may later take your chances at enforcement. 

 

An issue which we raised in the campaign was the issue of crime. The Attorney General had adopted 

what appeared at the time to be a rather flippant attitude during the recent by-elections in Saskatoon 

Sutherland and Prince Albert - Duck Lake and he was quoted by the local media as saying that crime 

was worse elsewhere. I think he had in mind places like Chicago, New York and Watts and so on. In 

fact, says the Attorney General, the crime situation is not all that bad in Saskatchewan at all. I am sure it 

is not in the Attorney General’s office. Now the Attorney General being an honorable man, and I say 

that sincerely, will change his mind when the facts are put before him. But I wonder if the Member for 

Saskatoon - Riversdale would not change his mind on his own if he simply walked down 2nd Avenue in 

Saskatoon after 7:00 o’clock p.m. A few years ago robbery with violence was a rarity and I invite the 

Attorney General to check the police station docket any morning of the week for robbery with violence 

has become commonplace. 

 

I am sure the Attorney General would change his mind of his own volition if he talked to the parents of 

the four children murdered in Saskatoon recently. Or if he went to my home town of Aberdeen, where I 

grew up, and the worst problem was the town drunk, loitering on the streets in an unseemly manner, 

where now recently police are investigating a kidnapping, a local bank manager, armed robbery, of the 

local bank, arson, and the list of course, Mr. Speaker, goes on. Or if he talked to the people who can’t 

attend church suppers any more, because, Mr. Speaker, if you try to raise money for a charitable or 

religious purpose in Saskatchewan and happened to be unfortunate enough to be carrying the cash box, 

you or your friends might be murdered. Or if the Attorney General tried to earn his living by driving a 

taxi cab in Saskatoon, or more particularly in Regina, or if the Attorney General read the Star-Phoenix 

or the Leader-Post, any day of the week. 

 

What the Progressive Conservatives were talking about during the recent by-elections was not the kind 

of kid who gets into trouble now and then, gets into a tight spot in a weak moment, we were talking 

about repeating hardened offenders, with 40 to 50 offences to their credit. The Attorney General knows 

what he can do, and I am confident with a little persuasion from 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

892 

 

the Opposition he will, he can start by examining his own attitude. He can start by talking to local police 

and prosecutors, he can bring the message to his federal counterparts, or he can have an interview with 

the Premier and review the positions of this Government and the priorities of this Government. 

 

I have several things to compliment the Government on in their Budget Speech, one of them was the 

removal of succession duties and gift taxes. The Hon. Member opposite yesterday referred to the 

rednecks in the Progressive Conservative Party. I wonder how the Wafflers will treat the removal of 

succession duties? I wonder how the Wafflers will treat the removal of the gift tax? I am sure they will 

have their hands full with their membership. 

 

The increased allotment which resulted from the two by-elections and from the Opposition criticism of 

the Government’s present health care system was something to behold. This is what we were talking 

about in the by-election and I believe that this is the reason for the sudden change in the Government’s 

attitude. 

 

During the recent by-elections we referred to reform and welfare and the Minister for Social Services 

already questioned me on this in the House. We indicated a pamphlet which was circulated in the 

community, in the constituency, that reform in welfare is urgently needed. What we stated was this. 

Many people in our province cannot work and are required to live in near poverty, they must be 

provided with sufficient money and decent living. Many others can work but are drawing from the 

welfare rolls, they must be provided with the opportunity to work. The vicious welfare circle in which 

they find themselves can be broken by decentralizing the decision making to the local level and by 

re-examination of welfare priorities. Now the Hon. Member in charge of welfare indicates in the House 

that most welfare goes to the elderly and retarded. Isn’t it a shame, when our system treats the elderly as 

welfare recipients and they don’t get the decency they deserve in their retiring years. What in any sense 

has been done that is substantial for the elderly in this Budget? 

 

We have referred to better management in our campaign. We asked during the campaign for people to 

look at the reports of the Provincial Auditor and of course were accused of attacking the Provincial 

Auditor. What we did say was that the Provincial Auditor needs more funds for his department and more 

staff, staff he should be getting. Now I invite this House to look at the report of the Provincial Auditor, 

for the year ended March 31, 1976, and in particular the following category, Department of Agriculture 

where the problem which affected the Provincial Auditor’s opinion was the failure of departments to 

adhere to generally accepted accounting principles. The Department of Agriculture, “Uncertainty 

regarding inventory valuation.” The Department of Attorney General, “Inability to verify trust liabilities 

and inconsistency in application of accounting principles,” and of course the list goes on. 

 

In addition, we had emphasized that negotiation is better than confrontation, and of course one of the 

Members opposite yesterday said if you allowed the companies to give you what they want to, they 

wouldn’t give you anything. Of course, if 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

893 

 

you adopt that attitude, that there must be confrontation, negotiations will never begin. We suggest that 

it would be prudent on the part of this Government to begin by taking an attitude that negotiation is 

possible. 

 

I should like to refer next to the provincial by-elections in Saskatoon Sutherland and Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake specifically. All three parties agreed that these were important by-elections. The Liberals indicated 

in these two by-elections they would prick the Conservative bubble, they indicated that they had a new 

leader and they would be positive. Of course, the advertising if anyone cares to look at it was about 

splitting the vote, and who would get the most votes against the NDP which we don’t feel was positive. 

They indicated that they were revitalized and they show ads in which 45 per cent just a year and a half 

ago in the constituency had supported the Liberals and that the PCs had indeed lost their deposits, and 

indeed the PCs did lose their deposits in both seats a year and a half ago. 

 

Mr. Malone, a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal, and of course the people believed him. Mr. Malone said, 

leadership is an issue, and again the people believed him. 

 

We think that in Saskatchewan we should have a province in which we are taking our proper place in 

Confederation and this can be done under a Progressive Conservative Government, this will happen in 

two short years . . . (In looking around the House, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that this is an artificial 

situation, perhaps I will continue it another time when I have the proper feedback in order to deal 

adequately with this.) For the reasons I have given, I cannot support the motion. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Member would entertain a question before he 

takes his seat? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Wascana asks whether the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland will 

entertain a question before he resumes his seat. I take this opportunity to tell the Member that he has the 

option of saying Yes or No with regard to the request. 

 

MR. LANE: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — I was most interested in the comments which the Member made about crime in 

Saskatoon. I wondered since he mentioned a capital offence in Saskatoon, if he would indicate to the 

House what his stand is on capital punishment? 

 

MR. LANE: — I don’t mind indicating to the House what my position is on it. I don’t think it is 

relevant to the Legislature. The comments I was making of course were referring to the entire field of 

crime, of course the entire field of crime is administered by the Attorney General for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. What I believe in as to capital punishment personally, I believe capital punishment is 

wrong. I hold that opinion honestly. However, I believe by the same token that if the majority of people 

in society demand capital punishment, they are right and they should get it, period. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Would the Hon. Member entertain another question? 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

894 

 

MR. LANE: — Yes. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — The Member referred to the capital crime that was committed in Saskatoon. Is he 

aware that Mr. Threinen was released by the Conservative Government in Alberta? Is he also further 

aware that recently the Alberta Government released a Mr. Nessler who was out on a pass for a 

committed crime of rape, and while he was out committed another crime by killing another girl? 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, if you want me to answer that question, I would ask Mr. Rolfes that had 

he practised law in this province, he would realize of course, that governments do not release prisoners, 

it is the court system that releases prisoners. We are indicating in our debate and we have indicated in 

the constituency that crime is under the jurisdiction, the administration of justice which is under the 

jurisdiction of the Attorney General for the Province of Saskatchewan. There is a certain amount of 

input that he can put in the administration of justice and leading in a proper fashion. But governments 

don’t release criminals, courts do. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it is a fact that the Alberta Cabinet released Mr. Threinen. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think we are getting into a debate on this issue. I’ll take the next 

speaker. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, some of us have learned that just 

because a person wasn’t a law graduate shouldn’t restrict him from entry into this House, but I am sure 

the Member will pick that up in due course. I am sure as well that he will discover from the Minister no 

doubt that when someone is committed at the pleasure of the Queen because of being held as a result of 

having some mental deficiencies that he gets released at the pleasure of the Queen which regrettably in 

the Province of Alberta is at the pleasure of the Tory Government there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to devote a few comments to this Budget, I consider it a regrettable budget, but I 

don’t particularly propose to dwell on its obvious failings. Indeed Mr. Speaker, given the unfortunate 

circumstances for the people of this province of having that government in power, I suppose one might 

expect more budgets of this nature, stifling the initiative of the people of this province. But again, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t want to deliver that kind of a speech. 

 

From time to time, for whatever silly reason, I try to advise the Government on how better to run this 

province. I have noticed that they are singularly slow to pick up on any good idea, no matter what the 

source, but, Mr. Speaker, I propose to continue in that vein from time to time. This happens to be one of 

those times. 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Your friends advised Ted Malone. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

895 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Well, I propose to be advising Ted Malone when he is sitting at the side where 

Mr. Romanow is presently, and I propose to sit beside him to do the advising. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, clearly I suggest government spending is too high. The spending 

of this Government is excessive. Indeed the spending of government at every level in democratic 

countries has reached alarmingly high proportions. Governments in Canada appear to be driven by 

public demand to overspend. In fact, they are not driven, the apparent demand is all too often caused by 

politicians themselves. To a great extent politicians entice people into allowing them to overspend with 

the people’s money. Politicians entice people with programs of questionable need, they create the 

perception of need and then for their own political ends fill that need. All that goes on, notwithstanding 

the increasing realization by taxpayers that governments give poor value for the mounting tax bite. 

 

Governments, Mr. Speaker, now spend over 50 per cent of our gross national product. And because that 

spending is service oriented, product growth in the public sector is difficult to maintain much less 

measure. The public sector which was once underpaid and perhaps a touch more dedicated is now well 

paid and handsomely pensioned with indexed pensions, largely non-existent in the producing economic 

world. The Public Service Alliance nationally because their indexed pensions are being questioned are 

now going so far as to ask for public support for similar pensions in the private sector. Some of us are 

beginning to ask, where will that end? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I began with that brief review of rather alarming facts, but what is most shocking is that we 

are doing nothing about it. Of course, asking this motley crew of NDP incompetence to crack down on 

that kind of thing is sort of like asking the Mafia to crack down on corruption. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it is not much better with other governments across 

Canada. Political parties at all levels appear unwilling to even voice the kind of realistic warnings that 

must be sounded, much less take action about them. I suggest we are on the brink of completely losing 

control of government spending. The addiction of politicians to so-called free services is one problem, 

finding incentives to save as a society is another and a low priority of careful government spending is a 

third. 

 

Let me briefly, Mr. Speaker, address myself first to the problem of the low priority of careful 

government spending. That is really a question of cutting back, how to pare regarding the budget. I 

urged the Government to divide the functions of the Minister of Finance into parts. The Minister of 

Finance, Mr. Smishek, bringing his full capacity of mind to that question thought that when I spoke of a 

division of functions for him, it meant he would be going to the bathroom sometimes at home and 

sometimes at the office. His NDP backbenchers thought I meant that half of the Minister would be sent 

to run the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

896 

 

Schreyer Government in Manitoba and half would be sent to bedevil the Lougheed Government. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, though Mr. Smishek’s dissection very much appeals to me, as does the discomfort of 

Premier Schreyer and King Peter, that was not the intent of my remarks. I was, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

debate on the Budget, pointing to the lack of an effective chopping block in government. 

 

In the Federal jurisdiction the functions of the Minister of Finance are divided into three functions - the 

planner, the Minister of Finance; the raiser of money, the Minister of Revenue; and the cutter man, the 

president of the Treasury Board, one Minister in charge of paring spending! He accomplishes this by 

stopping others from spending. While all other Ministers ‘accomplish’ (so-called) by initiating new 

programs and by enlarging their departments, and spending more, the Minister in charge of paring seeks 

to cut back. 

 

With 20 provincial Cabinet Ministers in this Government determined to spend more is it too much for 

the taxpayers to ask that there be one Minister whose job it is to spend less and better? One Minister 

who would be counsel for the defence of the taxpayer. 

 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, was the nub of half of my comments to your Ministers last year. A plea on 

behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that this Government govern better and possibly govern longer 

in the process. Now one would have expected that an option of governing longer would have appealed to 

their political desire for longevity in office. Unfortunately for the taxpayers of this province most of the 

Ministers are reaching that age when they are deciding to retire from politics anyway. And the Premier, 

regrettably for the taxpayers, perhaps has over-reached that age and he has decided to leave these kinds 

of plans for the new government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the low priority on careful government spending is one problem; the second factor is 

the problem of growing government spending caused by politicians creating demands for so-called 

‘free’ services. It is the politicians, I suggest to the Hon. Member, who have convinced people in the 

first place that these services are free. In economic terms the problem is that we have strong consumer 

pull where the pull is uniform, but the cost is apportioned differentially. 

 

What is the basic problem of the ‘free’ services syndrome? How can we make the consumer-voter see 

the real cost of the products he is led increasingly by government to demand from government? How 

can we make him see that government is frequently not the cheapest and most effective vehicle by 

which to provide those products and services to our province? 

 

Government is, in itself in most cases, less efficient than private enterprise. Add to that, the waste that 

develops from providing services on a universal basis. The inefficiency, Mr. Speaker, is compounded. 

 

Taxpayers pay for products and services from government that they may not want but utilize those 

services to the full because once the tax is paid the service is indeed free to them as individuals. Though 

the value of that service, the utility of that service, may be considerably lower to the consumer-voter 

than the utility of the dollars to pay the cost, 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

897 

 

when payment is made collectively then everyone will demand a full share of the service. 

 

The only answer, I suggest, is to tie the cost to the service. Make it possible for the buyer to individually 

judge the utility to him of each government service as he judges purchases of services and products in 

the non-governmental sphere. 

 

How do you put a cost to the service? The only answer is to tax those who benefit and to apply user 

charges. The marketplace principles must be applied increasingly, I suggest, to the purchase of 

government products. 

 

It might be argued that benefit taxation is a more equitable way of taxing. My purpose in advocating a 

shift in that direction, however, is that benefit taxation and user charges are the only means of attaining a 

greater efficiency in the allocation of resources within the public sector. The group in society receiving 

the benefit, using the highway, receiving additional garbage collection, expecting special policy 

protection, whoever that group may be should be taxed to some extent for that benefit. When a user is 

receiving government services and frequently turning a profit in the process, he should expect to be 

charged the approximate cost of that government service. That is all benefit taxation and user charges 

really amount to and they grapple with the problem of the appearance and the reality to some extent of 

products coming from government under the guise of being free. 

 

How can we articulate consumer demand in the public sector. That, Mr. Speaker, is the question that 

your Ministers grapple with constantly. The product may not have been universally necessary, but when 

all are compelled to take part in the payment, all demand their full share. 

 

We are running a government like a good social convener who wants to ensure that he has a few drunks 

to liven up the party. And that good social convener will know that though the cost of drink may be 50 

cents per drink if he gets everybody at the staff party to pay in advance they will over-imbibe than they 

would if they had to pay on a shot by shot basis. Well, Mr. Speaker, government run like a drinking 

binge isn’t going to be easy to cure. 

 

The political system, in doing its lousy job of accurately articulating demand and overgoverning and 

oversupplying in the process, is always reluctant to give back some semblance of buyer control to the 

people for whom it chooses to articulate that demand. Unfortunately in that analogy, once the staff fund 

has purchased more liquor than was needed, or wanted perhaps in relation to cost, there are always 

gluttons to consume the free supply. 

 

Even if we could, in government, accurately determine consumer demands, the political system, 

unfortunately, as it loses control of government in this country, will find it increasingly difficult to force 

its bureaucrats to stop over-supplying. Increased use of benefit taxes and levies may not be a panacea 

but it does offer a way of introducing economic rationality into the public sector in areas where goods 

and services are provided for the benefit of distinguishable individuals. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

898 

 

The legitimate high level of taxpayer unease and resentment at the extent of government meddling in 

every aspect of our lives suggests that we must find some better means of allocating public resources 

and cutting back. 

 

When even the NDP and even the Minister of Finance can realize that increasing taxes will result in a 

great deal of resentment by their support and when, Mr. Speaker, you are treated to the Minister dancing 

from one foot to the other in his explanation of those increased charges, it becomes clear that resentment 

against big government is growing and that all governments have to be seeking ways to lessen that 

resentment for the good of democracy in general. 

 

Benefit taxation is usually rejected out of hand by the NDP because in part they are always seeking to 

increase government involvement in our lives, and by the same token they hope to increase dependence 

of the people upon government, and the popularity for that kind of dependence. They seek to decrease 

the popular capacity to initiate and self-direct. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — . . . to do it . . . 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — In fact I must say to the Hon. Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) — that 

I have been tempted to say that repeatedly and was determined to maintain this speech at some level of a 

high plane, and I appreciate the help of the Member for Regina South to get it back into a level that the 

Hon. Member may comprehend. 

 

Benefit taxation, Mr. Speaker, in the past has not been progressive and that’s what made economists of 

the left reject the concept. Too much, economists have failed, I suggest, to know the reason for the 

rejection of benefit taxation. The Carter Commission Report, rejected the concept in a cursory way. 

Other jurisdictions, Ontario for instance, in its reports, have more kindly dealt with benefit taxation, but 

all have incorrectly assumed that this form of taxing may only exist where redistribution of wealth is 

undesirable. 

 

The error is a mixing of giveaways into costing questions. The recipients of giveaways should get their 

deserving help without the strings of tying that assistance to a program. Taxpayers should know the cost 

and be discouraged from receiving those government products where, as a group, the cost is larger than 

the marginal benefit. 

 

The Drug Plan, for instance, and the Hon. Member asks for examples, provides universal drug 

assistance. People who do not need government involvement are bogged down and held down to some 

extent by that government help. They are bogged down with government forms to get even a 

three-dollar prescription. The administrative costs are high. The cost to the province is approximately 

eight times the cost of a similar program in Manitoba, where all drug expense over $50 is paid by the 

province. For the old and the truly sick, (and I’m pleased to see that one of the Ministers who I’m sure 

won’t be back is back in the House), who receive over 25 prescriptions a year and more than half of the 

drug plan goes to those over 50, the Saskatchewan Plan is more costly than the Manitoba Plan, if they 

receive more than 25 prescriptions. Those in need, the old and the truly sick, receive less under our 

program. Those who 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

899 

 

don’t need, the young and healthy, those who could care less and don’t want to be bogged down with 

government forms, they find themselves going to unhappy druggists who don’t understand why the 

Government is meddling so directly in their lives, and they pay more for the services than they need to 

pay if they were paying directly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — The error, I say to the Hon. Member, is that people who do the thinking on his 

side of the House, tend to avoid concepts like benefit taxation because they have always tried to tie in 

essence welfare considerations to what should be a process of cost analysis. 

 

We intend to apply benefit taxation to highways, though our Minister always denies it. Gasoline taxes 

build highways. That’s just another example. Unfortunately, we don’t allow revenues to dictate 

expenditures to the degree that they should, or might. Leaving aside the farm community who should 

continue to have the purple gas exemption which Premier Thatcher introduced and which should carry, I 

suggest, a larger differential, let us look at the Gas Tax. Would it not be better to remove the 

considerations of redistributing wealth and allow highway use to be dictated by cost. It would be better 

to remove the considerations of redistribution and better to assist the poorer segments of the economy 

directly and let those taxpayers having received that assistance choose how they wish to spend the help 

that government may give to them from the public purse. A taxpayer getting a redistribution through 

highways and gas tax might have chosen to spend his redistributed wealth on something else. He might 

have spent those dollars in the private sphere. But governments of the left deny him that freedom to 

choose for himself. Assuming we agree on the level of redistribution, why can government not allow 

that freedom of choice to the individual taxpayer? 

 

MR. ALLEN: — Would you do it with Government Insurance? 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — You’re damn right I would do it with auto insurance! 

 

Government subsidizes travel by private automobile for about one cent per passenger mile. Perhaps each 

of us as individuals would choose to spend in this way, using private automobiles. But just as likely we 

might choose to spend that redistributed wealth in some other way. Beyond question, that freedom to 

choose how we, each of us, as individuals, should spend the money which government collects from us 

and then redistributes to us should be left to us as individuals. 

 

Air travel is subsidized to an even greater rate. Two or three cents per passenger mile. Passenger rail 

travel is subsidized at a rate of six or eight cents per passenger mile. We are subsidizing the rich who use 

the airlines in an effort to redistribute that wealth. In some smaller questions of government spending 

direct voter approval for expenditures would be possible. I see the Hon. Member for Regina Victoria 

(Mr. Baker) not being occupied at City Hall, has been dropping in and indeed we have been getting full 

value from him, Mr. Speaker, since his untimely reduction in salary at City Hall. The municipal 

governments, for instance, now pave back 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

900 

 

alleys if a majority of the people on that block want to pay for it. What a logical and appropriate way to 

decide whether you will pave a back alley. 

 

MR. BAKER: — We don’t do it that way. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Then I overspoke my time, Mr. Speaker, because I assumed that the Mayor of 

Regina would have handled this city in the pattern of Saskatoon, a much better managed city I’ve always 

thought, and that’s the way they pave back alleys there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Governments can finance a project like a back alley paving program but why, I 

say to the Hon. Member for Victoria, do you assume the demand. Why not ask those people on those 

blocks if they want to have their back alley paved since they are going to pay for it? Why do we allow 

city wards to not have the freedom to perhaps dictate garbage collection? I don’t know, for instance, 

whether the members from different areas might not choose in voting in their own wards, perhaps in the 

city of Regina, to get a little tax break and have biweekly garbage collection. I don’t know the answer. 

And I suggest the Hon. Member for Victoria doesn’t know that answer. But what we do in that instance, 

if government dictates to the people who will have to pay, that every area will have the same kind of 

garbage collection and I ask the question: — Why? Bureaucrats don’t have to decide everything for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, admittedly a serious need exists for improved redistributive fiscal policy, but that should 

be met directly, perhaps with a negative income tax. I suggest that we should not continue to try to meet 

it indirectly. 

 

We should not maintain our myriad, often contradictory and always confusing bits and pieces of 

redistributive policy which we have scattered everywhere throughout our legislation. The picture of true 

demand for services from government is being distorted and bureaucracy is mushrooming. 

Unfortunately, I suggest that perhaps the NDP like the toadstools that they find so palatable within their 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allocating resources would be far more easily and efficiently done if we got rid of our 

redistributive anomalies. Not only are we distorting the demand pull indicators in providing ‘free’ 

services, but there is a growing and very disturbing evidence that we may not even be accomplishing our 

redistributive goals. 

 

Health care, for instance, is over-utilized by people of the middle income, not the poor. Recent studies 

indicate that the poor, the people that that Government was trying to help, legitimately, perhaps when 

they brought in an omnibus health care kind of program, that the poor even today tend to avoid 

obtaining even adequate health care, while the middle income over-utilize the programs. 

 

Benefit taxation tied to direct redistribution of wealth rather than indirect redistribution may be fairer. At 

the very least, Mr. Speaker, it is no less fair and most important at the very least that it will bring an 

efficient pricing of public services and that will clarify the extent and nature 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

901 

 

of our redistribution of wealth. 

 

The compelling argument for benefit taxes continues to be that the demand for ‘free’ services will be cut 

back. Revenue for government will not rise but expenditures may be reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of the depression government spending has grown three times more 

quickly than private spending. Much of that growth is waste. Certainly in this Government but in 

governments all over the free world. 

 

Since the NDP took over, spending has increased in this province by three and one-half times. Spending 

in 1970 was $405 million. This year’s Budget is a billion and one-half. The NDP in Manitoba during a 

like period of time have similarly increased spending three-fold. They now face an electorate over just 

that problem, an electorate that, I suggest, may well defeat them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as long as government services go on being free or are distributed at a rate which is less 

than the marginal cost of supplying them, the apparent need to expand those services will rise. That rise 

is encouraged by the bureaucrats who are only too happy to meet the so-called ‘need’ and at a rate 

encouraged by the politicians who created the appetite in the voter in the first place, and only too happy 

to seek to get re-elected for providing those services. 

 

Their domain increases by popular demand and the political cup of the elected masters overflows with 

satisfied users. The taxpayer, as Mr. Thatcher would say, “fears no evil; though he sleeps in the shadow 

of still factories, UIC and DREE; though he walks through the valley of the soup kitchen, inflation and 

the NDP are always with him and he fears no evil. His taxes runneth over and he shall live in subsidized 

housing forever.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we believe in consumer sovereignty then benefit taxation and costs tied to services 

naturally follow. I have confidence in people. It is part of what I believe as a Liberal. I believe that the 

people have the power and the intelligence to decide on their own how their money should be spent. 

That obvious right should not change when people spend through their government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — People should be allowed to spend as they see fit, voting with their dollars as 

we essentially allow them to vote with their dollars in the private sphere. 

 

By taking tax dollars and providing services which though used when ‘free’ may not be truly wanted 

because they are worth the true cost to the individual, we are spending badly and building waste into the 

system. 

 

Any true believer in consumer sovereignty must support increasing individual direction of the public 

sector. Freedom of choice for individuals I suggest is possible even with public sector spending. 

 

An additional inefficiency is added to the two that I have mentioned. We pay for services with ability 

based taxes. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

902 

 

Redistribution then becomes one of the goals. We overspend in an effort to get the redistributive aims 

which we desire. Overspending on unemployment insurance for instance to get that unemployment 

insurance money into the Maritimes and to a lesser extent into Quebec, is one of the results through the 

Federal Government. 

 

Increased use of the benefit principle in public financing is desirable. The real obstacle to that increased 

use lies in public attitudes as to what is public and what is private; what should be sold and what should 

be free. 

 

The hang-ups against benefit financing become at best sentimental. Nowhere are such attitudes clearer 

than in the constantly repeated litany that one cannot charge for health, one cannot charge for education, 

one cannot charge for programs because we all would be apt to say that historic free access makes those 

things a basic human right. I may be prepared to accept that those areas of spending should be paid for 

collectively, but one really has to wonder why if the market system of pricing is so inapplicable in those 

areas, why we continue to charge in the market system for, I guess things that are even less basic 

according to your government, things like food, clothing, shelter. As Richard Bird puts it, it is plain that 

the real hang-up is not the essentiality of services like education, but the nature of the provider, namely 

that the services are provided by a government organization. 

 

Why do we always start with the presumption that water should be under priced and heavily subsidized 

by municipal and provincial governments, and therefore, in part paid for by the public purse and by all 

of us, but we don’t make that assumption about bread, milk or clothing. The only troubling question is 

whether, given the bureaucratic stranglehold now held by your bureaucrats over your Government and 

others across this country, whether the tax burden would, in fact, go down even if benefit taxation was 

brought in. We would have to ensure that there were offsetting tax reductions. 

 

In a political sense the greater problem is that once something is given away it is very hard for 

governments to start charging for it. Tactically for a government, as I said this was a suggestion to your 

Ministers, Mr. Speaker, I suppose the best I could do is say that any attempt at rational pricing would 

have to be confined to new services. But that may be the vehicle for a government to stop being pulled 

even further into the syndrome of the free services problem. 

 

The need is obviously great to continue in many areas with public sector spending paid for collectively. 

We must continue to alter the distribution of wealth. There nevertheless is a great deal of evidence that 

this has gone too far in public sector spending. The gains in redistribution can be maintained directly and 

the gains are in any event more than counterbalanced by the losses in inefficiency. We must, I suggest 

return consumer sovereignty to areas of government spending. 

 

Of course the NDP and those who associate freedom and the market system with the devil himself and 

who associate big government meddling with all that is goodness and light will obviously see the 

strength of this particular argument more slowly than those of us who are more normally endowed. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

903 

 

Consumption taxes, Mr. Speaker, are not as difficult to administer as income taxes. E & H for instance is 

collected by store owners who should be paid more for the trouble they go through, but even when you 

put together their trouble and the trouble of the government to collect it, they are able to collect that tax 

far more easily than a like amount of tax collected through income taxes. The importance, Mr. Speaker, 

becomes that benefit taxation is a program that could help us, I believe, to solve part of the problems 

that governments everywhere face. 

 

Unfortunately the NDP perhaps have difficulty accepting the basic tenet of market sovereignty, namely, 

that people themselves have the intelligence to know what is good for them. Premier Blakeney, I 

suppose, prefers to maintain his role as a nursery governess, telling the people of this province what is 

best for them. He will do for them what he thinks is best for them. He denies that they have the 

intelligence and the means to understand the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last of the areas of change that I want to suggest to the House concerning ourselves is 

with the totally missed incentives to save. Our tax system is really a disincentive to save. In part the 

answer to that problem will flow from a turning away from income taxes which discourage work, 

towards graduated consumption taxes. Consumption taxes were the earliest taxes that developed in 

society. They followed border tariffs, vendor licensing, agricultural assessments. 

 

The salt tax, for instance, in France is credited with bringing on the French Revolution. These kinds of 

taxes are very common and I suggest are under utilized by government. The inadequacy of consumption 

taxes in the past is that they have not been progressive. To a small degree the rich pay more tax because 

they have to spend more. That is only to a small degree. 

 

If personal taxing were to be based on consumption and not income, then to maintain equity in the 

system, I certainly believe we have to have a progressive nature in that tax. For a single taxpayer 

perhaps a ten per cent tax on everything over $5,000 that he spends, not that he earns. For a single 

taxpayer, perhaps the next $2,000 or $4,000 would be taxed 40 to 50 per cent. Then, Mr. Speaker you 

could move to a rather curious situation that you would say to somebody having earned the money, if 

you spend in a year more than $75,000 or whatever the figure might be, the consumption tax could be as 

high as 500 per cent on the amounts of money spent over the amount. 

 

Taxing income discourages earning, taxing spending encourages savings and encourages investment. By 

encouraging savings and encouraging investment, if we tax earnings at say 75 per cent at a rate that is 

over $60,000, if we by doing that, we clearly are discouraging our most talented and most capable 

people. Indeed if we are discouraging people who earn even $14,000 to $18,000 a year because they 

face, if they reach that level of taxable income of 50 per cent level of tax; if we are discouraging by 

taxing at that level, and thereby holding back the economy, a hefty consumption tax could result in 

maintaining the illusion of earning and at the same time compelling spending and investment. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

904 

 

Mr. Speaker, consumption taxing is something that isn’t possible for this Government to bring into 

effect. In fact, you need the power of the national government. You need the power to control the tariffs 

and you need controls on the amounts of money that can be taken from the country. 

 

I hope and I see signs indeed that economists are beginning to re-examine both of these areas. They are 

beginning to re-examine their thinking about tax regimes. 

 

Benefit taxation and consumption taxes when made progressive are extremely attractive in attacking the 

problems of waste in government and they encourage the work ethic and encourage saving at the same 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have suggested three areas of re-examination to the Government. As I do so, I am 

unfortunately aware that we of the Anglo-Saxon world are said to hold as a basic tenet a reluctance to 

review our problems in a logical way. A characteristic I am afraid that the NDP have honed to a fine 

edge and adopted almost as a mode of operation in government. 

 

In a tax system in this country that was brought in in 1917 when income taxes called ‘temporary’ war 

measures and didn’t remove the word ‘war’ from the names of the Acts for 30 years, I can’t honestly say 

that logic has been our long suit. It is something however, Mr. Speaker, that we have to look at in a far 

more basic way than simple to go on taxing more and spending more and having more and more 

bureaucrats. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if ignoring logic has been a national trait in our tax view, then I suppose the 

NDP in Saskatchewan, are exemplary Canadians in ignoring any kind of logic in their approach to tax, 

sort of experts in poking out their eyes in a futile attempt to touch the end of their noses. 

 

I think again, Mr. Speaker, in this Budget, except with that one exception of taking off the tax on 

inheritance, that this Budget demonstrates again from the Members opposite that unfortunately for the 

people of Saskatchewan there are none so blind as those who refuse to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose to support the amendment and I will be voting against the Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon - Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may ask the Member for 

Regina Wascana a question. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — You’re not going to like the answer. 

 

MR. LANE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I can appreciate the Member has a lot more tenure in the House than 

I do and a lot more experience and I am trying to learn how this is done. 

 

He talked about the effective and efficient use of public moneys and user pay policies and I thought that 

was good. Does he consider the use of government aircraft to fly members of the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

905 

 

Parliamentary Press Gallery to private parties in Regina, an effective and efficient use of moneys. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — That is not the question I anticipated. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — The answer may be longer than you think. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of this country can well see the importance of maintaining a 

means for government to communicate with the people throughout the country. I will come directly to 

that particular point. 

 

It was John Diefenbaker, Mr. Speaker, who bought executive airplanes for his government. He bought 

executive airplanes and the Liberals are still flying on the old things, though they are the fastest thing in 

the air in Canada. He bought executive airplanes because as a western Cabinet Minister and a man who 

was determined to make Confederation work, he could see the government was only talking to Toronto 

and Montreal. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — He could see that unless time could be made available for Ministers to get to the 

West and get to the Maritimes, government was going to go on being a government for central Canada. 

That is the reason he bought those planes and when a Minister, a western Minister, Otto Lang uses those 

planes absolutely to the full, he uses them because he spends more time communicating and travelling to 

his province and to the West than any other Minister of the Crown. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — And I say that goes to his credit. And he spends a great deal of time travelling 

to the Maritimes as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he has to do that because the Province of Alberta, in their narrow parochial way, 

keep electing Conservatives and don’t want to get involved in the government of this country, because 

the people of Alberta find that their government, in that province, doesn’t really care about a national 

country; isn’t prepared to look at the needs of this country all across the country in a universal way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when those planes are in the air they cost the same amount of money that they cost if they 

are sitting on the ground. The people who work with those planes are salaried employees, Mr. Speaker, 

and the planes cost the same amount whether they are utilized or not utilized. And, yes, Mr. Speaker, the 

practice has developed that when those planes are going from one place to another on government 

business, or government business, it is not inappropriate for people to be on the plane. The plane is 

going anyway. 

 

Conservative Members of Parliament very frequently have caught rides back and forth across this 

country, and I suspect they will go on doing that. When the Conservatives were in 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

906 

 

power Liberal Members caught rides back and forth because the planes were going back and forth 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the Conservative years the practice grew up of trying to schedule a meeting of the 

press club in Toronto and Montreal at a time when a Minister was ordinarily travelling there on 

government business and, indeed, during the Conservative years this touring press party started to take 

the national press gallery tour to Toronto and Montreal. It was at no extra cost to the taxpayers of this 

country, the plane was going anyway. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Minister from Saskatchewan said that he 

thought that what the Tories from Toronto thought was good enough for the press gallery to travel to 

Toronto to put on their show, was good enough to bring the press to Saskatoon and Regina when on 

government business, from time to time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION FOR PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

ROAD LOAD LIMITS 
 

MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to move the Assembly give Priority of 

Debate to a definite matter of urgent public importance to be: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan’s announced intention to place uniform load limits of 74,000 

pounds on municipal roads but placing load limits of 58,000 pounds on municipal roads for vehicles 

hauling grain will cause severe economic hardship to many farmers in Saskatchewan, and is causing 

great concern in local governments by an unwarranted and arbitrary interference with the rights of 

local governments. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — A notice regarding this matter proposed for Priority of Debate was received in the 

Clerk’s office at 8:55 a.m. today for which I thank the Hon. Member. 

 

The fundamental principle underlying Rule 17 was to provide an opportunity within a proper 

framework of parliamentary procedure, where none otherwise existed, for the immediate discussion of 

any matter deemed to be of such urgency and importance that all of the normal or special business of 

the Assembly should be put to one side in order to provide complete right of way to a discussion of 

one specific particular subject. 

 

I agree with the Hon. Member that the matter of load limits in Saskatchewan is of public importance 

and falls within the jurisdiction of the Provincial Government. The key question that faces me is 

whether this matter is urgent enough to set aside the business of the Assembly in order to debate it at 

this time. 

 

The said announcement was made just yesterday and therefore, has been raised in this Assembly at the 

earliest opportunity but all Hon. Members will note that the 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

907 

 

notice of the Priority of Debate did not state an implementation date on the proposed policy. 

Therefore, this Assembly is not faced with an exact deadline before which the debate on this matter 

must take place. 

 

Although the matter of load limits in Saskatchewan is of public importance I rule under Rule 17(6) 

that it is not of sufficient urgency that all of the normal business of the Assembly should be put to one 

side at this time. 

 

MR. LANE: — On a Point of Order! Would the Speaker kindly explain to the House when the 

Government states a policy that it has pointedly said will not be brought before the House at any time to 

debate it, by what other means can this Assembly on an urgent matter, bring this matter before the 

House? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — On the Point of Order. Mr. Speaker, there are two results that might well occur 

from a debate on a matter of urgent public importance. 

 

The first might be to discuss a policy already implemented with a deadline date as you indicate, but what 

could be of even more public importance and greater urgency, would be the prevention of a policy that 

might be in opposition to the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of that I should like to suggest that you reconsider that decision, because it is not 

only the implementation of a policy that is of urgent public importance, but it may well be, as I 

indicated, far more important to the public that a policy not be implemented. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on the same Point of Order and point out 

that in my judgment, at least, the object of Priority of Debate is to provide an opportunity for the 

discussion of a subject in a timely manner, in respect of which the rules do not provide another 

opportunity. I think that is virtually the quote you gave and the Speaker’s ruling of November 30, 1973, 

is cogent, I think. 

 

The motion for debate is also out of order if the matter can be debated in the ordinary manner, with the 

proper notice or in a major debate, such as the Address-in-Reply or the Budget Debate. 

 

Now, it seems to me that this matter before us falls precisely within that ruling of November 30, 1973, 

since anything that could be said on this Priority of Debate motion can be said equally well today and 

tomorrow and on the succeeding day in the Budget Debate. The Hon. Member for Swift Current (Mr. 

Ham) if he wishes to say anything with respect to this matter, can stand in his place in the Budget 

Debate and say it all and he doesn’t need a Priority of Debate motion. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Further to the Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 16, 1977 

 

908 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think I have sufficient guidance from the House now. 

 

I want to thank all Members for their comments on the Point of Order and say that I considered a 

number of aspects of the item that was put before me namely, the notice. I had to base my decision on 

the notice which was before me and I did that. The decision I gave was based on the strongest point I 

found in the notice. It was based on Precedents established by this House at some time in the past. The 

precedent I cited was by the previous Speaker Snedker and I find it quite effective in this particular 

instance. I think that while the Members are saying that the issue is probably an important issue, I still 

think that the point I made with regard to urgency is valid and consequently that is the way that I ruled. 

 

Motion denied. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 o’clock p.m. 


