
























































Hansard: March 21, 1977


 
 

1049 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

21st Day 
 

Monday, March 21, 1977. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to, on behalf of my seat-mate, Mr. Bailey, 
the Member for Rosetown-Elrose introduce to the Assembly through you, 25 Grade Eight students from 
the Rosetown Division 3 School. They are seated in the east gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Mr. Torwalt, and Mrs. Corronet. A member of our caucus will be meeting with them this 
afternoon. On your behalf, Mr. Speaker, I should like to extend to them a very warm welcome and I 
hope their day is interesting and informative and we wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and through you to 
the Members of the Legislature a group of 72 Grade Eight students from the Weyburn Junior High. They 
are sitting in the west gallery with their teachers Mr. Jim Nedelcov and Mr. Larry Balog, and the bus 
drivers, Mr. Dwayne Anderson and Mr. Gary Baniuck. I hope to meet with these students at 3:00 on the 
second floor, Mr. Speaker. I am sure it is our wish and the wish of the Members of the Legislature that 
their stay here proves educational and pleasant and certainly that they have a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to 
the Members of the Legislature a group of 55 Grade Eight students from St. Anne School located in 
Regina North East Constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Moski, Mr. Bernhauser 
and Mr. Kerster. I do hope that their stay this afternoon in the Legislature will be a pleasant and 
rewarding experience and will assist them in their Social Studies. It is my intention to meet with the 
students at about 3:15 in the Members’ lounge. Again a warm welcome to the students and teachers. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

BEEF MARKETING BOARD 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — A question for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, in 
light of the massive rejection of the beef marketing board concept in neighboring Manitoba, where 77 
per cent of their beef producers rejected this concept, will the Minister give 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1050 
 

this House the assurance our beef producers will have a direct say by means of a free vote as to what 
system they may or may not desire prior to implementation? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think I have indicated quite clearly 
what we are prepared to do. We have said that the farmers in the country are now discussing the problem 
and they will be making representations to me eventually. If they do not, I would expect that they 
wouldn’t expect any action. When they bring some proposals to me, we will look at them and see what 
our activity would be. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you have indicated that you have 
had discussions with various farm organizations. Can you advise this House which farm organizations if 
any, have endorsed your beef marketing board concept? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — We have never, Mr. Speaker, got to that specific point. We have had a large 
number of discussions with a number of farm organizations and they are discussing various methods 
which they might look at marketing. To this point, they are looking at marketing boards, they are 
looking at commissions and at other methods of improving our marketing situation. I think that is as it 
should be. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, final supplementary. You have continually imposed programs on 
farmers such as the Land Bank, the Hog Marketing Commission, and the Load Limit Policy without 
giving the farmers . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, I’ll take the next question. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER: (Thunder Creek): — A supplementary question Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
just indicated that discussions are going on with various farm organizations. Will the Minister tell this 
House, one organization that you are presently discussing a proposed marketing board with, 
specifically? Is it the Stock Growers’ Association, is it the NFU, is it the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
Let’s get down to specifics. To whom are you talking? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think I am open to representations from any group, any farm group 
which wants to discuss the marketing situation with me. At this point in time I know that there are a 
number of farm groups out there which are looking at various ways and means of handling a different 
kind of marketing agency. They have not to this point brought anything to me. Although we have had 
general discussions with them, we have not been discussing with them any specific plan. 
 
MR. THATCHER: A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister in essence telling this House that 
rather than asking them for proposals, are you inviting proposals? 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1051 
 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think that I have made that fairly clear in the past, that I have asked 
farm organizations to bring proposals forward. I am waiting for those proposals. 
 

LABOUR DISPUTE - CORY MINE 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation. As Mr. Speaker will be aware there is labour dispute at the Cory mine. 
I wonder whether the Minister would indicate whether it is the intention of the Government to use the 
grievance procedure which is written into the contract which would permit the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to obtain damages against the union for this illegal wildcat strike? As the Minister no 
doubt is aware with exactly the same union Dominion Bridge followed that course of action recently on 
a similar wildcat strike and obtained damages against them. I wonder if the Minister is contemplating 
that kind of action, or whether as a result of the Government involvement and perhaps the approach of 
the Government being involved in the union that you reject that proposal as a possible way of resolving 
this matter and bringing some labour peace and getting back into production. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of Potash Corporation): — Mr. Speaker the Government is not at 
present contemplating any action. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Management is handling the 
dispute with the Steelworkers, they haven’t made any such recommendation to me. I don’t think that the 
Dominion Bridge pattern is one that the Government of Saskatchewan would necessarily or even likely 
follow. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary. Mr. Speaker, would the Minister then not agree that the, as he 
puts it, “the Dominion Bridge pattern” is the pattern that private enterprise would follow as they try to 
do the best job they can, running the company, to do as well as they can for their shareholders. And that 
because the Government is involved, with a particular political bias, that as a result of that you are 
precluded from taking certain kinds of actions that private enterprise would take. I wonder if the 
Minister would not also agree that this is just a sign of some of the disadvantages of government being 
involved rather than clipping coupons the way private enterprise would. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think if one examined the disputes of a similar kind between private 
companies and trade unions, one would find in the vast majority of circumstances that private companies 
did not follow the example set by Dominion Bridge. 
 
MR. MERCHANT:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister would find from people within 
the trade union movement that Steelworkers was the only union in the by-election to support the 
Government . . . 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1052 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I’ll take the next question. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I would like to 
follow-up and ask of the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. Could he please 
tell me what he considers to be the public interest in this dispute, the protection of some $130 million 
investment of the people of Saskatchewan, or the protection of the union itself which is now involved in 
a wildcat strike and is illegal? 
 
MR. COWLEY: Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is quite obvious. The public interest from the point of 
view of the Government of Saskatchewan as the shareholder in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
is to make sure that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan works in the best interest of the people of 
this province. It may be that the Member has a different view as to how that best interest can be served. 
It is a grievance that the union chose to strike on rather than to take up the various options that were 
open to them within the contract. Obviously the management there is considering the options which are 
open to them. Certainly if the management has some recommendations to the Board of Directors or to 
myself as chairman, we will consider them. At this time I am not directly involved, neither do I intend to 
become directly involved, until such time as the management have a proposal for me. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister not agree that this 
points out the dilemma that faces the NDP Government of Saskatchewan, a marriage with the trade 
union movement in a political sense and the dilemma of protecting $130 million investment which 
demands maximum production in order to repay that and to derive some kind of a profit on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with the Member opposite that there is any dilemma 
there. I don’t see any dilemma at all any more than an entrepreneur such as the Duval Corporation when 
it was the owner of that particular mine faced similar problems from time to time and I may say they 
sometimes acted in ways I agreed with and some I didn’t. The matter of union negotiations and labor 
management relations is a complex one and I think that the Member opposite suggesting simple 
solutions and simple political attacks upon the corporation demeans this Legislature and himself. 
 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN - CORY 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — To the Minister responsible for the Potash Corporation. There were 
allegations made by the union involved of poor management in the PCS Cory. I am advised by the 
industry that in the four month period that the Government has taken over PCS Cory that their sales are 
less than 50 per cent of those of Duval in the previous four month period just before the Government 
purchased. That, in fact, the Government potash mine is running into severe market rejection of PCS 
potash 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1053 
 

that is not the lack of concern of the Government something to do with the fact that PCS Cory has 
seriously overproduced, and I shall give those figures, and that at the present time storage capacity is 
being fully utilized and that a shutdown is in fact beneficial to PCS Cory? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I disagree with those statements. I think if one checks the figures I 
maintain that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has maintained its fair share of the market and 
further that the inventory position of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan compares very favorably 
to other Saskatchewan producers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary. 
 
Would the Minister not admit that figures of comparing the two four-month periods from July 1, to 
October 29, the time of the takeover and then October 29 to the end of February indicates that PCS 
Cory, in the four-month period, produced approximately 40 per cent more than did Duval in its 
four-month period prior to takeover. That in fact there was serious overproduction and perhaps the union 
is correct in its allegations of very poor management of PCS Cory? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is obviously no. On the one hand we have the 
left or the right wing as the case may be of the Conservative-Liberal Party over there arguing that we are 
incompetent and can’t produce and then we have on the other hand the Liberal-Conservative Party over 
there saying you are doing a terrible job, you produced 40 per cent more. Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 
me that Members opposite had better get together. They had better tell the same story, because you can’t 
be incompetent for not producing enough and incompetent for producing too much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — The Member for Qu’Appelle, say ah ha!, I’m comparing the four months from 
October 29 to now versus the four months from July 1 to October 29. Everyone knows that shipments in 
the fertilizer industry are cyclical. If the Member wants to make a fair comparison he would compare 
October 29, 1976 to now versus October 29, 1975 to now. If the Member chooses not to do that he is 
playing with figures. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Minister. 
 
Would the Minister not agree that the current labor dispute at the Cory Mine, while perhaps over a 
relatively innocuous matter, could not be construed by the labor movement involved in the potash 
industry as being a test case to see just how the Government is going to react in such a situation and 
indeed what leverage the Government is going to use on the Potash Corporation if any, or whether they 
are going to come out in favour of their well-known supporters of the trade union movement? 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1054 
 

MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Member opposite is embarrassed because of the 
lack of trade union support for his party, but I want to tell the Member that I think that all trade union 
disputes are viewed by the trade union movement, particularly that involved with any industry as in a 
sense a test case. If one wants to take that general approach, obviously it’s somewhat of a test, as every 
dispute is a test. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I will move onto the next question. 
 

RURAL MUNICIPAL BOUNDARY CHANGES 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy). 
 
I wonder if the Minister would assure this Assembly and the people of rural Saskatchewan that he or his 
Department will not bring about any changes to the boundaries of rural municipalities unless these 
changes are asked for and agreed upon by the local government involved? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, neither the Government nor 
the Department have any plans whatsoever for municipal boundary changes. I think I responded to that 
question earlier in this House. I understand, however, that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) at their convention in Saskatoon did pass a resolution to do a study on boundary changes 
and I think that our position is that it’s a matter for them to look at and we are leaving it with them and 
will look forward to the recommendations of the study. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I understand the RMs did pass a resolution that they 
wanted no government interference and that they would look after their own study. Has the Minister any 
doubts at this time what the real feelings in rural Saskatchewan are as far as rural boundary changes or 
load limits after the results of the SARM convention? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

BEEF MARKETING BOARD 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, if I might direct a question to the 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding). 
 
The Minister I am sure has done a great deal of work upon the feasibility of a cattle marketing board. I 
wonder if the Minister would inform the House on the percentage that the Government believes cattle 
marketing would cost over and above 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1055 
 

the current sales system? The Egg Marketing Board, for instance, costs about 10 per cent and I wonder if 
you believe that cattle marketing would be in the 10 per cent range? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Member asks a hypothetical question. There is certainly 
no way that I could put a dollar or a cent figure on that kind of a question. I do know though that the 
figure he talks about of 10 cents extra for marketing eggs is not a valid figure. It is certainly one that 
some opponent of marketing boards has put in his mind and is certainly not valid. And I know that our 
studies have shown that we could very well provide greater revenue for our provincial producers 
through a marketing board than without one. 
 

COMPARISON PRICES FOR POTASH 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister responsible for potash. 
 
You asked for a comparison. You thought my previous figures were not fair. In the same period of time 
Alwinsal Potash Mines produced approximately 290,000 tons of . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! I’ll take the next question. 
 

BAYDA INQUIRY 
 
MR. MALONE: — A question to the Minister in charge of Mineral Resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is an article in this morning’s Leader-Post in connection with the comments you 
made, I gather over the weekend, about the Bayda Inquiry and upon reading the article I think the proper 
inference from it, if you were quoted correctly, would be that the Amok Development would likely 
proceed notwithstanding the findings of the Bayda Inquiry, and I ask you now whether you were quoted 
correctly in this particular story, if you have seen it. If that is the case would you not agree with me that 
you are to a great deal undercutting the Bayda Inquiry and what they can be doing if on one hand you 
are saying notwithstanding what the Inquiry says Amok can proceed? 
 
MR. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me first say that I do 
not believe that any statement that I have made as Minister of Mineral Resources has any influence on 
the ability of the Bayda Inquiry to carry out its delegated responsibilities. I did state, I have not seen the 
statement that the Member refers to in this morning’s Leader-Post, but I did state that the Amok Mine 
was in a different situation than with other proposed mines in the province, or other activities of 
exploration that may lead to mining ventures in the province. I say that because the negotiations and the 
discussions between the Amok operations and the Government of Saskatchewan have been going on for 
quite a number of years. They have been fully aware that the position of the Government is to hold an 
inquiry in 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1056 
 

regard to the establishment of these kinds of operations. The inquiry during those discussions was 
limited to identifying environmental concerns, safety concerns and then undertaking to make 
recommendations to the principles of the operations, in this instance Amok, the safety or precautions 
that would have to be taken in order to guarantee that this operation would not be detrimental in any way 
to either the environment or the safety of those who live in the community or work in that mining 
operation. When the Bayda Inquiry was structured it went beyond that jurisdiction. It also made 
reference to broader implications which may bring about some observations in regard to the continued 
expansion of uranium mining in Saskatchewan, a moratorium if you wish. 
 
My statement was that with the Amok operations, because of the investments and because of the 
groundwork that they had achieved up to that point that any moratorium or discontinuation of expansion 
of uranium mining in Saskatchewan would have to be treated differently in their regard, not necessarily 
other proposed or assumed uranium mines. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. Have you had communications with 
Amok in that regard, that is, written communications, and if so are you prepared to table the 
communications that you have had? 
 
MR. MESSER:— No, I have had no written or verbal communications with Amok. In fact, I have not 
conveyed to them - and Mr. Speaker I want to say that this whole situation is hypothetical, we are 
assuming that there may be some recommendation from the Bayda Inquiry which may bring about a 
reason to consider moratoriums or discontinuation of uranium mining in Saskatchewan. That is purely 
hypothetical, therefore, I have not had a discussion with Amok in regard to what the Government’s 
position may be if such a recommendation came. I conveyed to the press that if, and their inquiry was, if 
a moratorium came about where would this leave Amok. I conveyed to them as far as the Department of 
Mineral Resources and myself as Minister was concerned I would have to recognize that we did not talk 
to them about any such implications during the development of the mine up to this point in time. I think 
that they have to undertake to surmise from that whatever they wish. I believe that at this point in time 
they have decided, as the Member is aware, to delay further development until the recommendations of 
the Inquiry are known to the Government. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A final supplementary. Mr. Minister then is there any agreement between Amok 
and the Government prior to the introduction of the Bayda Inquiry as to the development of resources in 
Saskatchewan, that is, is there any written agreement between the two parties and furthermore are you in 
a position, or have you considered your position if the Bayda Inquiry does recommend the moratorium 
on the development, as to whether you will be paying damages to Amok for the investment that they 
have already made, which I believe is something in the order of $35 million? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, let me say firstly, that there is no formal agreement. I believe that there 
is an understanding 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1057 
 

between the Government and Amok, that they are to oblige themselves to recognize the 
recommendations of the Bayda Inquiry or for that matter, the recommendations of the Government in 
regard to environmental and safety concerns. That, I think, is the understanding that they have. There is 
no agreement nor understanding in regard to what might happen if the proposed moratorium is to be 
considered. 
 
Further, I have to say that I have not nor has the Government turned its attention to what obligations the 
Government might have, if any, if there is a moratorium declared on uranium mining. I recognize, fully, 
the $30 some odd million plus that Amok have already expended in regard to that particular mining 
development, but I do not believe it would be wise at this time to allude to what the position of the 
Government may be, because, again, I say it is purely hypothetical to assume that a moratorium will 
come. The Government, I think, would have to consider that after it came before it would consider what 
its position may be. 
 

URANIUM EXPLORATION 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I should like to direct a question to the Minister. The other day he got up in this 
House and bragged about the $20 million, if I remember correctly, that the Saskatchewan Mineral 
Development Corporation is investing in uranium exploration. What will be the position, or why will the 
Government make a commitment of $20 million in the uranium industry in northern Saskatchewan, 
when the Bayda Commission Report is not in, when they might recommend very serious environmental 
hazards, and what will the Minister do with the Government’s $20 million commitment if the Bayda 
Commission recommends a moratorium? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Member had been listening yesterday when I gave second 
reading to the Sask Mining Development Corporation speech I said that we would be undertaking to 
expend $20 million in exploration and development. It should not be assumed that that will all go to 
uranium exclusively. There will be an exploration and development program for other non-renewable 
resources as well. There will, yes, be a significant amount of that $20 million directed towards 
exploration development this year, a good percentage of that, if not all of it, was already committed. In 
other words, the exploration and development had been instituted in previous years and commitments 
had been made with other private individuals or parties that we were joint venturing with to carry out a 
certain level of exploration and development to a certain stage. My officials informed me that if we were 
to make a decision to curtail all exploration for uranium because of the Bayda Inquiry, it would quite 
likely cost us as much, if not more, to undertake to renegotiate or break our agreement with some of the 
other people who were involved in this exploration program. So at least, for this year, it would be 
financially prudent to undertake to continue to explore until we reach the termination of agreements that 
had been agreed upon prior to the announcement of the Bayda Inquiry. 
 

COMPARISON PRICES FOR POTASH 
 
MR. G.J. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1058 
 

had asked for a comparison that on comparable terms Alwinsal produced just slightly less in the same 
period of time as PCS Cory and Duval, but sold approximately 40 per cent more in the same period of 
time; that of the sales that PCS Cory has made they are, as I have said, less than 50 per cent of 
comparable sales by Duval and in fact of the mines production, two-thirds of the sales are by Duval. Is 
the Government aware of the very strong market rejection of Government potash and if so what action is 
the Government taking? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the Member before I don’t know where he is getting 
his figures from but undoubtedly there are some in the potash industry who would like to cause as much 
difficulty, I am sure, for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as possible. I am sure that the Member 
for Qu’Appelle is nothing more than one of their agents. I want to say to the Member that I don’t accept 
his basic premise, that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is meeting a strong rejection or, indeed, 
much rejection at all or much animosity in marketing its potash and, therefore, his question is 
unanswerable because the basis on which it is made is incorrect. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the Minister advise us . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I take the Member for Shaunavon. 
 

ROLL BACK OF LEASE FEES 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Because of the many requests from the advisory committees of 
the community pastures and depressed cattle prices, have you considered rolling back the lease fees to 
the 1975 levels? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the lease fees on private leases are 
reduced substantially from 1976. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — A supplementary. I didn’t mean on the community pastures. From the advisory 
committees of community pastures that have written in saying that they feel that community pastures 
grazing fees and whatnot are too high and I am wondering if you have considered rolling them back? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, Mr. Speaker, there has been no intention of moving back community pasture 
rates. I should like to point out to the Member that our costs in community pastures are increasing all the 
time and we have held the rate, this year, to the same rate as last year. You will notice that the Federal 
Government PFRA pastures increased their rates by 3 cents a day and we didn’t do that. 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1059 
 

BEEF MARKETING BOARD 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. Would the Minister not agree that cattle marketing will only be effective in raising a return 
to the cattle producers if it is possible to pass on higher costs to the consumer. I suggest to the Minister, 
in the other example of total control, the Wheat Board, we have seen as a result of the national cheap 
food policy, wheat sold for less than the cost of production for many years in this country. Would the 
Minister not agree that we might be putting ourselves under the control of that kind of cheap food policy 
and, secondly, does the Minister not feel that this kind of legislation might be in contravention of the 
General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, again, he is talking about something hypothetical, because we have 
no plan yet that we are proposing and to this point I don’t have any recommendations for such a plan. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — What about GATT? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Under the GATT arrangements we could, if we had a national meat marketing 
agency, we could very well deal with the GATT situation. In the present situation we cannot, because 
GATT does not permit us to set prices differently in Canada than it does in another country unless we 
have a supply management program. If we had an organized beef program in Canada, then we could 
overcome the GATT problem. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — moved second reading of Bill No. 67 - An Act 
respecting the Restraining of Animals from Running at Large 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this legislation is designed to accomplish several purposes including the 
following: Firstly, it protects property, be it land, buildings, crops, grain or feed, shelter belts and so on 
from destruction by animals that may be unlawfully running at large. It streamlines the administration of 
the Act by providing more latitude in the appointment of pound keepers and the disposal of animals in 
line with the present day practices and needs. Furthermore, it charges RM secretaries or administrators 
with the actual administration of the restraining and impounding procedures and relieves pound keepers 
of the responsibility of accounting for public funds. It prevents harbouring of stray animals by requiring 
if the animals are restrained by a finder that their discovery be reported immediately. It ensures the 
proper and humane care of animals that are restrained and impounded. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the original stray animals Act grew out of the customs of the early 
settlement period in the province’s history. At that time open range was the rule, but with the influx of 
settlers and with the development of farmsteads the demand to restrict the movement of livestock under 
the sensible and prudent premise that open grazing should be utilized and it would have been a waste of 
a valuable natural resource not to have grazed unused areas where possible. During these early 
settlement days a great deal of land was 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1060 
 

also vested in the Crown and was considered free to those who could utilize it for open grazing. The 
original Act provided that all lands within the provincial boundaries of the province be declared open for 
grazing subject to the wishes or requirements of individual municipalities to place restrictions within 
their own boundaries. It was designed to accommodate herd owners with primarily horses and cattle 
when animals running at large did not constitute a serious inconvenience or hazard to others. Conditions 
today have changed greatly, most of Saskatchewan’s land is now utilized for one purpose or another. 
The density of cattle is much greater and there is need to place more onus on the livestock owner to 
confine his animals on the property of which he has control. At the same time it recognized that there are 
certain areas of the province in which it may be desirable to permit free grazing seasonally or even 
permanently. The new Act provides for this possibility. 
 
A recent survey revealed that more than 90 per cent of the municipalities of the province have exercised 
the option available to them under the present Stray Animals Act to declare the areas within their 
boundaries to be closed to livestock running at large. In response to this evidence the new Stray Animals 
Act will restrict livestock running at large in all areas within the boundaries of the province but will 
provide authority for individual municipalities to declare open herd areas where such action is in 
keeping with the wishes of the ratepayers. The new Act is therefore, more in keeping with current 
farming practices. At the same time the new Stray Animals Act will give more authority to municipal 
councils and municipal administrative staff. These agencies will not only be responsible for the 
appointment of pound keepers and the designations of places to be used as pounds but will also be 
responsible for the disposition of strays found within the boundaries of that municipality. 
 
Under the present Act pound keepers are difficult to recruit because of their duties which involve record 
keeping, posting of notices, collection of fees, sales advertising and auctioneering when unclaimed 
animals were sold. The new Act places the administrative duties on the municipal secretary or 
administrator who are responsible for impoundment and the eventual disposition of the stray. Unclaimed 
strays may be transported to the most convenient market and sold through the facilities there by auction 
at the end of a 14 day impoundment period. Moneys received become the responsibility of the 
municipality to be distributed through the municipal office. 
 
The new Act provides an opportunity for the finder of a stray to report the discovery to the owner and to 
attempt to come to a satisfactory arrangement for the removal of the animal. It also provides protection 
for the owner of the stray in that the finder is required to report immediately to the owner upon 
discovering of a stray. If satisfactory terms cannot be agreed upon by the finder and the owner, the 
finder must notify the secretary of the municipality and ask to have procedures initiated for 
impoundment and eventual disposition of the animal. If the owner of the stray is unknown to the finder 
then the finder is required to notify the RCMP at the time of discovery in addition to notifying the 
secretary or administrator of the municipality. 
 
During the period of restraint between the time the stray 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1061 
 

is discovered and is either removed by the owner or is impounded, the finder may assess a fair charge 
against the owner for expense incurred during the period of restraint. In addition the municipality may 
level a penalty against any owner who is negligent in removing a stray to lawful premises when 
requested to do so by the finder. On the other hand protection is afforded to the owner in that the finder 
is required to deliver the stray to the owner upon receipt of payment of the assessed charges any time 
during the period of restraint. This section will provide an opportunity for the finder and the owner to 
arrange for a satisfactory solution in the recovery of a stray without resorting to the inconvenience and 
embarrassment of impoundment procedures. 
 
The new Act provides for greater flexibility in the appointment of pound keepers. Subject to the consent 
of the finder, the finder may be appointed pound keeper resulting in less inconvenience where several 
animals may have to be transported a long distance. In areas where it is not really possible to appoint 
pound keepers or to designate a place to be used as a pound, arrangements may be completed to provide 
for impoundment of animals at the nearest livestock auction market. This has significant advantages in 
that facilities are designed to accommodate confinement of a number of animals and staff is available for 
care and feeding duties. 
 
Communication procedures are streamlined with current practices. Notices may be sent by telephone 
rather than by registered mail, providing for a simplified and more rapid means of communication 
between the finder and the owner. 
 
The new Act will provide for a series of routine penalties. It will also be an offence to harbour, transport 
or sell a stray in a manner that is not in accordance with this Act. This is simply rustling and I am sure 
no one likes to condone that practice. The major concern is to prevent unreported strays from being 
offered for sale with animals which are legitimately being offered for sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation has the support of many farmers and several producer organizations, 
notably the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities. I am pleased therefore, to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments in regard to this particular Bill. I was 
quite happy to listen to the Minister’s comments in this regard. I would, however, ask leave after a few 
brief comments to adjourn debate on this particular Bill because there are a number of things which I 
would like to check out, particularly in regard to Section 35 in which the repeal of the Stray Animals Act 
and The Open Wells Act will become effective. 
 
Many aspects of the Bill are certainly welcome. Speaking as a grain producer much more so than a 
cattleman, the fact that there will now be a closed herd law throughout the entire Province of 
Saskatchewan is certainly welcome. I have had an opportunity to talk to some of the members of the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association and other ranchers throughout Saskatchewan with regard to 
this Bill and as the Minister has 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1062 
 

said they are generally in agreement with the content of the Bill. 
 
Some of the aspects of it that I am not clear on and that they are not clear on is the fact that the Minister 
can overrule a decision that is made by a local RM Council. I am speaking in regard to the authority that 
is now put into the hands of RM Councils throughout the province that they can now determine as to 
what will happen in regard to their particular municipality or section of their municipality as to whether 
the herd law is open or closed. I would like to check this out further. As well what is the position in 
terms of the municipality, the rancher and farmer in regard to property that is owned by the Crown such 
as provincial highways and municipal roads? Does the council have jurisdiction over this or is any 
animal which accidentally crawls outside of a fence and finds himself on highway property or municipal 
property, automatically considered a stray or does any preceding by-law passed by the municipality 
authorizing open herd law rule that animal out of being classed as a stray in case that should happen. 
 
As well the liabilities which may occur to the owner of a property in case that particular municipality 
does agree to pass a by-law enabling open herd law would certainly mean that the farmers involved 
within that particular municipality are going to have to spend a considerable amount of money to protect 
their particular property in terms of granaries, farm buildings, dugouts and wells and so on. So the onus 
again would then be upon the farmer to ensure that his property is adequately protected from any animal 
that may wander on to his particular property if the RM does pass open herd law. Here again the 
cattleman is not held liable for any damage that is done and if the fence is not constructed according to 
what the Act reads as a lawful fence the property owner then of course is liable for any damage that 
happens to his particular property as well as the damage to the particular animal. 
 
Possibly many of these questions can be answered once we get into Committee of the Whole. However, 
I would like to have the opportunity to consider the Minister’s comments and the Bill a bit further and 
beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — moved second reading of Bill No. 57 - An Act to 
amend the Public Service Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Bill that is before us today contains a number of amendments to The Public 
Service Act which as Members will know legislates a system whereby Provincial Government 
departments and agencies administer the salaries and working conditions of their employees. Because 
the performance of our public service employees is a prime factor in the importance of maintaining good 
government, we have introduced a number of important and positive changes to improve the legislation 
which affects them. 
 
Under the new provisions of the Act people between the ages of 60 and 65, Mr. Speaker, will be eligible 
for work in the public service on a permanent basis and will therefore, receive the full range of benefits 
which accrue to all other 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1063 
 

permanent government employees and we regard this as a major step forward, Mr. Speaker, in light of 
the fact that in days gone by a person over 60 was not able to become a member of the full time public 
service. They will now be eligible to receive vacation leave, sick leave, superannuation benefits and 
most important, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to advance to a higher position. Up to now these people 
have been employed on a temporary basis and have not been eligible for such benefits. We are therefore, 
deleting Section 20 of the Act which we feel discriminates against those people who are still of a great 
benefit to our society and have a generous contribution to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in another positive move we have removed legislation under the Act which requires all 
new Government employees to take a medical examination at their own expense before they can be 
placed on permanent staff. We feel, Mr. Speaker, that after an employee has worked in a position for a 
pre-determined probationary period that he or she has already demonstrated his or her ability to perform 
the duties of that position. We have therefore, amended the legislation to provide that an applicant or 
employee will take a medical examination only when there is some doubt that he or she is unable to 
perform those duties. In such cases, Mr. Speaker, an employee who is asked to take a medical 
examination will be able to select a physician from a list maintained by the Public Service Commission. 
All expenses for the examination will be paid by the agency that requests the examination. I am sure that 
the Members will agree that this is a more efficient and more equitable method of handling medical 
examinations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also amending the Act to provide for flexible probationary period within the public 
service. We have decided that present legislation requiring probationary period be of six months or one 
year duration is too rigid and it doesn’t give consideration to the amount of time required to learn a 
particular job. Discussing these matters with the union that represents the Government employees it 
became clear that these probationary periods must be made more flexible. It became obvious that some 
provisions in Government were just so complex that all duties could not fully be learned in a six month 
or even in a one year period. The proposed amendment will therefore, provide for longer or perhaps 
even shorter probationary periods and will also provide for the extension of a probationary period in 
certain cases. This latter change will be particularly important in cases where employees have not met 
the minimum requirements for his position after the normal probationary period but he would likely do 
so if he were given a little more time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also deleting Section 17 of the Act because this Section is outmoded and provides 
Government employees with special concessions such as free-housing accommodation and living-out 
allowances. This provision has not been used I am told in the memory of those people on the Public 
Service Commission at present. 
 
Section 15 of the Act, Mr. Speaker, is also being amended to comply with current methods used by the 
Public Service Commission to determine pay ranges for out-of-scope employees within the public 
service. This is presently done through consultation with the Public Service Commission, with 
department 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1064 
 

heads and groups of employees within each department in order to reach a satisfactory salary 
arrangement for out-of-scope employees. 
 
The current reading of the legislation requires that the Public Service Commission in arriving at salaries 
for out-of-scope persons must deal individually with each employee in each case. This method, Mr. 
Speaker, was found by employees and the Commission to be cumbersome and was a cause of long 
delays in reaching settlements and agreements. The new legislation simply allows the Public Service 
Commission to consult with groups of employees rather than with each individual employee. 
 
Another amendment would delete subsection (2): — of Section 15 of the Act which states, “that all 
salary ranges for in-scope employees must be approved by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council”. 
However, Mr. Speaker, since section 58 gives a designated Member of Cabinet the authority to enter 
into collective bargaining agreements for in-scope employees on all matters, including salary ranges, 
ratification by the Lieutenant-Governor we believe is unnecessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Section 37 and 39 of the Act deal with dismissals or demotions of out-of-scope employees 
and their right of appeal. Under existing legislation an employee who has been laid off or demoted and 
whose appeal has been upheld by the Public Service Commission has a right to be re-instated or to be 
employed in another position. Under the new proposed legislation these employees may now be eligible 
for additional forms of settlement such as a lump sum cash payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the re-wording of Section 35 in the printed Bill states that if there is a shortage of work in a 
department the department head may lay off permanent employees. However, in order that the Public 
Service Commission can make every effort to re-employ these people, present legislation requires that a 
list of all dismissals must be submitted to the Public Service Commission 30 days before the dismissals 
take place. The new legislation no longer requires the Public Service Commission approval for 
permanent lay-off. However, it will still be a requirement for permanent heads to provide a list of the 
employees laid off as early as possible in order to facilitate the employees’ re-employment rights. 
 
Changes under Section 27 states that the department heads are no longer required to report the hiring of 
people on a casual basis. This merely confirms what is actually happening in terms of existing practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the terms of the Act as it stands, casual employees may work a total of only 26 days 
in a two-month period. Because of the short-term nature of the casual work we feel it is unnecessary for 
these cases to be reported to the Commission. 
 
For the information of Members opposite a new subsection is being added to Section 5 of the Act. This 
is basically a housekeeping amendment which will allow the chairman of the Public Service 
Commission to formally delegate a number of his duties and powers to one of his employees. The 
legislation simply gives to the chairman of the Public Service Commission the same powers given to any 
head of any government agency namely, the power to delegate to others in his department the signing of 
certain documents and letters related to daily 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1065 
 

routine matters. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, Section 42 is being amended simply to tidy up the wording of the section and will 
not in any way alter the powers given to the Public Service Commission. Mr. Speaker, this is a general 
revision and a tidying up and making more workable and readable the Public Service Commission Act, 
and I think there are incorporated in the Act a number of progressive amendments to the Public Service 
Act. I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Would the Minister permit a question before he takes his seat. Is the 
effect that the temporary positions will in fact become permanent positions, is that one of the effects of 
the Bill. I didn’t pick up what you said about the temporary, could you explain it to me, I am somewhat 
confused. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I am not sure that I have the question, Mr. Speaker. The Bill does not say expressly 
that . . . you are talking about the age 60 provision . . . Those who are in excess of age 60 may now 
become permanent employees who were unable to become permanent employees, enjoying the benefits 
of sick leave, superannuation and the like. It is between the ages of 60 and 65. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to say much and I don’t 
propose to adjourn the debate. I think that the legislation could be divided into four categories, not in 
order of presentation in the Bill. But there are some minor technical changes and what the Government 
chooses to do as an employer in dealing with its employees certainly is up to the Government it seems to 
me. 
 
Secondly, I approve of the change regarding the medical examination, and third I of course approve of 
the change regarding employees from 60 to 65. We are beginning too much both in private enterprise 
and in public service employment to have a prejudice almost against employing the elderly, which is a 
dangerous practice that seems to be developing. 
 
The one area that concerns me and concerns me even more that this Minister would be presenting that 
argument, is the increased length of probationary period that is contemplated. I wanted at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker to address a few comments to the way the Government when people move from one area to 
another within government subject the employee to working through a new probationary period in that 
new employment. I find it frankly surprising that that Minister a Minister out of the trade union 
movement would be attempting to justify for the Government an increasing length of time required for 
probationary periods. 
 
If the Minister thinks about exactly what he said, I think he may start to feel that he is sounding like 
some of the more reactionary businessmen with whom he was dealing from time to time. It is a bad 
employer and a reactionary employer who suggests that they need lengthy probationary periods. The 
Minister said that there may be occasions when period of longer than six months or a year may be 
required. Those longer 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1066 
 

periods may be required because it takes longer than that for people to learn the job. That’s the kind of 
argument that employers from time to time will adopt and they tend to be the employers who get into the 
most difficulty with a trade union. A probationary period, Mr. Speaker, is not designed to train 
somebody on the job. A probationary period is designed for the employer to decide whether that 
employee will be capable of functioning in the job, doing the learning that is required and then going on 
to being a good employee. I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that periods in excess of six months which are 
probably the longest probationary periods I have ever heard of, I don’t think that periods in excess of six 
months and in excess of a year should be necessary. I am surprised to see an NDP Government 
suggesting that they should be. 
 
It really comes down, Mr. Speaker, to the Government thinking, well the employee need not fear 
anything from us because after all, we claim to be employee conscious and we’ll deal with our union in 
a fair and honest way. But that’s exactly the same argument that any businessman would give that any 
employer would give, because the perception of what is fair is always different from the point of the 
view of the employer as opposed to that of the union and the employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that works from time to time great disadvantage to people within the public 
service, is that they are persuaded for one reason or another to leave a position where they have tenure 
and where they are protected by their agreement and they take a promotion or they move to another 
department. Then in that other department, they get into a personality dispute, perhaps they get into 
problems with the deputy minister or whatever, and they get fired from that other position. They find 
themselves fired during a period of time when they were on probation. Within private enterprise and 
where the union is perhaps more aggressive in dealing with the company, once you have gotten through 
the probationary period you can move from one area to another and you continue to be protected. The 
Sask. Gov’t Employees Assoc. for whatever reason has not been able to negotiate such protection for its 
employees. Again, I suppose the Government would say, well, we fired them because we were being fair 
and because the man wasn’t trying to adjust. I know for instance, Mr. Speaker, of a couple of examples 
that have now gone to litigation, and I have had something to do with some of those actions. 
 
Those people then find themselves faced with a technical legal argument. Even though they have been 
employed for 10 or 12 years with the Government, they find themselves told that you were just on 
probation in that new position. I ran into a case the other day of a person who for over 20 years worked 
for the Grey Nuns Hospital, has now been fired, by the Government after the Grey Nuns Hospital 
changed ownership. He was persuaded to switch to a different area, persuaded to give up the security 
that he had, was on probation and was fired during the probationary period. He really doesn’t have the 
protection that was intended to be afforded to them. Because Mr. Speaker, the SGEA tries very hard to 
get along with government, I think that government, the employer particularly with this government in 
power, has an extra duty to bend over backwards not to take advantage of the employees that work for 
them. I think that the probationary 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1067 
 

changes are very bad changes that it indicates a government as employer and indicates employers who 
aren’t able to decide as quickly as they should, a person should not be left hanging for a year or more to 
decide whether he is going to be able to get along with that employer or not. A good employer can make 
up his mind more quickly than that. It is not a question of whether or not he has learned all the job, the 
question is whether the employee is capable of learning. A good employer and a good department 
should be able to decide more quickly than six months, never mind elongating that period of indecision. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of comments on the Bill, I don’t share the 
same views as the Hon. Member to the right. I think that the Commission should have the discretion of 
determining what is a fair probationary period on a particular job to be performed. I can see positions in 
the public service which are extremely technical, requiring specific expertise. To assess that person, six 
months may well not be enough. I would hope that the practice does not follow on the other side that we 
are moving in the majority of cases to eliminate or reduce to a nominal amount the probationary period 
because, should that happen obviously the number of civil servants in the province is going to increase 
dramatically. 
 
In 1972, I introduced a Bill in this Assembly to prevent discrimination by reason of age. It was rejected 
by the Members opposite, perhaps such legislation would have made certain provisions of this Bill 
unnecessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that putting the people into the permanent civil service at age 60-65, may in fact 
prejudice their hiring. If a manager in government is faced with certain budget restrictions that may be 
where he tightens up. I think that assuming this section to be passed that in fact there may be greater 
difficulties for those over 60 being hired, than is at present. I think the answer to the problem quite 
frankly is as I suggested in 1972, and that is an amendment to the appropriate legislation to prevent 
discrimination by reason of age. I think it is time for it and time for it in this province. I think it would 
be incumbent for the Government opposite to take that approach and establish it in our legislation 
preventing discrimination. 
 
We of course ignore a very basic problem, with the age 65, one that we are going to have to come to 
grips with in the province, and that is, whether or not we even maintain a compulsory retirement age. 
We in Saskatchewan have the highest percentage of senior citizens in the ratio of population, per capita 
population in the Dominion of Canada. We are going to have to deal with that problem and it may well 
be that it would again be in order for the Government to consider legislation reviewing any compulsory 
retirement age at age 65. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of the Conservative Opposition to support this legislation in principle. 
 
MR. SNYDER: Just a brief word or two in closing the debate, Mr. Speaker. I think in general any 
specific questions of a detailed nature can best be handled in Committee. I must say that I was rather 
surprised that the Member for Wascana 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1068 
 

(Mr. Merchant) was surprised that I was bringing forward some amendments to the Act which he 
believes are somewhat out of tune with the previous thinking that has been expressed in this Legislature 
by myself. I have to say to him that I don’t believe that any attitudes being expressed at this point are 
inconsistent with those that have been expressed by me in the past. I don’t believe there is any intent, 
Mr. Speaker, to do anything other than that which I had indicated when I delivered my second reading 
speech in terms of providing the person who was applying for a job and filling the job during a 
probationary period the opportunity to more properly learn that job and regardless of what the Member 
for Wascana says, there have been select cases where the employee given a little more time would have 
been able to adjust to the job to do a job which was acceptable to his superiors and accordingly a 
somewhat longer probationary period would have been in order. But at that point in time it was 
necessary for the permanent head to make a judgement as to whether that employee would be kept on 
that job on a permanent basis or whether he would be dismissed. We think in a number of instances this 
has worked to the disadvantage of the employee, and accordingly he was released from the job during 
his probationary period because he had not had sufficient time to convince his immediate superior that 
he had the skills and the aptitude to fill the job on a permanent basis. 
 
I should tell the Member also that there has been some rather extensive consultation with the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees Association, and my understanding was that they registered no 
particular concern with respect to the extended period during probation. I say it is not inconsistent with 
the views that I have held in the past. 
 
I think it is a good Act. As the Member for Qu’Appelle indicated, it brings forward some messages that I 
believe are becoming more and more important in Saskatchewan in terms of providing greater 
opportunities for those people who might be regarded to be nearing the end of their productive years by 
still allowing them the opportunity to become gainfully employed in a department of government and 
make their contribution. I think it is a good Act, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — moved second reading of Bill No. 71 - An Act 
respecting Boilers and Pressure Vessels and Steam, Refrigeration and Compressed Gas Plants. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a rather routine Bill which has some changes in it which will be directed to 
the House, but it is a piece of legislation, which replaces the former Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act. It is 
an attempt to reorganize and to update a traditional piece of safety legislation so as to make certain that 
our provincial standards continue to reflect both a genuine concern for safety and the proper utilization 
of our ever changing technology. 
 
The Boiler and Pressure Unit of the Department of Labour which administers this Act does so as part of 
the Occupational Health and Safety Division. Its purpose is to provide minimum safety standards with 
respect to the design, the construction, the installation, and operation and maintenance of most boilers 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1069 
 

and pressure vessels in the province. As such it is dealing with various gases and fluids and solids which 
may be flammable or toxic or explosive and therefore, require close regulations and guaranteed high 
standards in their handling. 
 
The Boiler and Pressure Vessels Unit periodically inspects all pressure vessels and boilers in 
Saskatchewan. All new designs including designs for related equipment are approved by the Unit before 
they can be installed. 
 
In addition to this all power engineers and fireman who will be operating the equipment are examined 
and also licensed by the Unit. This represents an extensive instruction program and this is indicated by 
the fact that during the fiscal year which ended in 1976, over 11,000 inspections were made. Included in 
this number were 370 new boilers, 1,374 pressure vessels, 37 refrigeration plants, which were installed 
in the province. In addition to this every new design of a boiler or a pressure vessels is checked for 
compliance with the regulations before it can be constructed. Last year this meant checking plants for 
295 new designs. 
 
The program of inspection of equipment, plus this systematic examining and licensing of operators has 
proven reasonably successful over the years. I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that any one accident is one 
too many, but I think that it is a credit to say that in Saskatchewan, last year, there was only one major 
accident in which one person was injured as a result of a failure to control equipment. 
 
I should like to describe, very briefly, the kinds of changes which appear in the Bill that we are 
considering this afternoon. A great many of them simply involve clarification or rearrangement so as to 
make the provisions more easily understood. I see no particular need to deal with those changes in 
detail. 
 
There is a new Section added to the Act covering what is known as a guarded plant. This refers to a 
boiler or a steam plant which is equipped with protective devices that shut down boilers when troubles 
develop. They have audible and visual alarms, which automatically signals to those who are protecting 
the plant. This new Section takes this modern technology into consideration and will allow plants with 
this type of specific automatic control to operate with less personal supervision than has been the case in 
the past. 
 
A new Section 3 is concerned with the calculation of capacity for boilers, steam plants and refrigeration 
plants. As with so many aspects of our lives these days we see the invasion of the metric system. 
Virtually all measurements have been rewritten in metric terms and instead of horsepower we have less 
colorful, but practical kilowatts; instead of square feet we have square meters and so on. 
 
Several Sections of the old Act have been deleted from the new one because they are more adequately 
covered elsewhere. Certain safety regulations, such as those dealing with the location of adequately 
equipped first aid kits, for example, now appear in the Occupational Health and Safety Act and they are 
no longer necessary in the Boiler and Pressure Vessels Act. 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1070 
 

Another reason for some of the deletions is that the regulations in codes are often more practical ways to 
cover details such as working pressures and hydrostatic tests. 
 
A reworded Section 24 appears in the new Bill, Mr. Speaker, designed to allow an inspector to use 
radiography examination for checking out a weld rather than cutting a section out of it to test the unit in 
that way. This is another example of technological advance. 
 
A Section which deals with the scope of the various certificates granted to operating engineers have 
been revised to include refrigeration qualifications. In the past, steam engineers received separate 
certificates, one indicating competence in the techniques of managing heating systems and in another 
using much the same methods, being directed towards refrigeration systems. Since the training courses 
are thoroughly compatible, this kind of amalgamation will not only simplify training, it will also ensure 
that more competence standards are maintained. 
 
The Section of the Bill dealing with of fences and penalties has also been updated, bringing them in line 
to those comparable to the Federal Boiler Act and to the Alberta penalty provisions and with other 
provincial jurisdictions also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier this Bill is an updating of some traditional safety legislation that has been 
about the province for some time. As you know the Department of Labour has responsibility for 
administering a number of these Acts which are designed to reduce the risks associated with such things 
as fire and radiation hazards as well as the installation of gas, electrical and elevator equipment, plus 
The Boiler and Pressure Vessels Act, which we are discussing today. 
 
These are all part and parcel of the Occupational Health and Safety Division’s responsibility to protect 
the health and safety of people at work. It is our policy to keep all legislation under continuous review so 
we may be certain that it is relevant to safe and healthy working conditions as well as relative to current 
technology. This latest Bill is a further example of the Government’s continued concern for the welfare 
of its citizens. 
 
I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 71. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — moved second reading of Bill No. 60 - An Act to 
amend the Partnership Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this legislation containing the provisions to amend The Partnership Act is 
necessary because the registration of partnerships and trade names will be transferred to the Business 
Names Registration Act, 1977. The amendments contained in this Bill are the minimum required in 
order to effect the transfer. The purpose of this is to have The Partnership Act complement, but not 
duplicate the requirements under The Business Names Registration Act and the amendments are 
designed to achieve that objective. 
 
Both this Bill and The Business Names Registration Act, 1977, will, if enacted, come into force on 
January 1, 1978. 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1071 
 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments are basically consequential to The Business Names Registration Act 
and I would, therefore, move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 
 
MR. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — moved second reading of Bill No. 69 - An Act to amend 
The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968 (No. 2) 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, under The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 1968, the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail 
Insurance Association has been limited in the amount it may appropriate from its reserve funds for the 
purpose of replacing its office building. The amount was established many years ago at $200,000. The 
Association has acquired property on which it plans to construct a new office building this year and has 
asked that the Act be amended to make funds available for that purpose. 
 
The amendment relates the amount which may be invested for the purpose to five per cent of the book 
value of the assets of the Association. The amendment is similar in this respect to that applicable to 
insurance companies under the Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act of Canada and under The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
The Association’s total assets exceed $16 million, which will allow the Association to hold real property 
for office purposes up to a value of up to $800,000. Any appropriation, however, may be made only 
after a resolution for the purposes approved by two-thirds of the delegates present and voting in an 
annual general meeting of the Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before moving second reading of this Bill, I want to indicate that the people from the 
Municipal Hail Association have been talking to me and asking if we could move this Bill along as 
quickly as possible. I don’t want to rush it through the House if some Members have some questions or 
wish to debate it, but I will ask if it is approved for second reading today, whether or not by leave we 
can move into Committee of the Whole. However, I want to indicate that I have made obviously no 
commitment on part of the Members. If it is possible it would facilitate the Municipal Hail people, if not 
we will bring it up as quickly as we can get to it. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 69. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should just advise the Minister that we will consent to 
second and third reading today if it is the Minister’s wish. 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Caucus will certainly 
facilitate in any way we can to help this Bill through. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read to a second time. 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1072 
 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — moved second reading of Bill No. 70 - An Act 
respecting Ophthalmic Dispensing in Saskatchewan. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to explain the principles incorporated in The Ophthalmic 
Dispensing Bill. 
 
I should like the House to know that The Saskatchewan Guild of Ophthalmic Dispensing requested the 
Government to develop some legislation to legalize and regulate the practice of ophthalmic dispensing 
in this province. The Bill before us is the result of very extensive discussions between the formerly 
organized Ophthalmic Dispensers of Saskatchewan, who are represented by the Saskatchewan Guild of 
Ophthalmic Dispensers. In addition the Department of Health heard a large number of independent 
ophthalmic dispensers; those dispensers who are not in any way aligned with any large national or 
international companies. Further, many discussions were held with the ophthalmic dispensers, in our 
province, with the Saskatchewan Optometric Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
This Bill is supported by all of the groups I have mentioned. The licensing and regulation of ophthalmic 
dispensers will provide some needed protection for the residents of Saskatchewan as they receive 
eyeglasses and contact lenses. 
 
Perhaps the public is not generally aware that in Saskatchewan at the present time anyone off the street 
may decide to call himself an optician or an ophthalmic dispenser or an eye glass specialist or a contact 
lens specialist and this individual may establish a business to fit and sell individuals eye glasses and 
contact lenses. This person may have no qualifications whatsoever to undertake those activities. The 
public has no protection against any malpractice of those individuals. Indeed, at the present time the 
dispensers of eye glasses and contact lenses are technically an “illegal” health discipline in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the interest of the public the Government believes that all dispensers of ophthalmic goods should be 
subject to examination, appropriate educational standards, licensing and some discipline. 
 
The rules for dispensing eye glasses and contact lenses should be spelled out in law and regulations and 
where necessary ophthalmic dispensers ought to be subject to appropriate supervisory mechanisms. 
 
We hope, also, that by legalizing ophthalmic dispensers and by setting reasonable standards of 
performance and examining for those standards by providing educational upgrading courses and other 
forms of continuing education, the ophthalmic dispensers of the province will be much better able to 
evolve as a health discipline into closer working relationships with ophthalmologists and optometrists in 
the province. 
 
In years to come we hope to see an eye care team emerge in our province rather than having three 
individual health disciplines working independently and sometimes at odds with one another. 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1073 
 

Mr. Speaker, you will notice in this Act that we have separated the dispensing of eye glasses from the 
dispensing of contact lenses. All of the health disciplines who participated in developing this Act believe 
that there should be more precautions and stricter rules applied to the dispensing of contact lenses than 
to eye glasses. We believe that an ophthalmic dispenser should first be qualified to dispense eye glasses. 
In the case of contact lenses, after an individual has the credentials as a qualified dispenser of eye 
glasses he may write a special examination and ascertain whether he is qualified to dispense contact 
lenses. If the dispenser passes these examinations he will be known for the purposes of the Act as a 
contact lens technician. 
 
He will be permitted to dispense contact lenses when they have been prescribed by an ophthalmologist, 
an optometrist or other legally qualified medical practitioner so long as the contact lens technicians 
abide by detailed dispensing practices which will be outlined in regulations pursuant to the Act. 
 
The Department of Health has been discussing the detailed regulations will all of these groups in the 
province and has been doing so for many months. 
 
I have been told that work is well advanced and the development of reasonable but strict rules for 
dispensing contact lenses. There are a number of special problems with respect to bringing ophthalmic 
dispensers into a full self-regulating state. There has to be a transition period where some board is 
established to oversee the initial development of the examinations and licensing process until sufficient 
ophthalmic dispensers are licensed to form their own governing association. 
 
This Bill proposes that during the transition ophthalmic dispensers will be regulated by a transitional 
governing board appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. The transitional governing board 
will be responsible for establishing licensing requirements, standards of practice and for otherwise 
governing and regulating the practice of Ophthalmic dispensers. 
 
In the interim period during which the transitional governing board is functioning, all ophthalmic 
dispensers in Saskatchewan will be examined. Those who immediately satisfy licensing requirements 
will be awarded full licences. Those who require further training will be issued provisional licences 
valid for no more than two years. These provisional licences would allow dispensers to practice under 
strict controls while they are obtaining the qualifications necessary to obtain a full licence. 
 
The reason for these provisional licences is that no grandfather clause has been built into this Act. A 
reasonable time has been provided for ophthalmic dispensers to become educationally upgraded so they 
may be fully licensed. 
 
Nevertheless, if an ophthalmic dispenser requires educational upgrading before he has a full licence to 
practise and if he is unwilling to take this upgrading after two years, he will not be eligible to practice in 
Saskatchewan at all. 
 
We should mention that the Department of Continuing 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1074 
 

Education will make available to the ophthalmic dispensers the necessary educational upgrading to 
enable all ophthalmic dispensers to be fully licensed. After a period of time which cannot exceed more 
than 18 months, a sufficient number of ophthalmic dispensers will have acquired full licenses and the 
transitional governing board will be able to turn over its responsibilities to an organization to be called 
Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association. Only holders of full licences will be members of that 
association. Ophthalmic dispensers will then have reached full self-regulation status. Even when the 
self-regulating association comes into existence, this Bill does provide that the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council may appoint one or two persons from the general public as full 
members of the council if it is considered to be advisable. 
 
This Bill contains important other features that ensure the practice of ophthalmic dispensing will be 
regulated in the public interest. Licensing will be by examination only. Examinations will be conducted 
by an independent examining board. The transitional governing board will be appointed by the 
Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. Regulations enacted by the transitional governing board and later by 
the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association will become effective upon approval of the 
Minister. 
 
Further the Minister will be empowered to request the transitional governing board of the council of the 
Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association to make, amend or repeal a regulation. If such a 
change is not achieved in 60 days of the request, the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council is empowered to 
impose such changes as are necessary. 
 
The Act provides important safeguards for ophthalmic dispensers. In examining and licensing, all 
ophthalmic dispensers will be treated equally. Ophthalmic dispensers requiring upgrading training will 
be provided with such training on a fair and impartial basis. Ophthalmic dispensers who are initially 
unable to fully meet licensing requirements will not immediately be denied the right to practise and will 
be allowed a reasonable period of time in which to obtain full qualifications. Appeal procedures for 
ophthalmic dispensers right through to the Court of Queen’s Bench have been provided in the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should tell you that I have received letters and other communications from some 
ophthalmic dispensers in Saskatchewan who are not affiliated in any way with one or another of the 
large firms in Canada which deal with optical supplies. These dispensers are concerned that one or 
another of these large firms might take control of the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association 
and the examining process, in order to drive out business of these independent operators. I would like to 
assure the independent ophthalmic dispensers in our province that this Bill does indeed contain many 
features that protect their interests. As this Bill has been developed and altered, I have been very 
conscious of the need to protect independent dispensers to provide features in this Bill to ensure that it 
will be administered fairly and impartially. 
 
To illustrate some of the features which will ensure impartiality and protection for those independent 
dispensers who are anxious about the motives of the largest firms in the ophthalmic goods industry, I 
would like to list a few of the 



 
March 21, 1977 

 

1075 
 

safeguard features. 
 
An entirely new dispensers association will be established as a regulatory body replacing the present 
Saskatchewan Guild of Ophthalmic Dispensers. For an eighteen-month period, prior to the new 
association assuming power, the Act will be administered by a transitional governing body with the 
seven members on the board appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. The transitional 
governing board will establish the first examining board and will oversee the initial examination 
process. This board will also establish the first licensing requirements and conflict of interest 
regulations. These regulations and those which will follow when the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic 
Dispensers Association comes into effect will become law when the Minister has agreed with the 
regulations and publishes them in the Saskatchewan Gazette. 
 
Furthermore, if regulations made by the transitional governing board or by the Saskatchewan 
Ophthalmic Dispensers Association are considered to be contrary to the public interest, these regulations 
may be overturned or amended by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. Licensing will be by 
examination only and there will be no grandfather clause. Licensing examinations will be conducted by 
an independent examining board. Dispensers who fail to meet initial licensing requirements will be 
allowed to practise for two years under provisional licences while they are undergoing upgrading 
training programs, offered by the Department of Continuing Education. 
 
Dispensers, I note again, will be entitled to appeal. This appeal will be made to the special three member 
tribunal, headed by a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the legitimate concerns of the independent ophthalmic dispensers in 
our province have been protected in this Bill. These dispensers need not fear biased treatment which 
might be directed at them, by large national companies which try to influence our Saskatchewan 
licensing process. 
 
I’m confident that The Ophthalmic Dispensers Bill represents an important achievement in the 
establishment of co-operative relationships between all members of the eye care team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore, move that this Bill be given second reading and be referred to the Select 
Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I have not too much to say on this 
Bill because there are many clauses I should like to discuss in the clause by clause study. I want to 
discuss very briefly two or three of the major principles and say first of all I have no objection to the 
Bill. The reason I have no objection to the Bill is, I think, a rather obvious one. It would appear to be in 
the public interest to upgrade the ophthalmic or whatever it is that the Minister of Health tries to 
pronounce, that I have been unable to pronounce any better than he has. It 



 
March 21, 1977 
 

1076 
 

would appear to be in the public interest to upgrade the dispensing of eye glasses and contact lenses etc. 
in the Province of Saskatchewan. In fact, in some cases I think that perhaps the Bill doesn’t go far 
enough. But I think it’s a good beginning and a good initiation of a policy to try and ensure that people 
who go to ophthalmic eye people, will receive at least a basic requirement for general protection of 
themselves and their children from the services that are supposed to be provided. 
 
I also want to comment on the provisional licence. In most cases a bill of this kind provides for a 
grandfather clause. And, of course, the reason for the grandfather clause is rather an obvious one, that 
people who have been in a business or have been in a service for 20 or 30 years and do not have the 
paper or academic qualifications as required by a new act or a new piece of legislation, but have learned 
by experience over a period of service, and are usually granted an exception and permitted to practice 
under the Act. However, I kind of like the provisional licence in this case, simply for the fact that 
because it is health, because it is something as important as eyes, it does provide the opportunity for 
these people to practise provisionally for two years, with the idea or the concept that they will then be 
forced to upgrade themselves through the services provided. 
 
I’m interested to hear that the Department of Continuing Education will provide for courses and classes 
which will make the upgrading possible. In other words that it will be provided by the Continuing 
Education and the Government will finance this so that it will be no privation for those who do obtain a 
provisional licence and not force them to go elsewhere, outside the province or to some other 
jurisdiction in order to ensure that they can obtain the upgrading required to pass the examinations. 
 
I think too, he did comment on the independent, the concern of some independents and the fear of some 
of the large chains. I think perhaps the independents have a cause for concern and in most cases and this 
particular one, I think the appeal procedures are adequate. I think after a period of time if they are 
inadequate, I’m sure that the Minister and the Government or whoever is responsible for it, will certainly 
have a look at the Act and ensure that these kinds of provisions or safeguards are provided for those 
individuals. 
 
As I say there are many technicalities in the Act. I want to discuss the licensing procedures. I want to 
talk about the makeup of the council and the disciplinary powers that are contained within the Act, but I 
think the best place to do them, Mr. Speaker, would be in a clause by clause study. Therefore, I want to 
tell the Minister I will support the Bill in second reading. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make a few comments in 
regard to this Bill, The Ophthalmic Dispensing Bill. Right? That’s exactly what I said. I notice that the 
Minister said that the permanent council of ophthalmologists may include certain public representatives, 
as appointed by the Minister. I would just hope that the Minister would go a little further and assure this 
House, that there will be public representation 
 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 

1077 
 

on this board. I really think it’s imperative. The reason I say that is, because I know that the field is 
actually dominated by one company, and I think it would be in the public interest if he would give us 
assurance there will definitely be public representation on the permanent board when it is set up after the 
transitional board has had a go at it. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of comments. I might advise the 
Assembly my understanding is that perhaps the Bill doesn’t have complete and unanimous support of 
those in the industry. Our critic has not finished talking to all of the various groups who are affected by 
the Bill and I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON Bill No. 69 - An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Act, 1968 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 16 - An Act to amend The Conservation and Development Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 17 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Act 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 18 - An Act to amend The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 
 
SECTION 1 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — What will this change in Bill 18 cause to happen? Does this give 
the Minister more power or not? 
 
MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — No. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is The Horned Cattle Act the Bill that covers the fund? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, it is. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Could you give me the Horned Cattle Advisory Committee - I realize it is not on 
the question, but if I understand correctly you will be paying out on their behalf as they request. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Would you repeat the question please? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — That you will be paying out as that Committee requests. Is that all it is giving you 
authority to do? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The Committee generally will 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1078 
 

advise me as to what the fund should be used for and I would accept their recommendations. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 49 - An Act to amend The Agricultural Research Foundation Act 
 
Section 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 53 - An Act to amend The Pest Control Products (Saskatchewan) Act, 1973 
 
SECTION 1 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Just one brief question with regard to this Bill. I think I will cover it under 
Section 1 instead of as we go through it. Section 16, dealing with inspectors in Section 17. Does this 
involve inspectors appointed or hired by the Provincial Department of Agriculture or inspectors hired by 
the RM councils throughout the province? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — They could be appointed by either the RM council or if the RM council chose not 
to appoint one, we could appoint one from our department. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — If one was appointed from your department, say in the event that an RM council 
didn’t appoint one, salaries would then be paid by the Department of Agriculture, would they then be the 
responsibility of the Department or would the RM be assessed for that salary? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I think they would be covered by our Department. 
 
Section 1: agreed. 
 
Section 2: amended, agreed. 
 
Section 3: Section 6, amended, agreed. 
 
Section 4: Section 8, amended, agreed. 
 
Section 5: New Section 16, agreed. 
 
Section 6: New Section 17, agreed. 
 
Section 7: Section 23, amended, agreed. 
 
Section 8: agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 30 - An Act to amend The University Hospital Act 
 
Section 1: Agreed. 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1079 
 

Section 2: Section 4, amended, agreed. 
 
Section 3: Section 16, amended, agreed. 
 
Section 4: Agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 27 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act, 1974 
 
SECTION 1 
 
MR. S. CAMERON (Regina South): — I wonder if the Minister could tell us how many employees 
there currently are in this corporation? 
 
MR. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Five. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Are you able to tell us what proportion of the investments made by this 
corporation are made in the province? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The last figures I saw, I would say approximately 40 per cent. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Can you also give us some indication of the 60 per cent of the investment made 
by this corporation outside Saskatchewan, where are those investments taking place? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Most of those investments are in things like investment certificates, in trust 
companies, banks and things of that nature. Organizations which do have offices within the province but 
do not have their head office here. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — By way of general comment, Mr. Chairman, we consider this to be one of the 
more foolish legislative provisions of this Government. 
 
Let me tell you why I say that. You established a Saskatchewan Development Fund Act for principally 
two purposes. One is to provide for investment by Saskatchewan people in Saskatchewan companies 
and in Saskatchewan resources. Secondly, to give people themselves some additional opportunity to 
invest money in Saskatchewan by way of Registered Retirement Savings Plans and various other kinds 
of plans. 
 
We say it is foolish for two reasons. In the first place as the Minister has just indicated, 60 per cent of 
the investment of this corporation is done outside the province. As the Minister knows it is done in 
respect of utilities, banks and things in the west coast, Alberta, some of it eastern money. So that the 
original purpose of the Act in that respect is being thwarted. Sixty per cent of the investment taking 
place outside the province. 
 
Secondly, as it is designed to give people, Saskatchewan people, an opportunity to invest in other things 
such as Registered Retirement Savings Plans, to put money away in that respect and so on. Here again 
we have a whole plethora of 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1080 
 

services of this variety that are available to people. Many companies and many people operating in this 
field are providing good service and providing good competitive service and that includes a lot of credit 
unions and co-ops as well as some peculiarly Saskatchewan investment houses such as Houston 
Willoughby. 
 
The Minister will also, I think, indicate in fairness that this corporation and the investments made by this 
corporation are in fact subsidized by the taxpayer of the province to some extent. Just pause and think to 
yourself how foolish in a sense this is. We are talking here about people who have surplus income to 
invest. We are not talking about the poor, we are talking about the rich or the near rich. Those who have 
money to invest in something like registered retirement savings plans or other investments. The taxpayer 
of the province is being asked to subsidize therefore, the rich or near rich, in an area where all sorts of 
competitive service is available to them. We indeed think this is so foolish that it is our belief here, Mr. 
Chairman, that we ought to be striking out this Bill in total and withdrawing it and disbanding the 
corporation and saving the money that is being spent on the employees. As I say it is a measure to 
duplicate a service which is already provided by many people and provided very well, including as I 
said, some co-operative trust companies. Secondly, a service which is available only to that small 
proportion of Saskatchewan people who have excess income to invest and we are subsidizing that 
investment. 
 
It is our view, Mr. Chairman, that this is one of the more foolish measures brought forward by this 
Government and one that we would think you would be anxious to clean up by repealing the Act in total. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I very much appreciate the privilege of responding to the Hon. 
Member. 
 
He says this is one of the foolish Acts, it had the best return last year of any fund in Saskatchewan, 19.36 
per cent on a net basis; and 14.58 per cent on a gross basis. 
 
These are the same people, Mr. Chairman, who talked about SGIO being a foolish arrangement. But it 
has kept $50 million in terms of investment inside this province rather than having to go down East. And 
a similar situation is beginning to arise with respect to The Saskatchewan Development Fund. 
 
I reject totally the idea that it is being subsidized by the taxpayer, it is not. It has an advance from the 
Department of Finance in its initial stages, it is an equity advance which will be fully repaid in time. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — At what interest rate? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No interest, it is equity. When the Hon. Member puts equity in a private business 
he doesn’t expect a guaranteed interest return on it, does he? I noticed that the Member mentioned 
Houston Willoughby, I think the law firm he is connected with, Balfour, MacLeod acts for Houston 
Willoughby. I have nothing against Houston Willoughby. I had a lot of dealings with them when I was 
acting as the general manager of 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1081 
 

the Saskatchewan Co-operative Superannuation Society. Incidentally, Houston Willoughby act as agents 
for the Saskatchewan Development Fund and did a good job for us in terms of advertising it last year. 
 
The other comment the Member made was with respect to the large amount that was invested outside of 
the province. Surely the Member realizes that this is a new organization, it has only been operating a 
little over two and one-half years. It is in the process of getting more and more money invested into 
Saskatchewan and I can tell the Member that a good deal of the money is now currently going into 
mortgages in Saskatchewan, when we couldn’t get Saskatchewan money into mortgages before. 
 
I would say, Mr. Chairman, that anybody who suggests we should repeal this Act is not facing up to the 
reality of the situation. He talks about lots of others being in that field. They are people who say they 
believe in competition in the field and this perhaps gives them a bit of real competition. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The Minister indicates that there was a good return on the fund, I don’t dispute 
that, in fact, I think there was. But let me ask the Minister who benefitted in turn? The people who 
benefitted were not the people in the province who most needed that kind of benefit, and you know that. 
Government has a justifiable place in providing for people who have some difficulty in income terms. I 
ask you, what place fundamentally has government handling the investments of the rich or near rich in 
Saskatchewan and I say to you in a subsidized way. You say it doesn’t amount to a subsidy. 
 
Here is how this corporation is subsidized. You know very well the initial funding for this corporation 
came from the Government of Saskatchewan, money that went to it, sure, by way of equity, but what 
return on that money. It wasn’t a loan drawing the usual rate of interest, which one would have to do if 
one were going into business apart from government. Therefore, this corporation is receiving the 
equivalent of eight or nine or ten per cent of interest on that initial start up money. The Minister 
indicates it is equity. But what are we deriving as the shareholders of the corporation being the people of 
Saskatchewan from that equity? We haven’t derived one cent. I say to you that that is in effect a subsidy 
for those people who have invested in this investment corporation. 
 
May I say by way of correction my law firm does not act for Houston Willoughby, I don’t know where 
you got that notion from. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, we intend to continue to oppose this Act. It has no relation whatever to 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance or indeed any other Crown corporation which is established in a 
different field for quite a different purpose. If a Crown corporation is established for the purpose of 
providing a service which is not otherwise universally available at or near cost, then you have every 
justification for the creation of a Crown corporation. Where you have a field which is well occupied, 
very competitive, having all kinds of service available to people, and we are talking about a small class 
of people here, then there is no reason for a Crown corporation to be established at the expense of the 
taxpayer. Your parallel between the SGIO and this corporation, 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1082 
 

I say to you is a nonsensical one. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I reject that approach because in time the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund will have increasing sums of money invested in this province. That trend is already 
there. I am sorry that I made a statement with respect to the law firm you are connected with being 
advisors to Houston Willoughby, I suggest they show good judgement by getting somebody else. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The Member talks about the rich and the near rich. I could take you to many people 
whom I know who have invested $100, perhaps that is all they had to invest as an initial start in the 
Saskatchewan Fund. They have certain reasons for doing that, admittedly. I would be one of the first 
people to admit that the growth of the fund hasn’t been as big as we would like to have seen, although it 
is beginning to take on a much more progressive growth now, particularly with the results that were 
obtained last year. I see nothing wrong with the Saskatchewan Development Fund participating in a 
competitive way with the others involved in the field. I don’t think that Co-op Trust is worried by the 
fact that it has credit unions competing with it in terms of investment funds for RRSPs and things of that 
nature. 
 
Section 1: Agreed. 
 
Section 2: Amended, agreed. 
 
SECTION 3 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, are we not in fact extending to people outside of the 
province the right to invest in the fund and that’s getting away from the original intent of the Act for 
Saskatchewan residents. Now the explanatory notes say “and others” and they refer to domiciled in 
Saskatchewan but resident elsewhere and I suggest that the actual wording in the Act extends it beyond 
domicile to anyone really who wants to invest in the Saskatchewan Development Fund. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said in the second reading debate it was not the intention 
of the Corporation to seek investors from outside. We do have people who have made investments in the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund and have since moved to other provinces and they wish to continue to 
make investments in the Saskatchewan Development Fund. Essentially this is set up on that basis to 
accommodate those people. 
 
MR. LANE: — You’ve got to admit though that it is not narrowed to those specific purposes. That in 
fact with this amendment anyone who wishes to invest in the Saskatchewan Development Fund, 
wherever he may reside, will now have the right to do so. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — We have some instances where people who may be domiciled in Saskatchewan and 
work all the time in Alberta, like Lloydminster is an example of this or you can take the Creighton-Flin 
Flon area, and to some degree this was designed to 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1083 
 

accommodate those people who had a desire to make investments in the fund. Now you are using the 
argument I believe, that “and others” gives scope for others. I suppose to some degree it does, but it is 
not, as I said before the intention of the fund to seek those investors, it is simply to accommodate those 
who have already expressed a desire to make investments in the fund and could not under the present 
regulation, or those who had made investments and had moved to another location but wished to 
continue to make investments in that fund in addition to their initial investment. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Minister, will you then be prepared to accept a House amendment that in order to 
bring the amendment in line with what you have just said about domicile, that the words to be added 
after “others” domiciled in Saskatchewan. Would you be prepared to accept that if it is moved? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Not until I can check that. I don’t know the legal interpretations of it, I would have 
to check with legal counsel. 
 
MR. C P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Minister, I should just like to point out that 
what you are doing by this, you’ve always indicated an aversion to money going across the border, and 
you turn around and permit somebody from across the border or in Eastern Canada to invest heavily in 
the Saskatchewan Development Corporation, those great profits will be going elsewhere and not staying 
in Saskatchewan. You are aware of that, of course? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I’m not sure that your interpretation is a correct one. 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — As a matter of fact his interpretation is quite correct. You can 
conceivably tell the Minister I have residence in Ontario . . . 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, on a Point of Order. I think the Minister moved that the Bill be 
stood until he could get a chance to check this out, and I think we should deal with that motion first. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — On that Point of Order, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t hear any such motion, and I don’t 
think in fact the Minister is aware of the motion and if he intended to make it he didn’t. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I said that I asked the Bill be stood until I could get legal opinion 
with respect to it. I so move. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, on a Point of Order. We didn’t hear the Minister. He certainly 
has the privilege of making the motion again so that the Chair and Members of the Assembly hear it, but 
in the meantime please don’t interrupt the Member’s opportunity to speak and when he is finished if the 
Minister wishes to rise and stand the Bill that’s his legitimate right. 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1084 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order please. I think the Minister has stated that he is prepared to stand 
the Bill. Is this agreed? 
 
MR. CAMERON:— May I ask, that is the subject of some debate as well. If he wants to stand the Bill 
he has to have the approval of the Members to do it. And I want to indicate to him before he takes the 
Bill back that I tell him that this is a fact that residents from outside this province could invest in your 
Saskatchewan Development Fund where you ask ‘what’s in it for you?’ And I say that ‘what’s in it for 
you’ applies not only to Saskatchewan residents but you could have some from Ontario invest in the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund and receive in the same way others do, a subsidized investment in 
Saskatchewan at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: — It has been moved that we report progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Progress reported on Bill 27. 
 
Bill No. 28 - An Act to amend The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act, 1974 
 
SECTION 1 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a few 
comments and the same comments I made originally when these Bills to change the reporting date were 
changed, as I presume, to the fiscal year. I also read in The Hospital Standards Act, and months from the 
third calendar month immediately following the end of each fiscal year, which means the end of the 
fiscal year is March 31, and if I understand the corrections, subsection (3) of Section 8, that means the 
end of April, the end of May, end of June before any reporting is required. This means, Mr. Chairman, 
that this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan, as I indicated, would perhaps be more than a year 
behind in the Government reporting to the Assembly and to the public about the fiscal affairs of the 
hospitals, the University Hospital and the Plains Hospital, in the Province of Saskatchewan. I say that 
this is a bad principle to get into even though I can appreciate the Minister wanting to standardize it with 
across Canada, but I am really not the least bit interested, that the accountants of the Department of 
Health or the hospitals, or the accountants wherever they may be may have an easier and a more 
streamlined and a simpler method of reporting. What I am interested in, is this Assembly and the people 
of Saskatchewan being given an accurate report on an up-to-date, current basis so that it can be 
discussed and argued in this Assembly and plaudits can be given for good fiscal management and an 
opportunity for the Members of the Assembly to criticize if there is something gravely wrong. But 
coming in a year later, again as you well know, Mr. Minister, by March 31, the end of the fiscal year, the 
Department of Health Estimates could be completely finalized in this Assembly. We would have no 
opportunity whatsoever to discuss them. Supposing this Bill was now in effect, and all the criticism that 
the Minister has suffered and the Government 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1085 
 

has suffered about the cutback of hospital beds, about the reduction of staff, about the failure to purchase 
equipment, about the limiting of the quality of service, we would have no opportunity to peruse the 
documents which would verify or negate these arguments that are being presented to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And as I say, I am concerned about this, and I brought it up in second reading. I should 
like the Minister to comment as to his feeling about this, does he agree that a year later is a sufficient 
time to report on the public affairs of the hospitals of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I’m not completely clear in my own mind whether the points you raise are good 
ones or not. I can understand some reason for concern perhaps, but I want to make it very clear that this 
is a decision not only made by our Government, but all the governments across Canada, including the 
federal authority, who feels that in terms of the rating procedures relating to hospitals the hospitals are in 
a far better position if the fiscal years of the governments concerned and the hospitals concerned are 
standardized and that’s the basis on which this is proposed. In other words, hospitals in the current year 
have operated through January, February and into March before the budget comes down, before they 
have any idea where they stand. If in fact the budget comes down usually in March, not too long before 
the first of April, and the fiscal year starts at the same time as the government year starts they feel, and 
we feel, and all of the jurisdictions across Canada feel, that this will be a more logical and reasonable 
approach. I frankly think that you are worried unnecessarily, but I can’t prove that one way or the other. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — One other little point I would like to bring up, Mr. Minister. Each province and 
the Federal Government has a different time for the sitting of their Assemblies. Each individual 
jurisdiction has a different approach to estimates and financial reporting. But in Saskatchewan it is 
tradition that we sit in the Spring before the commencement of the agricultural industry, and, therefore, I 
find that this will be a particularly onerous problem in Saskatchewan as compared to other jurisdictions. 
I bring that to the Minister’s attention, and I think he would agree with me. For example, Manitoba 
usually sits in June and July; British Columbia sits for a large portion in the fall; Alberta normally sits 
about a month before we do. But in Saskatchewan we normally sit in the spring before the agricultural 
industry commences spring seeding and therefore, that is a particular problem with us and Mr. Minister I 
once again repeat, because of the problems in hospitals this year, I think it incumbent that we do have an 
opportunity to peruse this and as I say, I am going to vote against it simply because I don’t necessarily 
agree that we have to march in lock-step with other provinces and the Federal Government in the 
reporting of our financial affairs. I object very much not to being able to have a current, up-to-date 
report. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I would think, Mr. Chairman, that the situation that holds true in Saskatchewan 
with respect to the sitting of the Assembly would also be true to some considerable degree with respect 
to Alberta and Manitoba, both of which have substantial agricultural industries and it would obviously 
have some 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1086 
 

bearing on both these provinces as well. I disagree, of course, with the Member when he talks about all 
the things that happened in hospitals. We attempted to restrain the rise in the costs of hospitals, but you 
look at the actual attained statistics and you will find that there has not been, a cutback. There were more 
occupied hospital beds in 1976 in Saskatchewan than there were in 1974. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The hours of staffing for people in hospitals is higher today than it was back in 
1971, appreciably higher. That holds true in terms of nursing staff as well. That’s not to say that there 
aren’t some problems related to it and there obviously are going to be problems because of the very 
difficult field of rapidly rising costs. I again say that the Health Ministers and the governments across 
Canada came to the conclusion this was the logical approach and on that basis we support it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I am not going to argue any more, I’m just going to say you just 
gave me the exact reason for my argument. The statistical figures will prove me wrong. You are trying 
to deny the statistical figures by this particular piece of legislation until a year later and if you are so 
proud of the achievements and you want to demonstrate that then you should want the statistics on a 
current up-to-date basis in this Assembly. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, statistics, of course, are available to the Assembly and the Member 
is arguing that they will be coming to the Assembly later and therefore, create some difficulty, but that’s 
not the conclusion that Conservative and Liberal Governments across Canada came to, as well as this 
Government. 
 
Section 1 agreed to. 
 
Section 2 agreed to. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 47 - An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I am going to 
vote against the Bill for the same reason. 
 
Section 1 agreed to. 
 
Section 2 and Section 3 amended agreed to. 
 
Section 3: Section 5 amended agreed to. 
 
Section 4: new Section 8 agreed to. 
 
Section 8, the audit fiscal year and hospital agreed to. 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1087 
 

Section 5: Section 23 amended agreed to. 
 
Section 6 coming into force agreed to. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 62 - An Act respecting the provision of Financial Assistance to Municipalities and 
Non-Profit Societies for Capital Works Projects involving Recreation and Cultural Facilities 
 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
SECTION 3 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — My only questions on the Bill, is it the intention of the Department 
to assign the $25 million in equal segments each year? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Department of Culture and Youth): — Not necessarily. It will be 
assigned and we will be better able to do it after a year’s experience on an estimate of the draw-down 
which no doubt we will be able to do according to the indications we get from municipalities. 
 
MR. LANE: — Do you have the estimate now, an indication of the demand on the plan so that you can 
make your projections? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We have some, I think it is safer to say ‘guesstimate’ at the present time. 
We have $4 million budgeted in this 1977-78 fiscal year. We anticipate somewhere in the area of $6 
million next year; $8 million the year after arid $6 million, in the final year. But those may change 
depending on the experience of this particular year which is really the year in which I think we will be 
able to get the clear indication because communities will have been able to have assessed what their 
needs are and have been able to have spoken with the various groups in their communities and have 
been able to make a better determination of what their needs will be and what they may be planning over 
the next period of time. 
 
MR. LANE: — The one thing that has concerned me about the Bill is not the intent or the good that it 
can do, it is the fact that the expenditures under the Bill can be directly related to the election pressures 
that the Government may find itself under. In other words, the Minister has already given the figures, 
it’s 4, 6, 8 and then down. I think that we can look at an election about 1979, which would be the $8 
million a year, $6 million being the biggest expenditure prior to the $8 million as we work our way 
down. Now what can the Minister tell us about the Act that is going to ensure that the expenditures are 
distributed fairly within each given year and then, secondly, that the expenditures, the total expenditures 
in each given year are in line with the goals of the Act and that is perhaps to create employment. I can 
see, for example, the reverse, that if there is a downturn in the economy that perhaps $8 million should 
be spent this year or next year to take a bit of a cushion off the downturn. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That’s why I prefaced my 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1088 
 

answer to the last question with the qualification that it should not be taken that the figures I gave you as 
an indication of where we might go to sort of be enshrined in stone because we will not be determining 
in the Government the demand out in the country, the demand in the communities; the communities will 
be determining that demand. I think that is one of the greatest merits of this program, we are providing 
an allocation of a per capita grant to every municipality in Saskatchewan. They then, in turn, will 
determine the kind of project they may want to develop. They will also determine within that four-year 
period of time when they want to develop that project. Although I am not arguing with the point that you 
make that in the event that there is at some future time a downturn of the economy it might be useful to 
be able to generate more capital construction that is probably a good point, but we certainly are not 
going to be saying to a municipality you have got to spend your money year X or year Y in order to 
qualify. That is why we said it is a four year program to give the appropriate time for planning, putting 
together a project, consulting all the interest groups in the community who may have an interest in some 
portion or maybe all of the facilities. 
 
MR. LANE: — What liaison does the department have, the branch that’s administering this with other 
Government agencies? For example, the Department of Municipal Affairs I am advised is doing a study 
on the so-called bedroom communities around Saskatoon and I have argued in the Assembly before of 
the specific problems that such communities have. A study has been indicated by the Department of 
Municipal Affairs on that specific problem. Now surely within the broad framework of handing out the 
moneys you don’t want to hand moneys to somewhere where in fact it may not do that much good. Now 
what rules and what criteria have you established aside from the economic as to the allotment of these 
funds? Can you explain them in detail? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We recognized that there have boon communities in the past that had some 
difficulties in beginning and progressing with a project because there are a number of channels or 
various departments or agencies that they have to be in contact with, Municipal Affairs, Culture and 
Youth, etc. If they are interested in connecting with an educational concern in their community, it could 
be the Department of Education and so on. In order to expedite this process we are establishing as you 
will find when we get to it under Section 4, a committee which will have representation from the various 
departments concerned including the Department of Municipal Affairs, the Department of Culture and 
Youth and a number of others who will make certain that all of the requirements are met so that the 
community doesn’t feel that after they have made an application and it has been approved that they have 
met with all of their requirements but then find on the last moment or the last day that they have not 
gotten the approval of some agency or have not been in touch with some agency that they should have 
been. I think that that will also be of great assistance to the communities. 
 
MR. LANE: — But I asked you a question, what the criteria will be. You answered by saying that there 
will be a committee established. 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1089 
 

Are you saying that the criteria have not yet been established? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am sorry that I didn’t quite get the question. We are not providing criteria 
for communities so firm that it will take away from them their local decision making exercise. So there 
are no criteria that say you have to do certain kinds of projects. We are urging, of course, and once again 
it is only a suggestion because I think it is important and I think most communities and most people 
would agree with it, that they consider planning on the multi-use kind of facility, that they consider all of 
the needs that they may have in the community before they make the application. We will talk to them 
about that but they will have to finally make that decision. We are not going to strait jacket any 
community into a particular project that somehow my officials or I or the Government or whatever feels 
that they ought to do. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about one aspect 
of the Bill. Here we are creating a massive slush fund for the Government. I say that in all honesty, I 
know that the pressures that the Minister can undergo when he gets $8 million to distribute to 
communities in Saskatchewan. I notice he has got a committee here. He doesn’t tell who the members of 
that committee will be, whether or not they are independent or not and therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to move a motion, an amendment, and because this particular fund deals with the municipalities of 
the Province of Saskatchewan I think it is very important that municipalities in this province be 
represented on this committee. It may well be the Minister’s intention but for his own protection and to 
ensure fair play I would like to recommend that there are three people put on that Committee. Number 
one is a representative from the Urban Municipal Association because we will be dealing with the 
municipalities of Saskatchewan. They will be making the decision as to what recreational facilities will 
be developed in their particular areas. Second, a member representative of the Rural Municipal 
Association who will also be very vitally concerned in the allocation of their grant moneys to the 
dormitory communities as my friend on my left has indicated. Notice I use that term loosely. Third, 
some independent chairman and I would suggest the Dean of the College of Education or some 
individual of that kind and then it would be the Minister’s job to appoint two members from the 
Government, perhaps the secretary from those who are involved and perhaps two of the other 
departments that might be involved and I might suggest Municipal Affairs perhaps and Culture and 
Youth. I am going to save this motion, it is not the time or the place now until we get to Clause 4. 
 
I do point out to the Minister that I have been involved in the allocation of funds. I’ve seen the Youth 
Agency, one of the most important concepts of the Youth Agency when it was established was to set up 
an independent board with representation from the communities of Saskatchewan for the allocation of 
the funds involved in the Youth Agency. Because when we get into recreation and youth facilities that is 
important. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister’s comment on that and I would also like to suggest 
that I will be moving that amendment when we come to Clause 4. 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1090 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I obviously will not be supporting the amendment. What the 
Member is asking and this may be the wrong place for me to make comments on it, but what the 
Member is asking is that there be worked into the committee or into the approval process certain delays. 
I am not arguing that the representation that he is talking about would not be available, I am sure it 
would be. The fact of the matter is the committee meets twice a month and to ask someone from an 
organization like he talks about would mean that the committee might meet once a month. I think that 
there is sufficient consultation with the communities involved to have their input into this. It is incorrect 
to call it a slush fund, how can it be a slush fund when the expenditure of the money that the 
Government is providing is on an unconditional basis which is the approach that we have been taking in 
most of our funding to municipalities in the last several years. We don’t determine, the Government 
doesn’t determine the expenditure of the money, the municipalities will and so they should because they 
are the ones who can best determine whether in those communities, as the Member for Qu’Appelle talks 
about, there is the need of a recreational complex and the people in that community are the best ones to 
determine that. They can go to their municipal council and their recreation board and talk about it and be 
assured that these types of things will happen. 
 
But having said that I think one of the things that the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley asked was what 
departments have officials represented on the committee. I can tell him that it is the Provincial Library, 
the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, the Department of Municipal Affairs, the 
Department of Culture and Youth, of course, with Mr. Tuck and the Department of Social Services, 
because all of them in some way could be involved in a program that provides funding for the 
construction or renovation or repair or improvement of cultural or recreational facilities. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Well, I think the Minister has just answered the very concern I have. When to 
the Government of Saskatchewan I guarantee by this fall, there will be requests to the Department of 
Culture and Youth for something in the neighborhood of $10 million or $12 million worth of 
construction and I think your deputy will agree with that. All of a sudden you are asking five people 
from the Government to make that decision where $4 million of grants will be approved for $10 million 
of requests. What we are here witnessing is that the Government is going to determine the community 
responsibilities and the community decisions and the community priorities because those five people are 
going to decide where the grants are going to go. They are going to decide which particular community 
is going to get the grant, which particular community is not going to get the grant. They are going to 
decide which community project will go ahead and which community project will not go ahead. All I am 
suggesting to the Minister is that one person from the Government and a subcommittee set up of the 
Government to co-ordinate the Government in all those five departments and report to him and please 
don’t tell me SUMA or the SARM are not going to be interested in the investment of $25 million in their 
communities. They will make the time, they will certainly appoint the people. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Certainly they are going to 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1091 
 

be interested, that is taken for granted. That is why we have met with SUMA and we have met with 
SARM and we will continue on an ongoing basis to talk about the way the program is going. I don’t 
know that there is going to be $10 million, the Member maybe can know better than I. I don’t know if 
there is going to be $10 million of request, I doubt it, but we will see. When those requests come then 
we will be in a better position to determine the level of funding that we will need to provide again next 
year. There is enough flexibility in that to accommodate that kind of a situation. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Minister, will you not admit though that a municipality can approve its particular 
project, can argue the need for the project, it might be a vital project to the particular municipality but it 
is still in order for the Minister to say, no, the funds have been allotted for the year. You still have that 
right, will you not admit that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — If there is an X number of dollars in the budget we certainly will be able to 
say that maybe the project has to be deferred for a year, or allocate an additional amount of money 
which I don’t anticipate we will have to do. 
 
MR. LANE: — If two municipalities come in with valid projects, all approved for X number of dollars 
you can say to one municipality, you can proceed and you could say to the other one, you can’t proceed 
because we are out of funds, the other municipality got the last for the year. Is that not true? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Theoretically I guess that is a possibility but in the practical sense I don’t 
think that that will be the case. You have to keep in mind that with a program like this which is a 
four-year program there are going to be a number of requests and I suspect quite a large number of 
requests from municipalities not to do any one project completely in the one year which will very likely, 
in most cases, be something that will be continued over a two- or three-year period of time, therefore, 
helping the distribution of funds over the four year period of time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Are you not admitting the very question raised by the Member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley that in fact the full discretion as to the allotment of funds rests with the Government? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Just like the establishment of any appropriation in the Budget of the 
Government of Saskatchewan as any government, whether it is provincial, federal or municipal in the 
total allocation of total funds, that rests with the Government of course. During the budgetary review 
process the Government will allocate a certain amount of money to the budget in this particular subvote 
and that decision, as the Member say so, yes I can’t disagree it is something that the Government will 
decide, but only we will decide on the basis of the indication that we get from the communities when the 
program is working. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to raise another matter and I would 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1092 
 

like to do it at this time, I think it will be another Section 5 if I can digress and cover them at the same 
time. I indicated at the outset, I don’t like the idea of just an open-ended approach to grants to local 
governments and I would think that it would be incumbent upon the Minister to supply this Assembly 
and I ask if he doesn’t have the criteria on which he would make his decision. And I urge the 
Government to take the fair approach that very specific criteria be established. I don’t care whether you 
use a point system or whatever, that the thing be weighted so that municipalities know what their 
chances are, they know what type of project would be fair, and I think it is incumbent upon the 
Government to give to the municipalities some indication. I suppose one could take the normal concern 
any time the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes): — is involved in anything you’ve got to be a little 
skeptical about how the moneys are going to be spent, but aside from that I would think it would be fair 
for the Minister to have some pretty fair guidelines established. Why would you make, if you have the 
power to make grants to non-profit societies, would you be able to make grants to non-profit societies 
that have nothing to do with municipalities? Would you entertain an amendment that non-profit societies 
to obtain a grant must have the approval of a municipality? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Every application that comes to the department must have the approval of 
the municipality. We state that in the information that has been provided to every municipality in the 
province. It will be stated in the regulations. It is true that a non-profit organization can qualify for the 
funding but it will have to be the municipality of Regina. If it happens to be in Regina, or the 
municipality of Humboldt, they will have to give that approval before in fact it can take place. It’s a 
decision that the locally elected municipality or municipal council has to make. We have made a point of 
making sure of that. Our regional services people in the regions are in constant contact with the 
municipalities so that there is a constant dialogue on the program and the municipality needs out there. 
 
I am a little surprised, really, somewhat shocked because I have always heard the Conservative 
Members opposite talk about local autonomy. It is another contradiction that we are hearing over there 
from the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). Do you really believe in local autonomy? Do you really 
believe that a municipality should be able to make its decisions on the people’s needs? Obviously you 
don’t believe it. You say one thing out in the country and to the press but in here you are sort of fuddling 
around. You are saying that we should set specific criteria, specific regulations, specific terms of 
reference and tell the municipalities, boys and gals, you do this or you don’t do anything. Well, that may 
be the policy of the Conservative Members over there, but it is not the policy of this Government. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, and in fact the very thing that we are concerned about 
is the attitude of the Minister in that he is taking away all discretion from the municipalities of 
Saskatchewan and by the provisions of this Act, the decision rests solely with the Government and that 
is what concerns the Opposition. It is not the fact that the municipalities have to have criteria or anything 
else. I think the only way to 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1093 
 

ensure fairness to the municipalities would be that the overriding discretion that you have taken in this 
Act, is to lay down some rules so that they know what kind of game they are playing. And if it is purely 
a political game as to where the moneys are being spent and how much is being spent, then, at least, tell 
them so. If you have guidelines or whatever you want to call them, to let the municipalities know what 
the rules of the game are, fair enough, then I have asked you on three different occasions today and you 
haven’t given them to me. 
 
Our very concern is that the municipalities don’t in the final result have the right to determine that there 
are several factors which stop them from determining: (1) The committee; (2) The amount of money that 
the Government decides that is going to be spent in any particular year; (3) The allocation of the funds 
within the province in a particular year. These are three controls that the Government has built in. 
 
On the second point if you really want to advocate the rights of municipalities, so to speak, then why did 
you reject the proposed amendment of the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald)? You 
can’t have it both ways, you can’t argue for better discretion on the one hand and protecting 
municipalities on the other hand, because the municipalities know full well that is not the way your 
system works. 
 
Again, on the second matter, you have indicated that your forms for nonprofit societies would require 
the support of the municipality through the approval of the municipality. It is not in the Act. I think the 
Minister will admit that. I am quite prepared to take his assurance that that will be the case. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — If it will be of any assistance, and I won’t go into any debate on that, but if 
it will be of assistance to the Member opposite, I only have one form and we can probably get another 
one for the Member on the Liberal Caucus, I will send over a Saskatchewan Recreation Culture 
Facilities Grants outline of the program, which provides, also, some indication of what the Member, I 
think, would agree is called “Project Criteria” and it may be of some help to him in better understanding 
the kind of information that municipalities have, which I think he will agree when he has looked at it, 
meet the kinds of things to some extent that he talks about. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t understand. Is the Minister indicating that there is a 
section in the Act that requires an application by a nonprofit society to be approved by a municipality 
before it can be entertained? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It is not in the Act, it will be in the regulations. It is in all the information 
clearly spelled out that we have sent out to municipalities, all of which have them. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well, speaking for myself, Mr. Chairman, I am not quite so willing as the 
Member for Lumsden to take the Minister’s assurance of that fact. 
 
Again, and you have done this time and again, you now again 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1094 
 

bring before the House a program under which you can spend $4 million. You might not think that is 
much money, but that is a very great deal of money, as a matter of fact. What kind of an Act have we got 
that authorizes the expenditure? It is two and one half pages to spend $4 million. I tell you that again, it 
is nothing but a skeleton piece of legislation. All that you are bringing before us is simply this: 1. Let’s 
have a program and 2. I will spend the money. No criteria whatever spelled out in the Act and indeed 
you partake of yourself the power to define all the expressions used in the Act. What is a nonprofit 
society? It has some simple little definition in the Act and if you don’t like it you simply go to the 
regulations and define it as you will. That is the kind of legislation which is so insulting to Members of 
the House, because we here are the lawmakers, not your people making your regulations. 
 
I think, again, that it is a contemptuous attitude to bring a piece of legislation before the House which is 
going to require the expenditure of a lot of money and you put before us a two and a half page little 
simple Bill that says absolutely nothing. I think that is highly contemptuous in terms of attitude. 
 
Look, again, at the power of regulation under this Act. The points that have been taken by the two 
Members are very good ones. Now where is the control? The control of these programs has to lie with 
this Assembly, not simply to bring before us an Act that says, “empower us to make all the regulations 
we will to administer this grant program as we will.” 
 
You say that you will give us an assurance that in the regulations there will be a provision that a society 
has to have the consent of the municipality before the application will be approved. Why isn’t that in the 
Act? That is very fundamental. And there are a whole lot of other things that ought to be a matter of 
legislation instead of a matter of regulation, including I respectfully suggest, the amount of money. 
Because, again, you are asking us to make large scale approvals here with no sort of rules and 
regulations spelled out. Everything is left to the discretion of the Minister and his Department. 
 
Perfectly good suggestions here that you have a committee made up of two members from SARM, one 
from SUMA perhaps the Dean of Education to pass on these applications. At least give us those kinds of 
protection because you know, as these Members have indicated, that this kind of a fund with no 
regulations spelled out in the Act, limiting or spelling out the way in which the funds can be allocated 
and to whom they are given, it is open to abuse and no doubt there will be some political abuse in 
respect of that. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I think the Member knows that everything is not written 
into law. If we wrote everything into the Bills that we have in the Legislature we would get so bogged 
down that governments and departments would never be able to respond to the needs of people and the 
kind of things that the people of Saskatchewan should have. It shouldn’t have to go through a 
complicated procedure in order to be able to qualify. Regulations are gazetted which everyone can see. 



 
Committee of the Whole  March 21, 1977 
 

1095 
 

The Members get the Gazette, as I do on a regular basis. It is spelled out in Section 9, the kinds of things 
that the regulations will be able to cover. I think that the Bill is really a good piece of legislation, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Minister, the fact is we are really going to the American system of 
legislation which is okay. We will have a program to feed millions and there it goes and the government 
bureaucracy is established from then on and in fact what is happening is that slowly we are losing our 
rights as legislators to oversee the expenditure of public funds. We all agree, and we have agreed in 
principle, with a need for a program, financial assistance, for capital works projects involving recreation 
and cultural facilities. I think all Members of the House agree to that and the parties all have in second 
reading by approving the principle. But the fact is that this is so broad and so open-ended that in fact we 
will never be able to determine whether in fact the goals as established by the government are being 
reached. For that, I think, the legislation is wrong although the principle is welcomed by all Members. I 
think the approach taken by the Government is one that is not to be condoned. Certainly we agree with 
the Minister that there are needs for delegation of authority and delegation of legislation. But to merely 
come into the House and legislate $25 million and we the Government will spend it on recreational and 
cultural facilities, the Government will make the decisions, I don’t think is quite fair in the parliamentary 
tradition that we have in this Assembly and I think the Minister is wrong in that particular point. 
 
Section 3 agreed to. 
 
SECTION 4 
 
MR. C.P MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, this is the Section that I wish to 
move amendment. Once again, I am not going to repeat the arguments. The Minister talks about local 
control and local decision-making and this will ensure that this takes place; that it will not be in the 
Government and that the Government will not make the determination as to the allocation of funds. 
 
Moved by myself and seconded by Mr. Cameron that Section 4 of the Act be amended by adding thereto 
Clause 3 as follows: 
 

The Committee shall consist of (a) two persons recommended by the SARM; (b) one person 
recommended by SUMA: (c) the Dean of the College of Education, of the University of Regina; and, 
(d) one person appointed by the Minister. 

 
The debate continued on the amendment. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I have already made my comments on the Motion when the 
Member earlier talked about it. I am sorry that he left out the Dean of the College of Education in 
Saskatoon. If he is going to cover the field he should cover them all I guess. But I am not going to argue 
about that. 
 
I have indicated, Mr. Chairman, that I don’t think this is a necessary amendment. Every municipality 
now will determine how 



 
March 21, 1977  Committee of the Whole 
 

1096 
 

it is going to be expending the money that is allocated to it on a per capita basis. When they make the 
application it will be approved and I don’t know what other way there is to go to municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, on an unconditional basis, as I think we ought to do and say, here is the amount of money 
that the province can provide under this program. You decide how it is going to be expended. That is 
what we have done. We also have gone so far as to provide some consultative assistance through the 
staff in this Branch, to help particularly smaller municipalities do their planning. We have established a 
committee of representatives from various departments which might be involved to assure that there be a 
rapid approval of the application. The Members say that we should build a bigger and larger committee 
and I think we all know that the larger the committee, the slower the progress. I would suggest the 
Members defeat this motion. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps if the Minister is not prepared to go along with that I 
think the Minister will concede that there has to be some provision here for us to see to it that the 
allocation of these funds, a sizeable amount of money, is done fairly and not in a political sense, which 
is one of our largest concerns. Perhaps as a minimum device the Minister would agree to permitting 
Members of the Assembly, at all reasonable times, to have access to the files in respect to which 
applications are received and processed. 
 
So I want to move, seconded by my seatmate, Mr. MacDonald, that Section 4 of the Act be amended by 
adding thereto, Clause 3 as follows: 
 

That the Minister shall at all reasonable times, on the request of the Member of the Legislature, make 
available to such Member, all information respecting applications made under this Act and the 
disposition thereof. 

 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Chairman, before this amendment is 
considered and amendment put if that is the wish we could leave it aside and rise and report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 o’clock p.m. 


