


























































Hansard: March 25, 1977


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

25th Day 
 

Friday, March 25, 1977. 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

POTENTIAL DRINKING WATER HAZARD 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Premier. 
I brought up in this Legislature yesterday, the problems raised on a CKCK documentary, dealing with 
the Buffalo Pound filtration plant and the potential drinking water hazard to the citizens of Moose Jaw 
and Regina. The Premier indicated, at that time, that he wasn't aware that a problem existed or he 
alluded to the fact that the problem lay only in my mind. And I'd like to know now if the Premier has 
had a chance to investigate my question and if he's aware of the problem that was pointed out? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I'm sorry I have not had a chance to investigate the matter 
raised by the Hon. Member. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Supplementary. Is the Premier serious in suggesting this matter was brought to 
the attention of your Government four years ago? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Who said? 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — The chemist and the manager at the Buffalo Pound filtration plant said that. They 
feel there is a serious potential for danger to 20 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan. You missed 
it for four years. I brought the matter up with you yesterday and merely asked ;you to investigate this 
situation and you come back to the House today and tell me you're not aware of it. Are you or some of 
your officials prepared sometime today or over the weekend, to investigate with members of the 
Department of Environment to see if there is any basis to the problems these people have raised? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear: 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will look into the matter and satisfy myself. I ask the Hon. 
Member to put his question on the Order Paper. Then I will know, to what problem four years ago, he is 
alluding. It is rather clear that it is not possible for people to keep in their minds, questions which were 
raised four years ago or allegedly raised four years ago. I ask the Hon. Member to put the matter on the 
Order Paper so that we will know precisely what he's talking about. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier accept a 

1321 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

note from myself explaining the situation briefly and giving you the names of the people, the 
professionals in the field, who seem to feel that there is a serious problem growing? Will he accept that? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I would like the Hon. Member to put it on the Order Paper. It is, I gather, an 
important matter in the mind of the Member. It ought not to be something between him and me. I think it 
deserves the full attention of the House if it is as important as he suggests. I ask him to put it on the 
Order Paper. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I'll take the Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 

MOTOR LICENCE ISSUERS 
 
MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister in 
charge of motor licence issuers. I was out of the House yesterday morning and I understand there was 
some question brought up on the licence issuing in Assiniboia. I might say that I was down there trying 
to look after the problem at the particular time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear: 
 
MR. NELSON: — There have been two licence issuers quit in Assiniboia and I might say I'm very 
happy with the co-operation I got from the people in the Finance Department. Since yesterday, there 
have been three licence issuers appointed, one in Assiniboia, one in Wood Mountain and one in 
Mazenod. Now my question hasn't to do with these particular people, but with the idea ... 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear; 
 
MR. NELSON: — . . . that there has been so many vendors quitting. In my particular case I have seven 
licences. They come due on seven different dates. This is an impossible situation for many farmers. 
They are trying to get these on one date and the problems that have come up with the licence issuers 
have been so great that they have been quitting and been pulling out on their people in their community. 
 
But my question is, firstly, how can I get these on one date and secondly, when will the Minister raise 
the fees for these people so they can be paid properly for the amount of hassle they've had to go 
through? 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member was looking after 
things in Assiniboia trying to get the licence issuer yesterday, a licence issuer was appointed on 
Wednesday in Assiniboia. We attended to it much quicker than the Member was able to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are from time to time motor licence issuers that do quit. We have close to 500 motor 
licence issuers and to the best of my knowledge in the last while, about 

1322 
 



 
  March 25, 1977 

 

a half dozen of them did quit but it's nothing unusual, Mr. Speaker. That is normal and routine. 
 
In his particular constituency in Assiniboia, it so happened that a motor licence issuer who was recently 
appointed quit a few days ago and a new one had to be appointed. Nothing is unusual about that. In case 
of the particular dates he wants to have his licences issued, I'm wondering whether at the time we asked 
for the information of when he wants to renew his licences, whether he completed the form. If he hadn't, 
then a date was assigned to him and maybe this is what created the problem. The Department of Finance 
had to deal with this problem when we were responsible for the issuing of licences. He indicated that he 
has received good co-operation from the department and if he gives us the detailed information, he will 
continue receiving the same kind of good co-operation as he has in the past. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, while I was in Assiniboia, his department and 
the Minister didn't know of the appointment. They also didn't know who or where the issuer would be, 
they are also . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! What's the supplementary? 
 
MR. NELSON: — I'll get to the question. I wonder if the Minister knows that his department was again 
very co-operative and is having a school in Assiniboia this afternoon for these three people that I 
arranged for yesterday. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear: 
 
MR. NELSON: — It is at 2:00 o'clock by the way. I wonder if the Minister would answer the first 
supplementary question. When will he give these people a raise so that they can make a decent sum of 
money on a licence and so that they can give good service? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the Hon. Member, since 1971 the per 
transaction rates were increased from 30 cents to 50 cents in the case of a driver licence and in the case 
of the vehicle licence, the majority of them were increased to one dollar from 30 cents. Now as things 
are at the present time, we are reviewing the fees, but this year, since in a large number of cases there 
will be renewals that will come up twice in one year, this will mean more money for the licence issuers. 
No new rates will be coming into effects for at least the next five months, but with the new system, rates 
are being reviewed. 
 

INTERPROVINCIAL TASK FORCE ON DRUGS 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Attorney General. A recent news release out of Ottawa states that the federal Minister of Justice, the 
Hon. Ron Bassford, has announced an interprovincial task force on the use of drugs across Canada. Has 
your department been informed of the plans of the federal Minister? 

1323 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I don't believe that I've received any communication 
that I can recall, in this regard. I don't want to be uncharitable or unfair to Mr. Bassford in case 
something like that has come to the department, but I don't have any recollection of that this morning. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I raised this question in the House several 
weeks ago. Would the Attorney General, when he has information on the nature of the task force itself, 
be prepared to provide, in detail to this Assembly, the nature of the task force and Saskatchewan's 
participation in it? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, I certainly would be prepared to do so, Mr. Speaker. I would like to remind 
the Hon. Member that the question of drug laws under our constitution lies exclusively under the 
jurisdiction of Canada. So much so, that they not only do the investigating, they do the actual 
prosecuting which is something unusual, whereas an Attorney General does prosecuting in other 
matters. They do the prosecuting entirely; the prosecution policy. As much as a province or this province 
is involved in the matter, I will undertake to inform the Member. 
 

EXPROPRIATION OF 20,000 ACRES AROUND REGINA 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, 
some time ago a question was asked to the Minister of Agriculture regarding the government's position 
on the expropriation of farm land in the Regina area, by the city of Regina, amounting to some 20,000 
acres. The Minister of Agriculture answered that his department has no policy on the matter. Some 
period of time has gone by and your Minister of Agriculture has indicated that he is not prepared to act 
on this matter. I would, therefore, like to ask the Premier this morning, is the Premier prepared to allow 
the city of Regina to proceed, to expropriate 20,000 acres of prime farm land, surrounding Regina, much 
of it the Regina clay land, Regina plains, and forever lose this in agricultural production? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn't aware of any proposal of that nature of the city of Regina 
to expropriate land. I heard a proposal that a large parcel of land be incorporated into the city, but no 
suggestion that it be expropriated. There is a very considerable difference between those two 
propositions, as will readily be seen. The second point is that we have had no proposal from the City of 
Regina, either to incorporate land into the city or alternatively to expropriate, whatever the proposal is. 
When we receive a proposal, if it materializes, we would certainly consider it and we would certainly be 
aware of the fact that there are many undesirable aspects to removing that good farm land from 
production. That would be a major element in any consideration of any proposal which might in the 
future be put forward by the City of Regina. I think the Hon. Member will agree that it's not possible to 
give a definitive answer to a hypothetical proposition that the City of Regina may or may not put 
forward. 

1324 
 



 
  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, I would respectfully like to tell the 
Premier that it is not hypothetical any longer, that the City of Regina is proceeding and whether they are 
incorporating it or expropriating it doesn't matter. Once they own it, they can do as they like. I would 
like to again ask the Premier to tell this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that in view of the 
fact that it is a myth that Saskatchewan has this blanket, huge blanket area of arable farm land, if the 
Premier is going to allow cities whether it be Regina, Moose Jaw or Saskatoon, to simply proceed in 
some unbridled fashion to expropriate the surrounding land and remove it once and for all from 
agricultural production? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member has me at a disadvantage. I don't know that the 
City of Regina is proceeding to incorporate that land, expropriate it and remove it once and for all from 
agricultural production. I am left only with what I read in the press. We have received nothing from the 
city. When we do receive something we will most assuredly deal with it and deal with it giving full 
consideration to the important point raised by the Hon. Member for Thunder Creek. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would 
the Premier not admit that this is a continuing problem and that the problem has existed? We only have 
to look at the expansion and the urban growth in Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. It's a problem 
that has been existing not only today, but yesterday, and will continue the next day and the day after as 
well. Would he not consider it appropriate for his Government to consider a policy on the acquisition of 
farm land for urban expansion? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order: — I'll take the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

APPOINTMENT OF NICK SHERSTOBITOFF 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Minister of Labour. 
Allow me please, to preface the question with my sincere congratulations on the appointment of Nick 
Sherstobitoff as chairman of the Labour Relations Board. I think that probably if you had any person to 
choose in Saskatchewan, you couldn't find anyone more exceptional than this man. 
 
Now, my question is, what are you going to do to give him the tools to work with? I'm thinking in terms 
of the situation that happened at the Star-Phoenix in Saskatoon where 40 out of 56 people asked for 
desertification and they were turned down. Now what are you, Mr. Minister, going to do in terms of a 
situation that looks like a slap in the face to democracy and majority rule? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would ask the Member to review the manner in which questions should be 
put. I think it's quite clear in that outline that the question should be of a non-debatable 

1325 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

nature. I think that the question the Member was putting, in the first instance, was a question that should 
be followed up in Estimates and not in the Question Period, because he's investigating a part of a 
department which I think is not of great urgency at this moment. I would say that the Member put the 
question in a debatable manner and this puts me at the disadvantage that I then have to allow the 
Minister of Labour equal time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps if I could put the question this way. What consideration is being 
given by the Department of Labour to remedy situations such as this? 
 
HON. G. T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — I should say first of all, Mr. Speaker, that I do not sit in 
judgement of decisions that are made by the Labour Relations Board, in the same way as the Hon. 
Attorney General does not sit in judgement or attempt to reverse decisions that are made by his 
provincial magistrates. As far as the tools that are being provided, we believe that the Labour Relations 
Board has functioned well, in light of an increasing workload, that it has had to handle over the last 
number o years in particular. I agree with you that Mr. Sherstobitoff will make a very able chairman. We 
believe with the appointment of an executive officer to the board, which took place only a short while 
ago, that will in effect, streamline and speed up the duties of the board. Apart from that, Mr. Speaker, I 
think I have no comment to offer, other than to suggest that the terms and conditions of The Trade 
Union Act are those that the Labour Relations Board is obliged to honour and administer. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary. I was not asking the Minister to sit in judgment or in appeal, as it 
were, on the ruling given by the Labour Relations Board. What I was asking him to do, was to enlighten 
the House as to what proposed changes there will be to remedy situations such as have happened with 
the Star-Phoenix. 
 

SCHOOL GRANTS 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question to the Minister of Finance. That portion of 
the Provincial Budget which probably gets the largest piece of the pie is education. The Minister of 
Finance is no doubt aware that within the next few days, that some hundred school boards across this 
province must set their budget. One major component is not completed, that is teacher's salaries and so 
the boards are going to be guessing. I wonder if the Minister of Finance would be prepared to review the 
amount of money for the Department of Education, should the boards fall short in their guess as to what 
the largest component of the budget will be? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Member is aware in looking at the budget, we have been 
very fair in the provision of funds for education in the budget. There is an increase of ten per cent in the 
grants, an additional $17 million, which is a substantial amount of money. We believe that we are 

1326 
 



 
  March 25, 1977 

 

providing the school boards with the funds that they need to take care of the additional costs in operating 
our school system, by way of salaries for the school teachers, salaries for other support staff and 
maintenance and additional costs that the school boards have to face in terms of supply. We believe 
sufficient funds are provided this year and when the Hon. Member takes a look over the last number of 
years, this Government has been very fair to the school boards. With the property improvement grant, 
we are picking up 78 per cent of the cost of our school system. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary question Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) 
didn't attempt to answer my question, we heard what he said before. Mr. Minister, perhaps I should 
rephrase the question. The time limit, when the board must complete the budget, is just in a few days. 
The largest single component of that budget is an unknown factor. Now should the board submit the 
budget, falling short as to what that figure will be, what is the Department of Finance prepared to do in 
the way of redoing the Education Budget? Could the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) perhaps 
persuade the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski), who is not here today, to have an extended 
deadline upon the time which these budgets must come in? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Member knows collective bargaining is in 
progress. I would hope that the school board, and the teachers, are going to arrive at a collective 
bargaining agreement soon. I can not, at this stage, be making promises that additional funds will be 
provided. There are also limits as to the amount of money we, as a province, can raise. The Hon. 
Member during the Budget Debate was somewhat critical that we are spending too much money. Now 
the Conservatives can't have it both ways. On the one hand, they say that we are spending too much 
money, on the other hand, they argue that not enough money is provided in certain programs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — To the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek). If it can be 
shown that the school boards in the Province of Saskatchewan are going to have to increase their grants 
by more than the ten per cent that your department has increased the grants by, will the Minister then, 
again be prepared to sit down and to look at the share of the Provincial Government's contribution? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Department of Education is always willing to meet 
with the school boards and the education authorities to discuss budgets as well as the education system. 
 

POTENTIAL DRINKING WATER HAZARDS 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney) has failed to make himself aware of the situation I have outlined, I would like to ask the 
Minister responsible for the Water Supply Board, if he is aware of any problem that has been raised by 
officials working at the Buffalo Pound filtration plant, regarding the potential dangerous situation of 
water pollution in the drinking supply for Moose Jaw and Regina? 

1327 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER: — (Regina-Victoria) Mr. Speaker, I would like to stand up on a Point of 
Privilege, if I may, with regard to the question of the Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) who is 
trying to condemn the water supply for Regina and Moose Jaw. I could tell him that the quality of the 
water . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order; I think there are a number of errors creeping I here. The 
Member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) begins his question with a reprimand and that is really not 
proper. I don't think that the Member for Regina-Victoria (Mr. Baker) has a Point of Privilege. He may 
be offended by some remark that may have been made with regard to the water system but that is not 
really a Point of Privilege and I don't think it should be raised at this time. Order, order; 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister for Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the answer is No. 
 
MR. MCMILLAN: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister responsible for the Water Supply Board 
undertake to investigate these circumstances that have been raised and can he assure this House that he 
will be able to give us some answer, preferably on Monday, with regard to the situation? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No. 
 

CATTLE AUCTION MARKETS 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding). I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture is aware of the problems faced by cattle auction 
markets in Saskatchewan with regard to buyers and the buyers' bonds? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture)No, I have no information of a problem there. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The cattle auction markets, all cattle auction markets 
in Saskatchewan, are faced with a very serious situation because a buyer from a packing plant, or an 
individual buyer, can cover one or two or three auction markets in a week and only be covered by 
possibly $100,000 worth of cattle. This buyer is only required to have a $6,000 bond and many losses 
are taking place because of this including going out of business, as in the case of the Arcola Auction 
Market. It is back in business now. A buyer is not required to have a bond any higher than $6,000. Is 
there any possibility of requiring by law, these buyers to have a larger bond to protect these cattle 
auction markets? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, my department has that under review at the present time and we 
are looking into that problem. We are aware of it and we have proposed some changes. We have not 
moved them forward at this time, but we will be looking at this very shortly. 

1328 
 



 
  March 25, 1977 

 

DESKS IN THE HOUSE 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek: — A question to the Minister of Government Services (Mr. 
Shillington). I wonder if the Minister could assure me that the desks for my Member for Wilkie (Miss 
Clifford) and myself will be back in position on Monday? We wouldn't want anyone in this Chamber to 
think there is any sign of movement on either part of ours. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, if that 
is somebody's idea of the contribution those two Members make or whether there is some reason for 
repair, but I certainly will look into it and get them back. 
 

LICENSING OF ILLEGITIMATE FARM MACHINERY DEALERS 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER: — (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister has come up with anything 
on this business of the licensing of illegitimate farm machinery dealers? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I could inform the Member that 
I sent him a note about that. There is a problem with relation to some of these dealers bringing in 
machines from the United States, and the Agriculture Implement Board is now examining how they can 
license them and get them under the supervisions of the Act. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Actually, I don't think the dealers are attempting to 
stop farmers from buying goods across the line at all. I don't think we are trying to discourage 
agricultural goods going either way. It is a case of getting the 'jockies'' license and requiring them to 
qualify in the same way for service and parts dealerships. This is very urgent for the farm machinery 
dealers. Would you follow this up and see that this does happen? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — I would like to inform the Member 
for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that he should watch his step. That fellow from Speers that he talks about is a 
good Conservative. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

MOTOR VEHICLE LICENCE 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, since we make announcements 
to the House rather than the press, it is my intention to bring to this Legislature . . . 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear; 
 
MR. WHELAN: — The press has been repeatedly asking me to make statements, and it is my intention 
to bring to the Legislature some 

1329 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

information that I think is pertinent regarding the motor vehicle license change-over. 
 
Proof of ownership is being asked for. It is a new procedure we are using because of the high number of 
stolen vehicles that are showing up in the Province of Saskatchewan. But rather than insist on a bill of 
sale, we have developed another more convenient method to establish proof of ownership when a 
vehicle is being transferred from one person to another. 
 
Mail-in registration has been discontinued because of the technique used to register the stolen vehicles. 
But Mr. Speaker, we have worked out a procedure with the auto dealers that will permit registration to 
suit their needs. 
 
The manual for issuers will be updated to take care of the error in the insurance manual of the handbook. 
The charges, if any, for renewal of transfers, when they are worked out, will be shown in the manual 
after it has been amended. 
 
A few issuers have resigned when confronted with the new system. We, meaning the Department of 
Finance, until April 1, have appointed a replacement as quickly as it was possible to do. 
 
The commissions for issuing registration and motor vehicle licenses have been increased substantially 
from 1971; from 30 cents per transaction to 50 cents on driver transactions, and to a dollar on most 
vehicle transactions. With the introduction of staggered renewals, a new cycle of renewals will begin in 
September. This means more commissions for the issuer with much less effort the next time around. In 
addition, in an effort to accommodate the public 12 months of the year, we will be examining a number 
of alternatives. 
 
It is difficult, at this moment, to assess the rates or increase the compensation until we have had a look at 
the over all operation of the motor vehicle issuers' offices across the province. 
 
Our office had endeavoured to guess the amount of supplies that were needed initially for each issuer. In 
some cases they have run out but our staff is trying to keep up with this demand, and we think we have 
now met the requests that have been made by issuers. 
 
Regarding the truck rating system, a questionnaire for trucking firms is being held in abeyance until the 
license rush is over, although we acknowledge the need for the vital information that was being asked 
for, if we are going to ascertain the transportation needs of the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The staff we have is an experienced staff and the new director has worked for the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Office for twenty years or so. We have every confidence that they will perform 
well and that they will produce the kind of system that we are aiming at and that the province needs. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head -Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, just a brief comment from the 
official Opposition. First of all, I want to tell the Minister that confession is good for the soul, and we do 
appreciate his 

1330 
 



 
  March 25, 1977 

 

offer of repentance and we do appreciate the rather speedy way in which he has attempted to rectify 
some of the unfortunate, circumstances that surrounded the issuance of licenses this year. I think one 
area he should have a good look at is the idea of a recompense for those issuers of licenses. The Minister 
of Finance (Mr. Smishek), indicated nothing would be done for five or six months. I think you are going 
to find a. sash of resignations, when the fact that the issuers of licenses are over-burdened and over-
worked is clear. Anyway I just want to say to the Minister that we appreciate the action of his 
department and SGIO and we hope that will rectify the situation 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose) Mr. Speaker, I should like to briefly comment on the statement 
made by the Minister. I think his department anticipated that there would be some problems and some 
confusion in the change-over and your anticipation certainly became a reality. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, the greatest complaint that his department is facing, as the Minister of Finance 
(Mr. Smishek) mentioned this morning, is that maybe the individual was forgetful or remiss in not filling 
out the attachment picking out the month. That is neither here nor there at the present time. The major 
difficulty, Mr. Minister, which has to be corrected, (I assure you that sooner or later, your Department 
has to correct it), is in connection with the person who has a responsibility for licensing seven or eight or 
nine vehicles along with three or four drivers' licenses. The registrations are spread over a period of 
time, sometimes every month of the 12 months. All these people are asking, Mr. Minister, is that all 
registrations come due at one time. They don't care what month it is so long as it can be transacted in the 
same month. And if you correct that, Mr. Minister, as I am sure you will, I think you are going to deviate 
the major concern in rural Saskatchewan. I can tell you that people are pretty hostile. 
 

POINT OF ORDER ON THE QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — On a Point of Order, if I may. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a habit, I think, of asking questions in a very polite manner. This morning I thought I was very 
polite about a very, very important matter, the expansion of urban sprawl in Saskatchewan and the 
imposition of agricultural soil. I asked the Premier (Mr. Blakeney), what I considered to be an important 
question-if there was a government policy or if anything was being done to protect and to see that this 
would be looked after in the future. I would like to know why that particular question was out of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I want the Member to know he was the epitome of politeness in asking his 
question. That wasn't the point by which I didn't allow the Member to proceed. The reason I interrupted 
the Member was that his question was repetitious of the question immediately proceeding it and was put 
in a debatable fashion. I think a check of the record will show that. 

1331 
 



 
March 25, 1977 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS – VOTE 16 (Cont’d) 
 

ITEM 7. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Chairman, when we rose last night there was a 
question about speed limits and I stated at that time that speed limits were regulated under the Authority 
of The Vehicles Act. We have a copy here. Section 133, item 1, says: 

No person shall drive a truck or power unit having a manufacturer's rated capacity in excess of one-
half ton or gross weight of 4,000 . . . at a speed greater than 40 miles per hour. 

 
It says 40 here, that is a misprint, it should be 50. The Highways Act . . . this is the change: 
 

No person shall drive any other vehicle at a speed greater than 50 miles an hour. 
 
We have the authority to change that to 80 kilometres. That legislation will be introduced later on. That 
is our authority to proceed in accordance with agreements that have been made with the Federal 
Government and as I understand it all provinces. Saskatchewan attended a meeting held at the top level 
some three or four years ago. The authority for the administration of this Act, as I said last night, does 
lie within the Highway Traffic Board and is under the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, is he saying that there is no Act now, that there will be another 
Act that gives the authority to move it. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We are telling you about the changes that will take place in that Act when the 
Minister brings them forward. 
 
MR. G. WIPF: — One final question on Item seven, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday it was $262,000 on this 
that you said was set aside for metric conversion. Is that right? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — More than that I believe. In Item seven, yes, that was the amount. Increments in 
salaries and the amount for metric conversion would make up the difference between $241,000 and 
$502,000. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Have you got a breakdown of what part of it was really metric? Could you give me that 
figure, then we will go on. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Just a moment please. The amount is $345,000 for the total package. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Is that all the way through for every department in the highways? 
 

1332 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 
 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That is only for this Item. 
 
MR. R. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — An interesting observation. I was wondering, although it 
doesn't directly fall under your department, when the change comes in the speed limits from the miles 
per hour to the metric, which is not that much difference in change, if the inquisitive motorists would 
know if the radar detection units are also going to be changed to metric at the same time. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I think that is an interesting question. I presume that they will have modified 
equipment that will take care of the speeds prescribed on the roads at that particular time when enforcing 
the law. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 

ITEM 8 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to table a letter from the City of Prince Albert, to the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, further to the discussion. I will read it before I table it if I may, 
Mr. Chairman. It was concerning a question raised earlier. 
 

This is to advise that the city council has approved your request to have the Department of Highways 
and Government Services carry out preliminary surveying, pre-engineering work this fall, on the air 
tanker base as proposed by the Ministry of Transportation. As discussed, the city of Prince Albert 
has not yet approved the MOT location for this base and we wish to advise you at this time that all 
work being carried out is carried out at your own risk and that you agree that you will not hold the 
city liable for any costs incurred, should the ultimate location be different than that being proposed 
by the Ministry. I would ask that before you enter the site that arrangements be made with the airport 
manager, and all activity on the airport field itself have his prior approval. Signed, J. A. Swystun, 
City Engineer, Prince Albert. Dated September 22, 1976. 

 
MR. W. C. THATCHER: — I should like to welcome the Minister to the House today. I can tell by the 
expression on his face that he is thrilled to be here. I would like to tell him that the Opposition is thrilled 
to have him. I sincerely hope, this morning, that the Minister brushed his teeth, had some Scope and 
washed his mouth out with soap for all the terrible things that were coming out of his mouth... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I don't think that it requires any preliminary remarks from any Member 
of the House, in regard to these things, in order to operate the business efficiently. This applies to all 
sides, I am not stressing any individual side. I am interested in expediting your business, our business, in 
a manner in which I think it can be handled honourably and that is the way we would like to do it. I ask 
Members to try and adhere to it. 

1333 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, might I ask what was the purpose 
of those comments? The Member was just setting up and made a very interesting comment before he 
started in response, to what I understand, were some rather unpleasant remarks of last evening. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I think those remarks were dealt with last evening. I should like to see us 
get started on a good tone and where the decorum of the house is certainly held to an acceptable level for 
all Members. I will certainly endeavour to keep it that way. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well if the Chairman happens to be through with this item of great importance, 
may I proceed. I notice last year that the Minister budgeted the sum of $34.5 million in terms of 
maintenance. Could the Minister tell me, on item eight, what was the actual figure that was spent? I 
realize the fiscal year is not completely finished, but I am sure your departmental people have a 
reasonably accurate estimate of how that amount was spent. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We have the book item that indicates what was spent. If you go to the 
supplementaries you will also find that there is a supplementary amount, maintenance of public 
highways and bridges is $1,803,120. The $1,400,000 is to provide legal authority; I say legal authority 
for our accounts payable. The Finance Act requires that we be authorized the full amount of what we 
actually spend plus accounts payable at the end of the year. The $1,400,000 is not spent; it is simply a 
legal bookkeeping entry to stay within terms, the legal terms of The Finance Act. Of the remaining 
$430,000, because the weather has continued to be good to now, we will not be needing that amount 
either. We're about $100,000 over in some small items, but this will be balanced by similar under 
expenditures in capital. We will net, within our total of last year's allocation of $129,700,000. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I am not completely clear what you mean by 'legal authority'. I think you said, 
$1,400,000 for legal authority from the Department of Finance. Could you explain that in a little more 
detail? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The legal authority to spend money, in any department, is granted under The 
Finance Act. No department can spend more than the legal amount, the stipulated amount that is 
permitted in this House during these Estimates, in any one year without coming to the House with 
Supplementary Estimates. That is a procedure that is time honoured and has been in effect as long as I 
have been around. That is where the legal implication comes in. You may want to take a look at The 
Finance Act or ask the question during financial Estimates or ask for a technical, legal explanation from 
someone that is probably better informed that I am. I believe that is the best you can do. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Is the Minister saying he  
 

1334 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

got a special warrant for $1,400,000? Is that what the Minister is trying to tell us? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, I suppose you would call that a special warrant. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — So what you are saying to us, Mr. Minister, if I understand, you got a special 
warrant for $1.4 million, so you are $1.4 million over your appropriated budget in the last fiscal year. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, I am not saying that. I am saying that we have to follow this procedure in order 
to provide, in a legal sense, for money that may be spent. I am saying we will not spend it but we have to 
have the money in place in advance, just in case we do. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — One more question which will clarify this. You got a special warrant for $1.4 
million but you are not sure whether you are going to spend $1.2 million or $1.4 million. Is that correct? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am saying that we are not going to spend any of it. But I am saying that The 
Finance Act states, that we have to take this procedure in order to stay within the letter of the Act. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I know what The Finance Act says, and you know it and so do 
most Members of the House. When you require money for a government department over and above the 
appropriation that is granted in the Legislature in the Estimates, you have to get a special warrant and a 
supplementary Estimate. You got it for $1.4 million and now you tell us you are not going to spend it. 
We will determine that next year, not at this time. 
 
The second thing, you also indicated, is that you borrowed from capital into operating, is that correct? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am saying that we may for the amount of $100,000. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, when you go into for example, some new construction or new 
gravelling, tenders are let and you know approximately what the costs of that extension or the upgrading 
of that particular piece of road are going to be. I want to ask a question. When you undertake a project 
and all the work is being done by your own highway crew, obviously your department places an 
estimate as to the cost of what that particular project will be. Am I correct in assuming that? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — You are. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, I realize that you have been in the Province of Saskatchewan longer 
than I have, one of the favourite topics is weather, drought and crop conditions and so on. 

1335 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

Looking at the Public Accounts and Estimates and your costs of various projects in Saskatchewan, you 
have listed the cost of placing the railings on the south side of the Saskatchewan Landing bridge along 
with some other mileage of highway. One of the topics of conversation, I can assure the Minister, and it 
branches over into the Morse constituency, was the length of time that it took the highway crews to put 
the new railings on the south side of the Saskatchewan Landing bridge. Do you have the cost of that, 
isolated from the cost of that along with the road? I would like to know the cost of placing those up. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If you want that exact amount, put a question on the Order Paper asking what the 
cost was of that particular project. In fact I will discuss the wording with you. We will put it back 
through the department as a House question and we will get the information to you. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — All right, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask the Minister another question in relation to this. 
Was the estimated cost for this project the actual cost or did it exceed your expectations? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I won't know until we investigate it. The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley said, 
"Why is that necessary?", It is not necessary but it is certainly far more legitimate and useful to have that 
answer given on paper through the House, than it is by word of mouth, from me to him, because it has to 
be factual when it is put on the order, and it has to be checked by my staff. I am quite happy to give you 
the answer in a note. I am simply saying that your guarantee of its authenticity is greater with any 
department, if it is put on the Order Paper and recorded in the House. It can be referred to 10 years from 
now. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister is asking us to establish a very dangerous 
precedent in Estimates. I certainly understand that there is a possibility that you won't have all the details 
of all the specific information that any Member on this side of the House might ask. But to suggest he 
has to put it on a written question is ridiculous. You might be completely out of this House and the 
Estimates might be all through, and there may be something quite wrong with it. If you want to say that 
the information isn't here but you will try and provide it as quickly as you can, then you have one of 
your people go out and phone and get it back, or whatever. We are not suggesting that you have to have 
every detailed answer for any question that the Members may ask. But don't suggest that we have to put 
something on the Order Paper. It is your responsibility in Estimates to provide it for us, in the quickest 
way you can, and if the Member agrees it is fine. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I agree with the Member. I am saying that we would get the figures in a hurried 
fashion from the Swift Current district and there could be, because it is hurried and over the phone, a 
margin of error. You can have them both, the research to answer the question and the quick one. But I 
would want to put that bit of a Caveat on it, that it is a quick answer rather than a researched answer. I 
would rather think they 

1336 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

would both be the same, but I simply want to give the Member that guarantee. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I just want an answer. I don't care if it is within the week. Can I have 
an answer within the week, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Certainly. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I want to thank the Minister for tabling a letter this morning. However, as I read it it still 
doesn't answer the question that I asked last night. I suppose you could dig through your files and bring 
out many, many letters that you have. The letter does say, as I said yesterday, that you have permission 
from the city to do engineering work, preliminary survey work and all that. You also stated that the city 
has specifically approved the location of the air base but you tabled a letter this morning in contradiction 
to that statement. The letter that I am asking for, as I asked yesterday and I thought I would get it today, 
is the letter that specifically approves the location base of the air tanker station in Prince Albert. I feel 
that I have been misled by this document that you tabled the other day. Could I have that letter or does it 
exist? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Now, I just happen to have the statement that was made in the House and I will 
read the statement. I have told the Member that I thought he had misunderstood what I had said. 
 
Now what I said and I quote: 
 

The location of the base is strictly in accordance with the Ministry of Transport's master plan for the 
city of Prince Albert. We have a copy of the letter from the city which gives council approval (that's 
Prince Albert city council approval) to do the engineering work and the city has now specifically 
approved the location of the air tanker base and access road. 

 
I submit, the blueprint that I consider to be authority from the duly appointed and paid representative, of 
the city of Prince Albert, Mr. Swystun. It is approved, signed there in the proper section. I presume that 
the city of Prince Albert has authorized this gentleman to say 'this is what we approve' and he has put his 
name on it. If he has put his name to it without permission of the city council, then that is a problem for 
the city council. 
 
MR. WIPF: — It was the same engineer that signed the letter and signed that blueprint then? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, right. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister has indicated under this item that there is an over 
expenditure on Item 8 and that there is an under expenditure on capital expenditures which we will deal 
with a little later. 

1337 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

Can we conclude from this that you, in fact stole dollars from what was going to be capital expenditures 
in new construction in this province and that you took money from that and placed it elsewhere in your 
department, possibly into maintenance? Would the Minister comment on this? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, I will comment on it. I said before that we have to remain strictly within the 
letter of the law and to come within a few hundred thousand dollars. We are continually monitoring 
construction work in six districts, very carefully, during the year to make sure that we don't over expend 
progress payments that are being made continually to contractors. Work is proceeding and that has to be 
paid whether it is in ordinary or capital. Our accountants have to maintain a strict surveillance of the 
spending. It would take a Solomon or some other very wise person to come out at the end of the year, in 
six districts with all the complications of each particular district, and thousands of projects, to stay 
within the dollar amounts right on the nose. At the end of any year, in any department that is handling 
that amount of work, there is going to be some over or under expenditure. Now we can go over the 
Budget with special warrants, but we have to go before the Treasury Board with special warrants and at 
the end of the year. In order to stay strictly within the letter of the law, we must make this formal 
application to the Treasury Board in order to stay within the rules. 
 
I am saying that it is a formality, that we know now that the money will not be spent. I assure the House, 
again, that that $129 million .that was allocated to us last year will not be overspent when all the bills are 
those that are coming in March, certainly cannot be paid until April. It is that way every year and I think 
that you will find that this is true in similar departments anywhere you go. I repeat, I am assuring the 
House that when the bills are all in we will not be spending more than the total gross amount that was 
allocated to the department last year. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Would the Minister tell the House what amount was taken from capital 
expenditures and placed into general expenditures? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, I mentioned the $100,000 out of the total amount that is in the 
supplementaries. There is maintenance of public highways and bridges $108 million; Highway 
Engineering Branch $50,500; Yorkton district $23,500; North Battleford district $32,970. Now if all of 
those are checked out, they fall into place. On the maintenance side there will be $100,000 shortfall. 
There will be a surplus, my people tell me, that we can take from capital in order to keep the books 
balanced and that is within the legitimate operation of the department. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Could the Minister tell us what he vired from last year's appropriation, 
approved in the House, from capital to operating? You have just given us the Supplementary Estimates. 
We are not interested only in the Supplementary Estimates, we want to know what you vired from one 
item to another item, or what you vired from capital into maintenance or ordinary expenditures. 

1338 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. KRAMER: — You are using the term 'viring' and maybe I did, but my Director of Support 
Services says we cannot vire, we have to go for special warrant and then the Treasury, of course, 
handles it. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — In other words, Mr. Minister, what you are saying is that all the money 
appropriated for last year's Estimates, whatever it was, so many millions, was used for capital and that 
was appropriated and used for maintenance and there was no transfer from one item to the other. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Except for the $100,000. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 9 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — I have a question to ask the Minister regarding a topic 
that was raised about a week ago in the House, namely, the 42nd Street bridge in Saskatoon, or the 
North Saskatoon bridge crossing. It was raised again by my colleague from Eastview yesterday. 
 
When it first came up, the Premier gave the assurance that, in terms of cost-sharing between the 
Provincial Government and the city of Saskatoon, there would be suitable arrangements made by the 
Government and that the city of Saskatoon could be assured that some of the cost would be picked up by 
the provincial coffers. 
 
Yesterday, shortly before the supper recess, I believe I heard the Minister say that the only commitment 
that had been made at this time, with respect to cost-sharing, was a sharing of costs leading up to studies 
regarding traffic flow and so on. Then after the supper recess I heard words to the effect of the usual 
basis being used which is 50-50, at least the implication was left with the House that there would be a 
50-50 cost-sharing basis. 
 
Now my first question is, is that to be taken by the city of Saskatoon as a firm commitment that there 
will be a 50-50 cost-sharing basis from the province? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — When the bridge is proceeded with, after all of the design studies and other 
preliminaries have been taken care of, the province is committed to spend at least 50 per cent, probably a 
bit more. 
 
MR. LANE: — I think that is a first. Now we have a commitment that there will be 50 per cent and 
perhaps more. That is on the record now. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I beg your pardon, but that is knowledge that the city of Saskatoon has had for the 
past three or four years. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, when the 

1339 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

Minister speaks about traffic surveys and so on, the mayor of Saskatoon seems to indicate that all 
necessary traffic surveys have been done, or at least he has that impression, rightly or wrongly, and that 
now he is not getting the proper go ahead I from the Government. Now, the Minister indicated yesterday 
that he wanted some request from the mayor of Saskatoon at this point in time. Perhaps if you could tell 
us exactly, Mr. Minister, what request it is that you are waiting for? My colleague and myself could get 
on the phone to the mayor of Saskatoon and confirm that the bridge could be proceeded with, because 
nothing seems to be happening; we don't get deadline dates; the traffic is bottlenecked in that area and 
the situation is getting worse and worse. 
 
Now what exactly is it that you wish to know from the city of Saskatoon? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We need nothing more at this point from the city of Saskatoon. I did not say that 
we needed anything from the city of Saskatoon. I am saying that a number of people in political life, 
including city politicians, have not deemed it necessary to rush the request for the design for the 
functional study which they had the opportunity to do, according to the letter I tabled in the House since 
1974. They never replied, never made the request until last fall before our budgetary process was 
completed. 
 
We need nothing more from them at this time, but I take a dim view and I am not pointing my finger at 
any one in particular and certainly not Mayor Wright, if he has misunderstood some things/he probably 
has not searched all of the records of them coming along, after being tardy, waiting for two years to 
make the application for the design study. They know when our budgetary process takes place; and that 
it is futile to come and ask at the end of the budget year, before our budgets are in place, to ask us to 
assist with the study at that time when they had had our offer three years before; to complain that we are 
not moving fast enough, I think is unfair. 
 
MR. LANE: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that there are studies going on presently about design and 
so on and that makes good sense. Could the Minister tell me if the exact cost-figure and the cost-sharing 
agreement are being worked out side by side with the progress in terms of the design and so on. Are 
both things proceeding at the same time? Have negotiations been opened in terms of nailing down the 
exact cost-sharing basis of the Provincial Government? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The functional study will be shared as the transportation study is shared, again 
75/25, with the province sharing the 75 and the city is aware of that. I should like to inform the House, 
again, that even now the city has not asked for a share of the bridge construction although at this time 
we have nothing on paper to indicate that. I don't think it is necessary for them to do that, but there 
seems to be a fair bit of innuendo suggesting that we are dragging our feet. I suggest to the House and to 
the Members for Saskatoon, that we are not, dragging our feet. The opportunity has been open to the city 
since 1974, it was open to apply and request us to share the design study, 75 per cent of it; they didn't 
make their request 

1340 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

until last fall. I said at the SUMA meeting in Saskatoon that the ball was in their court, I repeat it, that is 
where it was. We are proceeding as quickly as city requests come in. One city request is in. We will be 
proceeding with the functional study, when and if they ask for a structure, if the design study indicates 
that the structure is feasible in that location, that the soil conditions are right, etc., then we will proceed 
with that. But the city is the initiator and that should be remembered. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, I didn't mean to suggest any impropriety on the part of the Minister. 
What I was implying was that the way in which budgets operate and the way in which the inflation 
factor takes its toll, that if this thing is dragged on and decision is left for some period of time, that there 
might be at that point in time when costs have, perhaps, tripled or quadrupled with respect to the cost of 
the bridge, some reluctance on part of the Government at that time. How does the city get a firm 
commitment now of you saying, that you will give this much money in terms of funding that bridge. Is it 
just a matter of them requesting exactly how much, requesting you to put a figure on it? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The fact is the city has known for years what the sharing formula for construction 
is, it is 50/50, there is no commitment needed from us. Here is a copy of the Urban Assistance Policy, 
that every city councillor ought to know, if he is doing his homework, the information is available to 
him. If aldermen or Members of the Legislature fail to inform themselves and choose instead to play 
politics and attempt to get headlines as the great defender of the rights of Saskatoon or whatever, then 
that is their problem. I am simply saying that it's the city's responsibility and it is not going to be 
allowed, as far as I am concerned, to pass the buck to the Provincial Government. They knew very well 
what the situation was for years. It is written in black and white. 
 
I don't know what the Members are going to gain by questioning me when they ought to be at city 
council questioning them. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry to delay my colleague's Estimates. This is not the best 
tactic I suppose as a government but I, too, am a Member from Saskatoon and I heard at some 
considerable length, last night, questions relating to this 42nd Street bridge by the Liberal Member and 
now this morning we hear it again by the Conservative Member. 
 
There are two points that I want to make. First of all, I am distressed at what I believe to be the continual 
attempts by the Liberal and Conservative Members of Saskatoon to continually politicize this question 
of the 42nd Street bridge. 
 
I think the worst example of it, I must say, came when the rookie Member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
(Mr. H. W. Lane) in his very first question in the Saskatchewan Legislature, was asked by the press 
outside how things were going. His response was that things were going pretty well, but he had to ask 
two Ministers for some kind of answer on the 42nd Street bridge, but neither one of them could give him 
an answer. He said that 

1341 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

finally he had to go to the Premier in order to get an answer but the Premier waffled on the question of 
the commitment. Those are pretty close to the exact words of the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland that 
he gave to the television cameras at that time. The simple fact of the matter is that anybody, who was in 
the Legislature at that time, knows that the question was asked specifically of the Premier and the 
Premier gave the commitment that he did the day of funding, as the Minister of Highways had 
repeatedly done this morning and last night. I am disturbed by that kind of irresponsibility on the part of 
the Opposition Members in the Legislature, because that is simply not what transpired. 
 
The second point that I want to make is that I think the city of Saskatoon has handled this thing well. I 
think they are a competent civic government, they have a competent civic administration. I believe that 
the Department of Highways has done a good job on this thing. Everybody comes on the television 
cameras in Saskatoon and they say to build the 42nd Street bridge, everybody, meaning the Opposition 
MLAs. I know that we have fallen in that same trap on this side of the House. I want to tell you that I 
have received many communications from people, who are not confirmed in their minds that 42nd 
Street, as an example, is where this bridge should be located. 
 
There are many people who say it should be on 51st Street and some who say it should be even further 
down the line. Now what are we to do as a government? Are we to respect the wishes of the citizens of 
the city of Saskatoon and area, or are we to arbitrarily as a Department of Highways, say it shall be here 
at 42nd or it shall be there at 51st or whatever location? 
 
I think the Minister of Highways is taking the correct and responsible point of view when he says that 
we want the local government to be heard in this situation. We want them to decide where the location 
should be. I think the same thing can be said with respect to the functional design study. This is a totally 
responsible thing and you have to know what kind of bridge, what kind of earth, what kind of costs, 
what kind of materials, before you know what the dollar cost is going to be and whether it is going to 
meet the operation. That again is local responsibility. 
 
I only want to intervene to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was born and raised in Saskatoon. I am very sensitive 
to this question of the need to improve traffic patterns. I believe that we need a bridge in the 42nd Street 
area, wherever it is ultimately decided. I have confidence in Mayor Wright and the city council, very 
much so. I think that negotiations will be tough. There will be periods of frustration, that is inevitable. 
The Government is committed to do what it can to assist and I think the Department of Highways, the 
Minister and the deputy and his officials have done all that they can to make sure that this project is 
being moved ahead. I want to commend the Minister of Highways for doing a good job and urge the 
Members of this House to get on with the business of making sure this project is achieved working 
through the civic government and not in the political forums here. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I wonder if I may comment, after the lecture delivered by the Attorney General. I 
think that if he checks the record 

1342 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

he will find that the questions, which I asked of the Minister last night and of the department, were 
questions about planning and the future. I have never had any intention of attempting to politicize the 
matter. The matter was one that I raised a year ago to find out what the department had in mind. I am not 
attempting to lay fault anywhere. The fact is that there are many, many people in the city of Saskatoon 
who are frustrated every day because they can't cross the river. I am simply, in the questions that I 
directed yesterday, attempting to find out what kind of time line the department has for the future, what 
kind of target date do they see as a possibility. The matter of the funding, as the Minister says, has been 
written down for a long while. Anybody who cares to read knows it is 50/50 funding at least and it 
might be more. I agree with you that Mayor Wright and the council of the city of Saskatoon are 
extremely competent, as competent or maybe a little more so, than any other municipal council in the 
province. It may very well be that they will get better than a 50-50 split, if they do, hallelujah; 
 
I think the Attorney General ought to understand what my particular purpose was in the questions that I 
asked last night, if he didn't understand them. 
 
MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Chairman, in brief response to the comments of the 
Attorney General. He refers to the fact, or at least he leaves the implication with the House, that 
someway I used the press to mislead what had transpired in the House. He, of course, refers to the fact 
that I am a rookie MLA. I certainly make no pretensions about the fact that I have only been here a very 
short time and I am trying to learn. Of course I am watching the example from the other side of the 
House to see what I should not do. Now he says that the question was directed to the Premier. I wasn't 
sure how to nail it down at that time, and I asked either the Minister of Highways or the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs. Of course one of them was not here, and I didn't recognize the fact at that time. The 
other one sort of shrugged, didn't know what to do with it, then finally the Premier answered the 
question. That was the way it came up in the House. 
 
In terms of irresponsibility, I would ask the Attorney General whether it was irresponsible then to raise 
the question the other day about Place Riel? Only a few short years ago there was a commitment for 50 
per cent funding of that particular project. Now delay after delay has taken place, and after costs have 
risen from somewhere in the order of $4 million to $10.8 million, the Government's commitment has 
now come to only 33.3 per cent . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order . . . I think that we are not on the subject of highways at present. If we 
could revert back to the bridge. 
 
MR. LANE: — In terms of the 42nd Street bridge, I have specifically referred in my question to the 
House to the 42nd Street bridge crossing or the north Saskatoon crossing. I haven't tried to nail it down. 
I have said that there is a problem in that area and the people in Saskatoon recognize that there is a 
problem. We have simply been indicating that something has to be done and perhaps there should be 
some input from this Government. 

1343 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

Now when he refers to it, he says that we are politicking. I refute that statement. I take exception to the 
statement that we, in some way, by bringing this 42nd Street bridge or north Saskatoon bridge crossing 
up for debate, do not have confidence in Mayor Cliff Wright. That's utter nonsense. I simply asked 
questions to peg down what would be the Government's contribution, or would it be another Place Kiel 
case, where the contribution once the cost had risen would flip to a lower percentage? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to pursue this because I think this is an example of my 
point. The Hon. Member says that something has to be done. He wants to know what can be done. I am 
asking the Hon. Member, what more can the Minister of Highways have said or have done, as far as the 
Government of Saskatchewan is concerned? What more? That was available to you yesterday and last 
night. Transportation study, we're funding it, we are waiting for it; functional study, no request from the 
city of Regina, we are waiting for it; location, no location from the city of Saskatoon, we're waiting for 
it; commitment to funding, 50/50. Mr. Chairman, it was 50/50 two years ago, it is 50/50 today, it will be 
50/50 two years from now and maybe more. What more can be done? 
 
I know what you are going to do, judging by the track record. You will go back in front of the television 
cameras, and say that oh, we couldn't get the determination of the Government, they were uncertain 
about this, he said maybe 50/50, maybe 40/60. That's the way it is going to be operating. The press will 
dutifully report that, without any kind of catching of it. All the people in Sutherland will say, how great 
this new MLA is fighting for this 42nd Street bridge or somewhere out there. I am saying that is pure 
political phoniness. Every Member has the right to ask every question that he wants to ask about the 
bridge or anything else, but please do it with some degree of political integrity. 
 
My purpose in rising today, and I repeat again, is that this has not been the case as far as the bridge is 
concerned. I think on the television show that I refer to specifically, while it may have happened that 
way in the House as you report it now, that's not what you said on television. You took an entirely 
different interpretation. You purposely tried to communicate to the citizens of Saskatoon that the 
Ministers were either unwilling or unable to answer the question and that the Premier refused to give 
you a commitment of funding and that is a pure basic untruth. You know it. I am saying that when it 
comes to the questions that are here, please just say that I'm for the Saskatoon bridge. The Member for 
Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) and all these Members that are here are for the operation. When you ask us 
what can be done about it, don't ask us to move in and bully the city of Saskatoon. Don't ask us to get in 
there and run roughshod over them. You are suggesting that we should be moving in and imposing our 
stand on the city of Saskatoon and I oppose that. I am not referring to the Liberals, they didn't say that. 
The Member for Sutherland has suggested that. Don't ask us to bully the city of Saskatoon or to override 
them or to push our Government views on them, because that is just not the way that we work. We 
simply want to hear from them as to location and as to these specific issues and to move on to the bridge 
in that regard. 

1344 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that the Hon. Member will certainly appreciate that. I hope he keeps those 
comments in mind when he next comes before the television cameras about the 42nd Street bridge. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear; 
 
MR. LANE: — This wasn't a political issue as long as we were asking the Minister of Highways 
questions about how the bridge would proceed. Now it has become a political issue, now he is saying we 
are bullying the city of Saskatoon. What we are in fact trying to do is get some information for the city 
of Saskatoon, some commitment. If you say, Mr. Attorney General that I am fighting for the citizens of 
Saskatoon you are quite right. I intend to continue to do that because nobody over there seems to be 
doing it. 
 
In response to the question about what more could the Minister be asked to do, he could be asked to 
continue answering questions so that we can nail down exactly what is going to happen and get some 
firm commitment so that the 42nd Street bridge or the north Saskatoon crossing doesn't turn into another 
Place Riel. After the inflationary index has taken its toll and the costs have gone up, then the 
Government decides at this time they don't have quite enough money in the coffers, because they have 
been shooting the wad in potash mines. That's all we want to know, and it won't be political as long as 
you allow us to ask the Minister questions about the procedure and how this thing is going to proceed in 
the future on the 42nd Street bridge. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to again say that that is an example of an out and out 
falsehood, falsehood about money, falsehood by the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland, falsehood by the 
Conservative Party about the business of shooting the money on potash. That is an out and out blatant 
political misrepresentation. If I was less than parliamentary I would call it something more substantial 
than that.. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order please! 
 
I have been looking into two crystal balls here, which you people have been referring to in the past and I 
fail to see where the debate is building on tearing down this bridge you are referring to. I think that it is 
very important that we adhere to the item at hand and I think all parties have had a chance to express 
their views. I have been fairly lenient, but I do ask you to get on with the business of the day. I would 
ask you to consider Item 9. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Before we agree to Item 9, I want to complete my remarks, and I will keep your 
observations in mind, in so doing. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, with respect to .this particular Item 9, as it relates to the 42nd Street bridge, 
that the kinds of statements that we have received, are the kinds of statements which have destroyed the 
credibility of the Conservative Opposition. The Members laugh because they win two by-elections in 
1977. I tell you, you may as well enjoy it, because you will have about two and a half years or three and 
a half years in which to enjoy the success that you have. 

1345 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

The Member talked about the 42nd Street bridge and he said he wanted to make sure the costs on the 
42nd Street bridge didn't escalate because of costs of inflation and that somehow the Government is 
going to try and duck out. Mr. Chairman, if the costs of the 42nd Street bridge escalate, they will 
escalate partly, if not mainly, due to the fact that the Government of Saskatchewan is awaiting specific 
recommendations from the city of Saskatoon on these points. If the costs on Place Riel escalate, it is 
because the Government is waiting for specific recommendations from the University of Saskatoon and 
the University's Commission on Place Riel. If the costs escalate as they do, all governments will have to 
make the decision that is relevant at that particular time. That has nothing to do with the questions with 
respect to the 42nd Street bridge. I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, and I submit to the Members of this 
House, and I submit to any impartial and fair-minded person who has been listening to this debate, last 
night and today, that every relevant question respecting funding, studies, transportation, location and the 
go-ahead, have been answered by the Minister. And the bottom line on that is that there has been no 
delay and no foot-tracking from the Department of Highways. 
 
The question of money for potash is a total misrepresentation and a red herring which shouldn't be 
brought into this question whatsoever. Mr. Chairman, I repeat again, the Member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland is falling into the negative steps of his leader and the Conservative Party in drawing these 
falsehoods through the political arena. 
 
MR. LANE: — On the question of destroyed credibility, I would submit to the Attorney General that 
credibility is not destroyed by asking questions, it is destroyed when governments make commitments 
which later on they do not keep, or when they fight an election with no mention of potash mines, and 
just months after the election is over, when they have had no mandate, spend in excess, or make 
commitments of millions of dollars, that's what you were saying in the House the other day. Now 
certainly that is going to be a relevant question in the mind;; of the electorate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it is only fair, since he brought up the question of Place Riel again, that I should 
have an opportunity to respond. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. I think we have to draw a line here somewhere. I ask the 
Members to adhere to the subject and this is the bridge, Item 9. I am not going to, as long as I am in the 
Chair, allow anything further to be discussed at this time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, I will respect your ruling on that particular issue. I would like to raise 
one more comment and that is, when the Attorney General referred to my comments, he left the 
implication with the House that in some way I was urging the Government to bully the people of 
Saskatoon when he talked about the 42nd Street bridge. I would like to set the record straight at this time 
and say that I have indicated time after time, that it is not the 42nd Street bridge, that's one reference, but 
the other reference is the north Saskatoon bridge crossing. 

1346 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

I realize it is not in this Member's Riversdale area, therefore, it is not as great a concern to him and his 
constituents whether or not the traffic is bottlenecked in the Saskatoon Sutherland constituency. Perhaps, 
Mr. Chairman, we can get back to the Minister of Highways and continue asking questions about the 
42nd Street bridge, without interference from the Attorney General. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I want to tell the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Sutherland . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order I I'll acknowledge the Member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General doth protest too 
much I am afraid. And the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland doth know too little to talk very 
intelligently about the issue. That became pretty evident during the last by-election campaign, the kinds 
of things that the Progressive Conservatives were saying about the 42nd Street bridge or the North 
Saskatchewan River crossing indicated that they hadn't bothered to research it and that's par for the 
course for the PCs, they don't research very much of anything. 
 
I would like to suggest to the Attorney General, and I should like to suggest to the Member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) that they both keep their hands off that darn 42nd Street bridge, leave 
it to the Minister and me and we will get the thing up, in co-operation with the city of Saskatoon. 
 
MR. LANE: — I just want to make one comment, and that is: — if in fact we did as well with no 
research as we did in the last by-election, just think of how we will be able to clobber the dickens out of 
them when we know something. 
 
Items 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 11 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, may I suggest that we take all the 
numbers through to 20 as read and approved? 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: — It has been suggested that all numbers be taken through to No. 20 as read and 
approved. Is this agreed? 
 
Items 11, 12, 13 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 14 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, if I could ask the Minister . . . that's a 
fair hike. You are going up roughly $400,000 in the Regina district. Could the Minister just very briefly 
explain the reason for this? 

1347 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

MR. KRAMER: — The main increases there are the usual wage increments for those periods that I 
mentioned earlier. That's $160,000. Metric conversion is $47,000. That's an item that was not there last 
year, also day labor wages, there is a $31,000 item there. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Last item, could you repeat that again? 
 
MR. KRAMER:: — $31,000 for day labor. 
 
MR. THATCHER:: — Mr. Minister, I don't think those numbers came to quite the increase there. You 
will note that your number of employees that you are budgeting for has gone from 48 to 47, yet you are 
budgeting for an increase in salary of $160,000 with one employee out. And the numbers that you have 
just put out, I don't think add up to the total increase. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — With approximately $250,000 in total, the increments are $160,000, the metric 
conversion and items that accompany it are about $50,000, and the day labor is $31,000, so that s 
$241,000. There are some miscellaneous items, office equipment and service contract — $3,200, 
miscellaneous adjustments of $4,700, etc. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Just one question to save me from doing it in 16. Are you telling 
me that there arc metric conversions in every one of these estimates? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Those are signs for the various (six) districts, and are signs that will be put up in 
October (all speed limit signs) throughout the entire province by the various districts. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, it appears that the amount that you are allocating for salary 
increments, with one less employee, if my very quick calculations are correct, is almost a 24 per cent 
increment. Could you explain that? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Our estimate is 26.4 per cent, you are a little low. Prior to the AIB (Anti Inflation 
Board) it was 16 per cent. That was before the Thanksgiving deal. The allowance for the unsettled 
agreement is the balance. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, you take the figures. Last year you budgeted $681,000, this 
year you are budgeting $854,000. Now I may have punched the wrong button here, but my calculator 
says that is a 24 per cent increase calculated for . . . 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Our gross is 26.4 per cent, I think that is correct, I have the accountant here behind 
me. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, never mind the two percentage points, or whatever it may be. 
That's a pretty hefty increase isn't it — 24 per cent? 

1348 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, it's normal. That's about what the increases are right across the board. The 
Yorkton district is 27.7 per cent and it is 25.3 per cent in the Saskatoon district. This will depend on the 
size of salaries because it is a percentage of the salaries. There is a greater increase in the lower paid 
people in order to compensate them for the increases in the cost of living, but the large increase took 
place during that high inflation period, prior to the federal AIB being introduced. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, actually the figure is much higher than that because there is one 
less employee. Now are you telling us that the wage settlements, that you are projecting for this year 
with your employees, are going to be somewhere in the 24 to 27 or 28 per cent bracket? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, I am not. I am saying that these embrace two years. The year we know about 
was in the vicinity of approximately 16 per cent. We are providing a figure that will take care of 
increases. We are not going to make commitments because we are not going to end-run the negotiators. 
The figures between 6 and 10 per cent are the only figures I can give to the House at this moment 
without showing our hole cards. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I'm not trying to hold things up, but I want to get this perfectly clear. What you 
are saying then, is that you are incorporating increases that were negotiated last year and what you are 
projecting are settlements that will be for the 1977 year. Is this correct? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — This amount, the 16 per cent, was for the 1975-76 agreement. The amount that is 
still being negotiated, belatedly, is the 1976-77 and that's the one that I am saying is not the one we can 
put a firm figure on for reasons that are obvious. 
 
Items 14, 15 and 16 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 17 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I notice the North Battleford district has an over expenditure here 
of $33,000. I also note that the increase in salaries that are being suggested here, I'll grant you there is an 
increase of one employee, but it comes out to 34 per cent. That's getting pretty high, Mr. Minister. 
Would you explain where the over expenditure in North Battleford came from, and also why there is 
such a huge increase in salaries for that particular district? Does North Battleford have some sort of a 
favoured position within your department? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I would like you to identify the $33,000 over expenditure. Where do you get that 
figure? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I get that from your Supplementary Estimates and it is account No. 16, and the 
amount is $32,970. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Fine. First of all this district was just formed  
 

1349 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

last year. The budget that was made up in early 19/76-77 has an item there of $407,320. That was the 
early 1975 wage rates. There was a staff change of three. I'm sorry, plus one, at $17,350 and that would 
bring it to the new total, plus $12,360. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — What is the $12,360 for Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The 1975 settlement was 18.3 per cent in that area. We have a round figure for the 
others. The estimated settlement this year, plus that amount, brings our estimate up to 28.3 per cent — 
that's a possible, not a definite figure, but we have to budget in that manner in order to take care of any 
eventuality when the agreements are finalized. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Would the Minister not agree that he's probably, in contrast to last year, 
allowing lots of dollars in for potential settlements? But if you were a negotiator for the SGEA 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) and you saw these kinds of dollars being budgeted 
for, wouldn't you be giving an open invitation for tremendous demands on the part of the people that you 
must negotiate with, for a settlement? Now last year we had the reverse argument. We stood here and 
said that you were not budgeting enough. And now we can't use that argument because you are certainly 
putting the dollars out. Why this change in philosophy? Are you not just inviting the negotiators for the 
SGEA, and rightly so in the interests of their membership, to simply make very, very strong demands on 
this treasury? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I think that is a point that could be raised, but my advisors doubt if the SGEA is 
going to base any of its arguments on the basis of a 1975 settlement, which is the major portion of the 
amounts we are discussing here. The same yardstick is used in the wages and salaries in all of the 
districts. They vary because it is a percentage of different sized salaries, so the percentages do come out 
somewhat differently. In this case, they came out a little higher and the low of 24 per cent, the estimated 
wage increases, are not clearly identified and we don't intend to identify them. I think this is about the 
best you can do to fully inform the House as to what the anticipated spending may be after those rather, I 
think, tardy settlements, regardless of whether it is the union or our Government negotiators who are to 
blame. We are behind with the final settlement. 
 
Item 17 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 18 
 
MR. G. N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — On this Item 18, under what area does the obtaining of 
gravel come? You are stockpiling gravel, your buying of the gravel — what area do these come under? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That purchase is done under Item 8. That is included in the $43,233,700 on page 
53, Item 8. 

1350 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. WIPF: — Okay, I didn't realize that at the time. Can I get the names of the holders, or where you 
get the names of the people that own the pits, as to where you get the gravel from? 
 
How much gravel is the Department of Highways taking off Crown land at this time from the pits? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I will get all that information, the location, the ownership of the pits and I will have 
our staff tabulate it and send it over to you. We could list any specific pits you are interested in, or do 
you want us to identify all the sources of gravel that are used in the Prince Albert district? That is a big 
chunk of north eastern Saskatchewan; it is more than one-sixth of the province. If you want those close 
to Prince Albert, the latter will require less research than if you want them all. But you can have 
whatever you want. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I would like those within a 30 mile radius of Prince Albert. Is the Department of 
Highways, at the present time, taking gravel from Crown land, from the reserve out there and using it? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I think we probably are. If there is Crown land around, it would probably be the 
most inexpensive area from which to get the gravel. As I say, I'll give you those answers and we'll 
identify them, whether they are Crown or privately owned and who the owner is. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Okay, that's good. The reason I'm asking is that I understand that there is one pit up 
there, just about finished now, from which you have been taking gravel, but the gravel is coming off the 
Crown land beside it, although you are buying it through the holder of the pit. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If you have a specific case, we would certainly be interested in it. If, in fact, we are 
buying Crown property from some individual, I certainly want to know about it immediately. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I can't supply you with that today, but I want to supply you with that on Monday. Also 
when these pits are dug out, finished, is there a policy of the Highways to restore these pits, fill them in, 
instead of having the big holes? Whose job is it to do that, is it the owner of the pit or is it the 
Department of Highways? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If it is our pit, if it is a Crown owned pit, it is landscaped for grass and restored to 
reasonable environmental standards. We do not have any control over privately owned pits. I think it is a 
question that could possibly be raised by the Department of the Environment, if it is an eyesore, visible 
from the road. But that would be an intrusion on someone's private land and I think there would 
probably be some hesitancy to order people to do something on their own property. 

1351 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman if I had a lease on Crown land from which I was selling you gravel, (I see 
your deputy over there shake his head, no) when the gravel has run out on that lease, do you not have 
any authority to instruct me to get that levelled off and reseeded? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The extent of ownership, of course, is somewhat less when it is a Crown lease but 
the owner of the Crown lease, or the lessee, is still in a position to have a say what happens on that lease 
while he owns it or is a resident on it. There are literally millions of acres in Saskatchewan in the 
southwest, of leased land which ranchers have been on for three generations. They treat that land as if it 
was theirs and behave as if it was theirs. To give you an example, they even post it, even though it is 
Crown land, during the hunting season and forbid people to enter onto it to hunt the Queen's deer. So a 
lessee has a fair bit of authority. It would have to be looked at, if it was a public nuisance. I think there 
are some regulations that some department has in order to get him to clean it up. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Then it is possible for an individual to lease Crown land from you with a gravel pit on it 
and then sell you the gravel off that lease? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There may be circumstances where a mineral lease, sometime in the past, has been 
given to him. A lessee has rights only to the surface for grazing or farming, but I would assume that if 
the department came in and took gravel from that land, the only compensation that would be due that 
lessee would be the disturbing of those acres that were used. But as far as the purchase of the gravel is 
concerned I would doubt very much, unless he had some lease that had been entered into which might 
be an exception back some years ago. 
 
I would want the specific location and the name, we would be glad to research it and give you the 
answer. But I can't answer now as this is hypothetical. Please give me the details. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, it gives me great pleasure to introduce a fine group 
of Grade Eight students from Aberdeen. They are here this morning with their teachers, Mr. Nick Peters 
and Mr. Ted Thacker and their bus driver Art Cavill. They are visiting the Legislative Building and later 
on this afternoon the RCMP Museum and so on. I am sure you will join with me in wishing them a very 
educational trip here this afternoon and being a safety man, I want to wish them a very safe journey 
home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — I wonder if I may join the Member in welcoming a very 
fine looking group of Grade Eight students who are sitting in the gallery. They come, I am sure most 
Members will be aware, from an extremely fine school unit, an exceptionally fine school. They have two 
fine teachers with them . . . 

1352 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Good . . . 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, I wouldn't want to go quite that far, but anyway we would like to welcome 
you people to the House today. We hope you find the time that you are here to be worthwhile. Like the 
Member for Kinistino, I want to wish you a safe journey home. Please take back my regards to your 
fellow students and other members of the staff. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to also welcome some of them as they 
are from my constituency, just over the highway. I hope they have a good time here and have a good, 
safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to add my best wishes 
to the group. As you may or may not know, the town of Aberdeen is my home town. The reason they are 
such a fine looking group, of course, is because the nature of the community has nothing to do with the 
educational supervision they are receiving from the top. I appreciate that Mr. Thacker is with the group. 
He was a principal of mine in some years gone by and has been with the school for a long time. I just 
want to send a hearty round of welcome to these people. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Committee of Finance — Highways & Transportation cont'd. 
 
Item 18 agreed. 
 

ITEM 19 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, would the Minister tell me the role of 
this Management Services Branch within the Department of Highways? What do they do, what is their 
function? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Chairman, funds in this Item cover the cost of personnel and other services, 
materials and equipment essential to general operations branch development and administration. This 
includes salaries for branch management, salaries for vacation and other paid time where the employee 
is not available for work, employee training to better perform in this area of responsibility, salaries and 
expenses for maintaining liaison with other development agencies and organizations. It covers system 
development. Funds in this Item cover the cost of personnel and other services, material and equipment 
essential for the development of systems. Funds in this Item as well cover the cost of personnel and 
other services, materials and equipment essential for the updating and maintenance of various 
operations. This includes general maintenance of existing computer programs where errors are detected, 
modification to existing computer programs to make them continue to fulfill the user's requirements, 
modification to existing computer 

1353 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

programs to have them continue to operate effectively when modifications are made to SaskComp, that 
is Saskatchewan Computer Corporation, further modification required to the work flow of systems when 
either volume and/or changes in purpose makes these originally designed systems decrease in 
effectiveness. 
 
Some of the major systems requiring continued updating are: — (1) Administrative accounting, this 
includes modification required for the general employment payroll, department owned equipment and 
administrative accounting systems; (2) Material testing analysis; (3) Earthward system. This system 
requires modification for changes in standards and education and training of users; (4) General 
maintenance and updating of existing systems. 
 
That should cover it. There are a few more items here but that is roughly the information, I hope that is 
the information the Member for Thunder Creek desires. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I think maybe what you have gone through in the last minute or so 
confirms the growing suspicion that many people have and that is the tremendous growth in the size of 
Government. Now you have listed a long, impressive-sounding list of duties for this department. The 
fact is that of these duties 60 per cent of your expenditure in this department goes strictly for salaries for 
22 individuals. Much of it is financial services for the Department of Highways, and I think last night we 
conclusively demonstrated that your financial services branch is a needless duplication of another 
existing government department. There were 31 employees involved there, we see 22 employees 
involved here and that is a grand total of about 53 people that I think are highly questionable, that are 
really necessary in the Department of Highways. 
 
I think as one goes down the list of your estimates and you total up exactly who is who in your 
department and who is doing what, you find out that you have expenditures listed here for 460 people. 
Of those 460 people, 262 of them are administrative people, 57 per cent of your people are in 
administration. Where are the people who are supposedly out maintaining our highway system, where 
are the people who are building our roads and please don't tell me they are private contractors because 
we just don't seem to have too many of them left any more? But, Mr. Minister you have obviously got a 
department here, management services, but what you have listed I fail to see why we need this 
department when we have an executive administration, you have a financial services branch which we 
don't need, half a million dollars there could be tossed right off the top, $572,000. There is over a 
million dollars that could be chopped right off your budget in terms of people. You've got a personnel 
branch, some of the duties which you listed for these management services, if they don't come under 
personnel I don't know what they would come under. Why do you need a personnel branch when you 
have people doing this? You've got a planning branch, why doesn't the planning branch do it? Then it 
goes on and on into a surveys branch, a work branch, public communications. Mr. Minister, you just 
listed a group of needless duplications. What are all these administrators doing here? Of your 460 people 
listed 262 are strictly administrators, where are the people who are maintaining our 

1354 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

highways, who on earth is making the system go? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to go through this once again. Our total budget is $143 
million. We are talking about the administrative management and accounting capability to handle that 
total budget. The Member for Thunder Creek ignores the challenge I offered him last night to submit the 
management of the Department of Highways to the scrutiny of an independent body so we could have 
an in-depth study done. I won't even ask him to share the cost of it but I am prepared to do that. I don't 
know whether he sets himself up as an expert in accounting. I have to rely on the advice of the people 
who have been in this department. I think, including the number of support people sitting here, that 
represents 100 years of service to the Saskatchewan Government. These are some of the chiefs in the 
various branches whom we depend on, whom the Saskatchewan taxpayers depend on. The total 
administration costs, I mentioned before, are 8 per cent of the budget. The Member asks where are the 
people that do the maintaining? There are 1,500 of them scattered through towns and villages all over 
Saskatchewan, the most decentralized department that we have anywhere in this province. Those people 
are out in the country in all the various sub districts that we have just examined and for whom we have 
given account of our spending money, for Swift Current, North Battleford, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
Yorkton and the Regina district. Each one of these has a management capability to control the funds and 
authority to spend the money, also to direct the maintenance for this far-flung department. Now the 
Member for Thunder Creek may have some good ideas. We are prepared to submit them to the scrutiny 
of qualified people outside this department; if that is what he wishes in order that we end this argument 
back and forth. I say this is the best answer that we can come up with. I say that the management of the 
Saskatchewan Department of Highways and Transportation budget is better than most and can't be 
equalled in any department anywhere across western Canada. I haven't had the chance to examine the 
ones in eastern Canada. We get work done for the Saskatchewan people, more work, more miles for less 
dollars, and I suggest to you that an 8 per cent administration cost is a good one. I see a former Minister 
of Highways, I would like to welcome the Hon. Gordon Grant to the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — And I would like to say to the young Member for Thunder Creek that t-the Hon. 
Gordon Grant had all the same staff in his department at that time. This man is a business man, and I am 
certain that the Hon. Mr. Grant, would have seen through this alleged nonsensical arrangement while he 
was Minister. He would have done away with the systems that the young Member for Thunder Creek 
suggests are now wrong, after being time-tried and efficiency proven. So, Mr. Chairman, once again I 
have done the best I can. I say I am prepared to submit the management of this department to outside 
scrutiny and have it exposed to expert questioning and analysis, which I doubt that we can get from 
either me, as the Minister, or the Member for Thunder Creek. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the Minister completely, in 

1355 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

fact I would like to go a step further. I would like to suggest that we let Gordon Grant go and sit over 
there and maybe he would know something about the department and would get on with it, because the 
Minister seems either unable, incapable or unwilling to answer questions. Now he just told me he has 
1,500 employees spread around Saskatchewan. I would like to ask you, why don't they appear in the 
budget? You have got the numbers here, you list them out 13, 31, 17, etc., add them up for yourself. 
Very quickly I added them up to 460. You say you have got 1,500 employees looking after our roads, 
building our roads, why don't they appear in this budget? You can talk around things as long as you 
want but answers like yours are why school children, who are up in the galleries, get such a nebulous 
impression about the nonsense that goes on in this Legislature. 
 
Now once again I will ask you. Where are your 1,500 plus employees? Why haven't they been budgeted 
for? And as far as this proposal of submitting it to an outside body to examine the Department of 
Highways, if your answer is indicative of what is going on in the department, and I really don't think it 
is, because I happen to share the very high regard that you hold for the people who are in this House 
with you today. But the answer that you have given me, as far as management services as it pertains to 
the other department that you have, is perhaps a little strange. Now would you tell me where these 1,500 
employees are? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Since the province was formed, the regular civil service personnel, day labor 
personnel, have never been listed. They weren't listed in 1950, in 1960, they are not being listed in 1970. 
This is the budget procedure, and I submit that if it is wrong then possibly a request ought to be made for 
an overhaul. It has never been any different. It has been an accepted procedure and if I am as short on 
capability as the Member for Thunder Creek suggests, far be it from me to change it now. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I find this very interesting, Mr. Minister, because, in the Budget Address the 
Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) bragged about how this Government has kept control on the size of 
the civil service and nobody believes his figures. He doesn't even believe them himself. We, in 
Opposition, have always tried to find out just exactly how many civil servants we have in Saskatchewan. 
You have just told us there are 1,100. You have 460 listed, but you say you have 1,500, so I will give 
you the benefit of the doubt and say 1,100. There are 1,100 who are not in these items, which I am sure 
the Minister of Finance has not included in his items. And you have just admitted that the Government is 
hiding and disguising this terrible growth of the civil service. You have done an abominable job in 
explaining the function of this management service, which based on your explanation today, is a 
needless, useless duplication. The financial services branch could also be eliminated immediately and 
consolidated as have most other Government departments. That could save the taxpayers the expense of 
53 civil servants and save us well over one million dollars. If the other departments in the Government 
that we are going to go through have examples like yours. God help the taxpayer. 

1356 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Hear, hear! God help the taxpayer if you had to make decisions. All I can say after 
that tirade, is you are dead wrong, nothing is changed, it is the same as it has always been. I will correct 
that figure. The regular summer and winter complement of the people who are in the day labor area is 
1,500. They go up to as high as 2,500 during the summer months, construction months. That will be a 
little more information for you. 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, since the students in the galleries were referred to, I 
want to compliment the Minister of Highways for the continuation of Highway No. 41 from Aberdeen to 
Alvena. I know it is very well appreciated. I also want to say a word of welcome to the former Minister 
of Highways (Mr. Grant) who is sitting behind the rail today. My feeling is that the Department of 
Highways, whether under the Liberal Government or this Government, has been a very well managed 
department. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a comment 
on the day labor services. There is no question about it, day labor services have been in the Government 
for many, many years. But there was a basic difference from 1964 — 1971. Everyone in Canada knew 
that the Government did more to hold down the growth of bureaucracy than any government on the 
North American continent, including freezes year after year after year. Nobody questioned the growth of 
the civil service. But today the growth of the bureaucracy and Government expenses are becoming a 
major issue in the inflation and tax rates, the rise of taxes in the province, and the cutback of services. 
All of a sudden we have the Minister telling us we have got 2,500 additional civil servants in the 
Department of Highways, one department, in the height of the summer construction period, and 1,500 
the rest of the year. And how many times have we had to press the Government side, trying to determine 
the total extent of the civil servants and the bureaucracy in this province without any success? All I am 
suggesting, Mr. Minister, is that that is an interesting disclosure. I think we should sit down and do a 
tabulation in this department and in every department that we come to in the Estimates. Does the 
Minister have any additional people in the Department of Highways who are paid by the Department of 
Highways, other than the 460 here, other than the 1,500 under the day labor services, and the 2,500 in 
the height of the construction period? Do you have any other contract? Do you have any other 
individuals paid by the Department of Highways in any way, shape or form, by contract or by anything 
else in this appropriation for this fiscal year? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am not surprised when the Member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) raises 
inane questions, but I am surprised when the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) does. 
He was a Minister and ought to know what was going on in the Department of Highways and in other 
departments during those seven years he was in Cabinet. I suggest to you that the same complement of 
people, both winter and summer, were in the Department of Highways during those seven years and that 
has not changed. I can provide you with the total temporary 

1357 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

employment figures. I will tell you something else. A great many of those people who were on so-called 
temporary service, worked as long as 42 years until three or four years ago. Nameless, faceless, as far as 
the Government of that day was concerned. Forty-two years service, then retiring with no pension. One 
of them, a 44 year man retired with $11,000 of which he had contributed half over his period of years in 
the Government. Not funded, no pension, for him and countless others. This has been changed. These 
people are now in the service as they should have been a long while ago. That was changed about three 
to four years ago. But the Member very well knows that he is headline hunting, talking and asking about 
a disclosure, a disclosure of information that he was well aware of. Certainly every Minister and every 
Member in the House who has been in the Cabinet knows that day labor service has not been itemized 
and listed in Estimates since 1905. No change. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Minister to please answer my question. I 
am not debating whether day labor services have been in the Government. Of course they have. What I 
am asking you for is an accurate evaluation of the growth of bureaucracy in Saskatchewan in the last 
five years. And figure after figure has been thrown out by the Public Service Commission with no 
accuracy. The press has searched for it, everybody has searched for it. All of a sudden we have been told 
there are 2,500 day labor people in one Government department. Not that there weren't just as many 
perhaps in 1971 or 1968, I am merely asking him what additional people other than day labor service 
and those listed in the Estimate book are paid by the Department of Highways? Those under contract, or 
any other way, any other temporary employment those are not included in permanent positions? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, once again the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, (Mr. MacDonald) talks 
about the 2,500 people. I said that was the employment during summer months when we are trying to 
get construction work done. At the same time that people are complaining of work not being done fast 
enough, others are saying we have too many people working. Temporary staff goes up to as high as 
2,500 in the summer, but the main complement, truck drivers, maintenance and asphalt crews, clerks, 
etc., in the various districts, are not listed in the Estimates. Regular civil servants are there, they have 
always been there. There may be, from time to time, contractual services. I will list those; I can't give 
you that off the top of my head. I will give you a total list. It is no secret, anybody can get it, a list of 
those people who are temporary. There is no change. I want to say you are wrong as well when you talk 
of this growth of bureaucracy. This department has done a lot more work in the last five years. We only 
increased because of five new programs, traffic safety division, a thousand miles more highway to take 
care of in the management area, urban assistance plan, which is spending a great deal of money, and has 
to be supervised. All of those, and others. The urban transit assistance needs supervision. We have only 
employed 18 more people in the regular service since I have been the Minister, since 1972. The others 
remain very close to the same numbers, in the maintenance and day labor area. 

1358 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I understand from the Minister he has given me an undertaking 
to provide a complete up-to-date list. I will ask him for that as of July 30, 1976. So that will be the 
height of the construction period, and that will be an accurate interpretation of all people paid by the 
Department of Highways in any way, shape or form, whether it be day labor, any kind of temporary 
employment, under contract, whatever it may be as long as they are paid from the appropriation of the 
Department of Highways. I will look forward to that. I can appreciate that that may take a short period 
of time/ for his officials may take a day or two a week, and I will appreciate receiving that as soon as 
possible. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I just want to know, are you including those working for contractors? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I am not talking about a contract that has been let. I am talking about 
individuals whose services are under contract to the Department of Highways. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I will do a little more than that. I will get them for some years back as well. 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Highways brought up the point that 
there are many faithful employees of the past on low pensions, and I agree completely. But some of 
these gentlemen who were pensioned off with low pensions, during their working period, were promised 
by your Government, and I believe by the past Liberal Government, that at the time of retirement they 
could have this money out in cash. Their understanding was that they could have their money out in a 
lump sum, with interest. Now we have people retired from the Department of Highways who want to do 
a little something, for example, they want to get into a store and under the rules that are now in place, 
which they were not told about, and they insist they were not told about, they can't get this money out 
even without interest. All they want is their money back. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — When the Public Service Commission comes up, would you ask at that time? 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, may I have leave of the House once more to 
introduce a group of students. 
 
I should like to introduce a fine group of 45 Grade Eight students from Cudworth School. They are here 
today with their teacher, Shelley Thomas. 
 
You know that coming from Cudworth is a long drive. I am sure that their trip here this afternoon will 
be a very educational one. If they haven't had dinner, we will have dinner a little later on. I am sure that 
you will all join with me to wish them a very educational stay here. Being traffic 

1359 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

safety year, I want to wish them a very safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Committee of Finance (cont'd) — Highways & Transportation 
 
MR. G. N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — What was the last answer that you gave? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The last answer that I gave was in answer to the question of Mr. Larter's which 
should be asked when the Public Service Commission estimates are under consideration. I said there 
were people retiring/when I became the Minister, who had worked on so-called temporary service for as 
long as 44 years and they are not on a pension today. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 20 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, just one thing I should like to mention on this survey and I believe 
this is where it would come under. 
 
The Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) is not here. I believe the Member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson) mentioned the other day that we call this section, at the junction of Highway No. 13 and 39, 
through Weyburn, the million dollar mile. It took so long to complete and the design on that corner was 
one of the most fantastic designs I have ever seen in my life. It had Highway No. 13 coming in on a 
curve and I believe there has been at lease one fatality on that road already. The road was just 
resurveyed and redesigned and it is still a dog's breakfast going into that corner. I am just afraid that 
unless there is a new approach into Weyburn, on that intersection, a stranger coming along that road can 
get himself into a terrible amount of trouble. And even though it has been redesigned, and you have 
spent thousands of dollars again, it is still a very, very bad intersection. I just want to bring this to the 
Department of Highway's attention. I believe that all the people travelling that road, as often as we do, 
will tell you exactly the same thing. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We will agree with that, it is probably not the best. It is not the worst either. We 
have more accidents on other intersections. It is under constant surveillance and our people did the best 
they could with the situation that exists there. We have discussed the problem with the city of Weyburn. 
I can only report that there is ongoing surveillance on that road. If we can find better answers we will be 
building whatever safety measures we can into that intersection. 
 
I mentioned the Traffic Safety Division that we have in our department, the first one in Canada. We set 
it up three years ago and it is totally dedicated to checking out areas which are accident prone and trying 
to find solutions. Some of the solutions are very expensive, a three million dollar interchange might do 
the job. But short of that we might not be able to come up with any answers. 

1360 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

There will be another $11,000, my deputy informs me, spent there on signs again this year. We are 
doing the best that we can. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, at this point, since we seem to be on that subject, I shall perform a 
task for the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg), which is becoming rather common for me to 
look after his constituency business, because of my proximity. I should like to comment on the junction 
to No. 1 Highway, which comes in on 9th Avenue North in Moose Jaw. I am sure the Minister, and I do 
not intend to make this a political thing, I am sure the Department of Highways is aware over the past 
ten years of the number of fatalities that have occurred at that intersection. I appreciate the problems of 
the Department of Highways to correct that intersection. It is a terribly costly thing and we are probably 
talking in terms of three or four million dollars. But I ask the Minister and his department to please look 
at that intersection. It is just something terrible. I am very familiar with it as I drive it a couple of times a 
day and you almost take your life in your hands when you are either crossing that highway or coming in 
on No. 1. I would ask the department to take a look at that and while I realize that a three million dollar 
horseshoe is out of the question, there must be something that we can do to improve the safety factor 
there. 
 
This is on behalf of Moose Jaw North, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am sure that the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North would thank you for 
performing that task. Yes, it is another one of the troublesome areas. I can remember one accident there 
where a group of young people drove out there at an estimated 70 miles per hour. There is no way that 
you can prevent those kinds of accidents. I don't know what they would have done had there been an 
overpass there. They would have probably gone over. Those are the unavoidable, unfortunate accidents 
that seem to occur once in a while. 
 
Since we have slowed down the traffic, however, with the. flashing lights, the incidence of accidents in 
the last two years is nil. I don't know of any. But I agree with the Member that it is a hazard. If there is 
anything more that we can do, if anyone has any suggestions for improvements, we would be pleased to 
listen to them. 
 
The interchange, as I mentioned to the Member for Estevan, would cost three to four million dollars and 
is probably the only guaranteed solution. 
 
MR. J. L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Chairman, just on that point, the Minister is 
probably well aware that there has been a considerable amount of correspondence drawn from the 
administration in Moose Jaw and from myself in regard to that intersection and some other areas in that 
particular area of Moose Jaw. 
 
I wonder if the Minister could give some assurance at this time that there will be an ongoing study made 
of that intersection in co-operation with the administration in Moose Jaw in 
 
 

1361 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

order to alleviate the very serious problem that is definitely evident at that point? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, we are prepared to co-operate with the elected officials of the city of Moose 
Jaw any way we possibly can in order to save lives, especially during Safety '77. 
 
Item 20 agreed to. 
 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES — VOTE 17 
 

Items 1, 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 

TOTAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, at this point I should like to point out to the Minister that these 
capital expenditures for this year are showing a mere one per cent increase over last year. I think we 
brought down a Budget which has vastly increased percentage-wise in Government expenditures over 
last year. 
 
I should like to ask the Minister that in view of the fact that our highway system is probably the most 
important thing to rural Saskatchewan because of the vast distances of this province, does the Minister 
think that he has been fair to people who don't live in a concentrated urban area like Regina, Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, etc., do you really think that you are being fair to the people that live out in rural 
Saskatchewan, with a paltry increase in capital expenditures of one per cent? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, that is again, a matter of conjecture on the part of the Member. The dollars, I 
agree, are not a large increase, but I will give him the assurance the great bulk of this money is going to 
be spent on the three, four and five series of highways in this province. The emphasis on super highways 
is going to be far less than it used to be. We will be building more miles of road into the areas that he 
mentioned with this money. I will also assure the House that this year with a drop in the inflation rate, 
construction economy and efficiencies, I guarantee that we will build more miles of road and pave more 
miles of road than we did last year. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, you have mentioned a drop in the four-lane highways. I don't 
know where you have been building these highways, these four-lane highways. I don't know how you 
could drop it much further than what you have during your tenure as Minister of Highways. You 
completed a little stretch I believe between Valjean and Secretan. The four-laning of that highway to 
Saskatoon, probably as heavily travelled a route as we have in this province, has been proceeding at a 
ridiculously low rate and I see nothing wrong with four-laning the main arterial route in this province. It 
makes common sense from a safety point of view as well as a means of expediting transportation 
through a very vast and large province. 

1362 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

Mr. Minister, again I contend to you that the overall gross Budget of this province has continued to go 
up and up and up and we are now spending up to $1.5 billion. If you can only get us a one per cent 
increase in capital expenditures out of a $1.5 billion Budget, you are getting clobbered when you go into 
those tough Budget negotiating sessions with your fellow Ministers. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have to get on the step because rural Saskatchewan is getting the shaft, because of 
your incompetence in these negotiating sessions. 
 
Would the Minister tell us, of his capital expenditures of last year of $83,765,000, how much of that 
figure was actually spent and on what date was your last contract let? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I can't accurately answer that question either on the last Budget or on the total 
amounts of money. As I mentioned earlier, these final bills come in at the end of the fiscal year, also 
there is a carry over and this will have to be calculated. We assume, as I said, that we are within our 
budget and we have kept the programs in reasonable shape. The Member can criticize the progress, but I 
should like to read into the records the number of four lanes that have been built since 1961-62. In 1961-
62 there were 37.67 miles; 1962 — 1.25 miles; 1963-64 — nil; 1964-65 — nil; 1965-66 — 2.61 miles; 
1966-67 — 27.83 miles; 1967-68 — 30.40 miles; 1968-69 — 46.43 miles; 1969-70 — 18.18 miles; 
1970-71 — 14.87 miles; 1971-72 — 30.89 miles; 1972-73 — 47.06 miles; 1973-74 — 22.50 miles; 
1974-75 — nil; 1975-76 — 49.63 miles. 
 
Now if you average the miles added over those years and if you take from 1964-65 on to 1971, the 
Member's assumption that more miles of four-laning was done in that time, is just not correct. Even with 
that paltry amount he mentioned on Highway No. 1, there were more miles built per year than there 
were in the previous three or four years, as the Member for Morse found out when he got into a debate 
over that. 
 
I am not suggesting that we are moving fast enough I am suggesting that the No. 11 requires a great deal 
of attention. I would suggest to the Member for Thunder Creek that even though it was necessary to 
four-lane between Swift Current and Moose Jaw, it was more necessary east of Regina. The choice was 
wrong because the traffic count was far higher, and still is in the Indian Head area. I am sorry your 
seatmate is not with you. I am saying the choice was not based on traffic count west of Moose Jaw when 
it was initiated, and was wrong at that time. There is certainly a real need for extension to the east of us. 
There is a need for further construction between here and Saskatoon; there is need for construction of 
that kind of highway in other parts of Saskatchewan as well. I think we are doing pretty well. 
 
You like to refer to the Province of Alberta. Your colleague from Shaunavon (Mr. Anderson) raised that 
question and granted that the road, even the two lanes between Swift Current and the Alberta border, are 
in far better shape than they are when you drive from there to Calgary into the land of the 

1363 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

blue-eyed Arabs, I say we take no backseat on the Trans-Canada. We have 50 per cent of Trans-Canada 
four-laned. Your suggestion is wrong, that we are not doing well, that we are not getting our share of the 
Budget. I think we are providing a service to Saskatchewan in highways, second to none when you 
consider the miles of roads that we have to provide. The complaints that are coming in (and you get 
complaints a lot oftener than you get compliments) nobody runs after a bus once they are on it – I 
suggest that the complaints are far less than they were three or four years ago, the written, spoken and 
telephoned complaints, as near as we can record them. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, you still haven't answered the question on how much of your 
capital expenditures last year were actually spent. You have a goodly number of people with you this 
morning, and I am sure that they can provide that figure. I doubt that very much road building is going 
on at this point in time. I think you can come up with that figure. But as far as your job and as far as the 
Department of Highways is concerned, frankly the job that it is doing stinks, because there is no reason 
that this Trans-Canada shouldn't be four-laned from one end of this province to the other. It should be 
done as quickly as possible. There is no reason why this road from Regina to Saskatoon shouldn't be 
four-laned as quickly as possible, and there is no reason why that road which goes from Saskatoon 
through to the Alberta border into Lloydminster shouldn't be four-laned. Certainly you can't do it 
tomorrow and nobody suggests that you should, but you should be down there and you should be 
working on them, because four-lane highways on your main arterial roads are, with the kind of vehicles 
that we've got, and the necessary mass transit that we have to have, necessary as a safety factor. Time is 
becoming more and more important in a person's life. What sort of dollar value do you place on your 
time? A four-lane highway expedites that. Time is becoming important, not only to farmers, but to 
everybody who is on an hourly rate. The four-laning of the highways is not a luxury, it is becoming a 
necessity. Again, I will ask the Minister, how much of your budget for capital expenditures did you 
spend last year? I can't believe that you cannot come up with a figure right now. I suggest you come up 
with it. The figure you are proposing this year, again proves that you have lost out badly in the battle for 
the dollars in the overall global budget for this province for the coming year. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I have tried to answer the question as best I can. I listed; we have completed miles 
and miles and miles of roads . . . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I mean dollars, never mind roads. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — . . . The dollars, I have told you, that until the final year-end accounting is done that 
I cannot answer that accurately and I do not propose to make a guess. You will be able to get that 
information in the following year, but I cannot now. I will be glad to give them to you at the end, but I 
cannot give you an accurate answer now. There is no accounting procedure that is going to provide 
them. If you want to pursue it further – I 

1364 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

don't know what else I can tell you. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That is unadulterated nonsense. You have got the gall to walk into this House 
with your estimates and you can't oven tell us what you spent for capital expenditures last year. Who are 
you trying to kid? Now you can fiddle around with telling us how many miles have been built from 1971 
through 1975 and yet you can't tell us how much of last year's budget was spent. How much road 
building have you been doing this winter? Not very much, if any whatsoever. Now I can't believe that 
you cannot send some official from your department out of here and have an answer in five or ten 
minutes, and until you do, we are simply not going on. You are just refusing to provide us with that 
information. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am refusing to provide an answer that is impossible to give. The accounting 
procedures will simply not allow me to come up with an accurate answer and I am not going to provide 
an inaccurate answer to this House. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well now, isn't that strange! He can give an accurate answer on what he has to 
spend up in North Battleford; he's got some things down here on the Supplementary Estimates; he seems 
to be able to provide accurate answers there. He seemed to be able to provide what he considered 
accurate answers on everything else which has come up, but then we get to the capital expenditures and 
all of a sudden, we are drawing a blank. Now come on, who are you trying to kid? Send somebody out 
and get that answer right now or else get out of that chair. 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: — Subvote 17 — agreed? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — All right, we can do it this way if you want. Would the Minister care to break 
down that $74,712? What are you spending it for? We have a lot of these coming up. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — It's in front of you, I've tabled it in the House. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — How did you arrive at this figure? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Through the Estimates. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Of the Urban Surface Transportation, how did your department decide which 
town is getting it, and which one wasn't getting it? Give us a little further explanation as to why you 
chose town A over town B, etc., other than the fact of what political party may be representing that 
particular area. If I may point out, in Thunder Creek, which is certainly not an NDP stronghold, and 
highly unlikely ever to become one, that last year we got exactly nothing. Oh, we got a little finished on 
our four-lane highway, other than that we didn't get one nickel spent in terms of capital expenditures in 
the 

1365 
 



 
March 25, 1977  Committee of Finance 
 

Thunder Creek constituency and you can go on and on and on. 
 
Now you note that if you break some of this down, many of the areas that are represented by NDP 
MLAs seem to do reasonably well, so would the Minister tell us how do you justify your choice of A 
over B? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — When we get requests within the policy we process them and they are estimated, 
the programs are delivered accordingly, according to our Urban Transportation Policy, and certainly 
abided by. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Is this the last vote? Well there are a couple of questions which have not been 
answered. 
 
Would the Minister tell me what it costs for grading, or how many miles were graded this year — in the 
past construction year — how many miles were paved, what was the cost to move a yard of dirt this year 
as compared to the year previous? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I answered that question last night, but I shall repeat. Grading, we completed 299 
miles, paving — 390, oil treatments — 243 miles. Average cost per yard — earth work, 61 cents per 
yard. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Would the Minister care to tell the House of the figure last year, $83,765,000, 
would you care to tell us exactly how much you stole out of that capital fund to put into general 
expenditures, maintenance and items that were not obviously a capital expenditure, because very 
obviously the Minister can provide that figure, his people can provide it. The Minister is afraid to 
provide it. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — If the Member for Thunder Creek knew anything about the financial arrangements 
of the province, you would know that you can't vire money from capital into ordinary operating. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The question is again hardly worth/of an answer. I object, Mr. Chairman, to the 
Member suggesting that money was stolen and I demand that he withdraw that now. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I shall rephrase the question. Shall we say "removed" then? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I might add, until the Minister provides that figure we are going to be on Highway's 
Estimates for quite some time. I suggest to this House that for some strange reason the Minister is afraid 
to provide that figure. He knows full well that he can acquire that figure very, very quickly if he wants 
to. He obviously does not. I challenge him to provide it. He can do it, everybody else seems to be able to 
do it, but somehow on this particular item they just don't seem to be able to come 

1366 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 25, 1977 

 

up with it. However, I think we can give him the weekend. Perhaps it's a good idea. He and his people 
have the rest the afternoon to go and dig that figure out, which will take them about a couple of minutes, 
and, therefore, I would call it 1:00 o'clock. 
 
Progress was reported and Committee given leave to sit again. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 o'clock p.m. 
 
 
 

1367 
 


