


























































Hansard: March 31, 1977


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Thursday, March 31, 1977. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o'clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, if I can take a minute, I'd like through you to 
introduce to Members of the Legislative Assembly, the Grade Eight students from Grant Road School 
which is in my seat. They are in the company of Mr. Short and Mr. Freitag. I am sure Members will 
want to welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this Assembly, I 
should like to introduce a group of 25 Grade Eight students from the Rosetown Division III School. This 
is the third group, Mr. Speaker, that has come through from the Rosetown Division III School and I 
know that all of the Assembly will join with me today in welcoming them here. 
 
They are accompanied by Mr. DeBois and Mrs. Berntson, who happens to be the aunt of the Member 
from Souris-Cannington and also the wife of a very good friend of mine who shares the superintendency 
role in Rosetown. I will be meeting with them later this afternoon, a few minutes after Question Period. I 
ask everyone to welcome them here and I am sure you join with me in wishing them a very safe trip 
home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and the Members of 
the Assembly, a group of 22 students from Allan School with their teacher, Don Federko, sitting in the 
Speaker's Gallery. I know we all hope they have a good day and an enjoyable time in the Session and I 
will meet with them later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I only wanted to include my welcome 
to that of Mr. Cameron to the students from Grant Road School. It is very close to my constituency and I 
know the families of some of the children who are here and the teachers, and I am sure the Members 
would welcome them on my behalf as well. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear; 
 
MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I too, would like to welcome the 22 
Grade Twelve students from Allan School who are accompanied by one of the best physical education 
teachers in the province, 

1521 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

Mr. Don Federko. I understand that they came in last night; I presume they had an enjoyable evening. I 
understand that they have been, or will be visiting various places of interest in Regina, and I think it fits 
in very nicely, their coming to visit the Legislature, with their Grade Twelve social studies course. It is 
my wish that you enjoy yourselves and that you have a good trip on your way home. I too, will be 
meeting with them when they leave the Speaker's Gallery. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and to this 
Legislature, 47 Grade Seven students from St. Edwards School. I believe they are sitting in the west 
gallery and they are accompanied by their teachers, if I can pronounce this correctly, and I apologize if I 
don't, Mr. Drabyk and Mrs. Mertworth. I can tell by the sounds in the gallery that perhaps I didn't 
pronounce them correctly. I hope you have a very enjoyable afternoon in the Legislature and that you 
find it informative. I look forward to meeting you later on in the afternoon in the rotunda area. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. N. E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join in the welcome to the 
teachers and students from the Allan School and Grant Road School. Both of the teachers, Mr. Freitag 
and Mr. Federko, are former students of mine. I am very pleased that they have brought their students 
here to the Legislature to see the democratic process in action. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. H. LANGE (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce a group of 25 
Grade Eight students seated in the west gallery. They are from St. Oliver School in Radville, 
Saskatchewan, which is about the centre of my constituency. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Reifferscheid, and their bus driver, Mr. Holzer. 
 
On behalf of the Members, I should like to welcome them to the Chamber this afternoon. I hope that 
they enjoy their stay and we will be meeting with them when they leave the gallery. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. LANGE: — With the indulgence of the House, I should like also to introduce a group seated in the 
Speaker's Gallery immediately above me. They are the unit board from Radville School Unit, Radville, 
Saskatchewan, who have come to Regina today to meet with myself and the Minister of Education to try 
and ameliorate some problems that we have in the Radville unit. 
 
In the gallery are board members, Mr. William Tatarliou, Mr. Feldon Lowse, vice-chairman, Mr. Jack 
Scott, chairman of the board, Mr. Bill Kozak, school superintendent, Mr. Jim MacIntosh 

1522 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

and board secretary, Mr. Ken Tebb. 
 
I would like to welcome them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN-JAPANESE TRADE 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister in charge of Industry and Commerce regarding remarks that he made to a 
Saskatchewan-Japanese joint meeting when he expressed interest in increasing Japanese trade. I wonder 
if the Minister would comment on the fact that we continue to maintain a Pacific Rim office in Regina at 
a cost far less than the cost of maintaining the European trade office, though we do massively more trade 
to the Pacific Rim countries than we do trade with European countries. I wonder if the Minister would 
agree that the European office should perhaps be closed and a meaningful office opened in Japan. 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I have to disagree with the 
Member for Regina Wascana. The European office serves more than the purpose of looking for trade 
from Europe; it looks at other countries as well. I think it has a meaningful place in that area. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, would the Minister be prepared to table in the 
House at some later time, the trade figures. I believe the Minister would agree that the trade figures 
would show that the $66,000 that we spent on the Japanese Office represents far more trade than the 
amount in the European Offices. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order: The Member for Kindersley. 
 

PRIVATE OIL COMPANIES 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce. He is aware that the Government has announced new initiatives to 
encourage oil and gas exploration and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce is somewhat involved in 
the SaskPower and other development fields for energy, gas exploration particularly. Would the 
Minister indicate whether any changes are proposed to overcome the problem that private companies 
have in competing with Government operations in that the private companies pay both provincial and 
federal taxes and it is difficult for them to compete with organizations such as SaskPower? Are you 
prepared to announce any changes? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is a question that would have to be directed to the Minister 
of Saskatchewan Power. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the Minister not 

1523 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

consider it in the best business interest of the province to have a healthy industry and in that light is it 
not a problem that concerns your particular departments? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister will have a change in some policy later on, and I 
think maybe something may be announced. But I think he should direct that question to the Minister. 
 

JUVENILES IN NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — A question for the Minister in charge of northern 
services. I have with me a document purporting to be a photocopy of an internal memo within the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, based on an investigation by one Lynda Hope and Verna Peidt, 
dated February 2nd, 1977. The document raises new allegations over and above those found in the 
police report. My question is this. You said yesterday, Mr. Minister, that your department is to set 
standards and licensing and this document indicates that Camp Ehrlo was not in compliance with your 
regulations. How do you explain the failure to ensure that this camp was not even in compliance with 
your own regulations? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I think it is 
unfortunate that the Conservative Members pursue this line of questioning. This item was publicized and 
publicly dealt with almost one month ago. The information in the press and available to the public on 
that occasion was that there were certain conditions existing in the northern camps that required 
investigation by the RCMP and the department. We closed the camp under instructions from the 
department upon investigation of those situations. Now it has been closed for about a month and here the 
Conservative Members are raising the issue now in the House. Investigations by the RCMP have been 
undertaken and they will be reporting their findings to the Attorney General. The only conceivable 
reason why the Conservatives raise this issue now is to try and gain some cheap politics out of the sad 
situation which exists with boys who are sent to those camps in the north rather than go to the 
penitentiary. There is no other reason, no other logical reason why the Conservative Members now raise 
those questions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, the final paragraph of the report filed in your department says, "Indeed, 
the boys would be better off in penitentiaries," but be that as it may. Yesterday you told this House that, 
and I quote, in relation to these camps referred to; 
 
They are both privately owned, operated and financed. There is no relationship to the DNS. 
 
I refer this Assembly and the Minister to the Public Accounts for 1976, in which Klahonie got $116,916. 
Those are your records, Mr. Minister, and Ranch Erhlo — $150,000. Do you still tell this House that 
you have nothing to do with the funding of these camps? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, again all the Member is attempting to do 

1524 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

is to gain some cheap politics. That is the only reason why he is raising this line of questioning now. It is 
evident that where we have youthful persons who have committed some criminal offences or some 
criminal acts, who would otherwise be sent to the penitentiaries or to jails, there are these wilderness 
camps which do, at the time of the court hearing, make a plea to the judge that they take the boys and try 
to work with them. On that basis, we pay if these youthful offenders go to these camps under the 
auspices of Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, we then pay the daily rate. Otherwise we have no 
relationship so far as the ownership or the operation of the camps is concerned. It is unfortunate, indeed. 
There are in this community, in this city, very honourable citizens who donate their time to the boards of 
these various camps, who are now being criticized by the Conservative Members opposite. 
 
It is unfortunate that because of one or two unfortunate situations arising because of hired staff, that 
these people now want to drag around through the public, both the students and the people who donate 
their time in assisting young men in being rehabilitated in some other way than through the penitentiary 
system. 
 

BRIQUETTE PLANT AT MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry 
and Commerce, the Minister in charge of SEDCO. 
 
He was asked a question the other day on the announcement of the briquette plant at Moose Jaw. What 
security had been taken for SEDCO in respect of its loan of some $200,000 and I wonder if the Minister 
has that information for us now? 
 
In addition, would the Minister indicate whether SEDCO took an equity position in the company, and if 
so, to what extent? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the second question first, the equity question, no. To answer 
the first question, I am sorry that is confidential information and if you put that on notice of question, I 
will get the information. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister would indicate to us at 
what interest rate the funds were loaned to the company and what is the amortization period of the loan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I don't have that; that will come up in Crown Corporations. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — My last supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Why did SEDCO not take an equity 
position in this company? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Well, Mr. Speaker, SEDCO doesn't take an equity position in every company that 
they help out and they loan money to. 
 

EXPORT OF CATTLE TO PACIFIC RIM COUNTRIES 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like 

1525 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

to direct a question to the Minister in charge of Industry and Commerce, specifically in charge of Sask 
Trading Corporation. 
 
I am sure that the Minister is aware that last year in a very highly publicized trip, Sask Trading 
Corporation sent the director and quite an entourage to the Pacific Rim countries, specifically China. At 
that time it was indicated that within a year there would be very significant results in terms of exports of 
beef cattle and other products to the Pacific Rim countries, specifically to China. 
 
In that many of our breeders are preparing to sell these cattle, would the Minister tell us what progress 
has been made? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I have to tell the Hon. Member that I can't give him any of that 
information at this time because I just don't have it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Might I very respectfully ask the 
Minister why he doesn't have that information and is he, in fact, aware that Sask Trading Corporation is 
under his jurisdiction? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I am very well aware that Sask Trade is under my jurisdiction but I 
don't have that information. 
 

JUVENILES IN NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 
responsible for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You indicated yesterday with regard to the police report that basically you had nothing to do with it and 
the department had nothing to do with these so-called wilderness camps. And at the same time you said 
that it was being investigated by the Government; the Attorney General would answer. The police 
reports indicate that there was one child seriously injured a year ago last January. Can you tell us when 
you turned the matter over to the Department of the Attorney General for investigation? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Members can pursue this questioning if they 
wish. It is indeed unfortunate. He said in his question the information he is seeking happened over a year 
or one year and a half ago; I believe that is what you said. 
 
Here you are supposed to be addressing a current question on a current issue. I am saying that when the 
information comes in from the RCMP, regarding the Wilderness Challenge Camp operated by Ranch 
Ehrlo, that when that information came in on the 1st of February, 1977, that on February 2, 1977, .the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan dispatched to that camp its officials and they remained at that 
camp until it was closed short days thereafter. I will be investigating the allegations which have been 
made. The RCMP will be making their report to the Attorney General. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if they continue to do this, they are simply casting reflections on those honourable 
people who are 

1526 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

the members of the boards of those camps, who are attempting to do a job on behalf of boys who need 
some assistance, those who come from divided homes or no homes at all. All that they are attempting to 
do is drag around through the public, those people who are attempting to do a job on behalf of the boys. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. I think the Minister is aware that Ranch Ehrlo 
was very concerned about the allegations made in the admissions of beatings and brutality. But in 
November of 1975 the Human Rights Commission of the Province of Saskatchewan, after investigating 
Camp Klahonie, licensed by your department, suggested and recommended that set standards for 
disciplinary action be established. Can you advise this Assembly when those set standards for 
disciplinary action were established by your department and the basic terms of those disciplinary 
standards? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the Member is now talking about a different camp entirely. He is 
talking about Camp Klahonie which some six, or eight, or ten months, or a year previous to this issue, 
was raised publicly and dealt with publicly and reported on publicly and Camp Klahonie's licence was 
also suspended. It was not re-issued and it has only been re-issued on a temporary basis, when they met 
with the criteria or the policy relating to the operation of the camp. I can table for the Member, if he 
wants the policy and the guidelines governing the camp operations. They didn't reopen Camp Klahonie 
until those provisions were met. 
 

BRIQUETTE PLANT AT MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, additional question of the Minister in charge of 
SEDCO. You indicated a moment ago, Mr. Minister, that the loan arrangement between SEDCO and the 
briquette plant in Moose Jaw as to security you took, is confidential. Can you tell us whether you intend 
to register your security documents in the Land Titles Office and in the Corporate Securities 
Registration Office, in which event documents would then become public? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, if that is the policy of 
SEDCO, that is probably what will happen. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well, may I ask you by way of supplementary, how else do you intend to protect 
your interest and your security if you don't register in Land Titles and in Corporation Securities 
Registration? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, again, if that is the policy of SEDCO, that is what will happen. 
 

CENTRAL VEHICLE AGENCY 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Government Services (Mr. Shillington) in charge of the Central Vehicle Agency. Is the 
department presently engaged 

1527 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

in studies or a survey related to the operation of the Central Vehicle Agency vehicles in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — The answer to that is No. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Would the Minister not deem it advisable in 
the current costs of operation per mile of vehicles, not only government vehicles but private vehicles as 
well, that it would be a wise procedure on the part of your department to probably look at some savings. 
And the question is, is your department considering the purchasing of the smaller compact car for the 
various operations in the province? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member asked two questions. Would a survey be 
advisable? The answer to that lies in the fact that we have already done a study of Central Vehicle 
Agency. We have had the report in and are on the way to implementing it. There have been some 
problems with Central Vehicle Agency, by and large, problems which we inherited from the 
administration previous to ours. However, we do have a report, we are implementing it and within a few 
weeks it will be fully implemented and I think our problems will be in hand with Central Vehicle 
Agency. 
 
You ask if we are considering buying more cars. We are getting rid of cars rather than buying them. We 
won't be buying cars for awhile. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My question was the smaller compact car. The 
final question I have for you, Mr. Minister, is there not some possibility or something in your report that 
will lead this Assembly, and indeed the people of Saskatchewan, to assume there could be some sharing 
in the cars in the operation of the cars by the various departments? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, they do now. It is a fairly complex operation. Some cars are assigned to 
a department, some are shared, and that process goes on now. 
 

BRIQUETTE PLANT AT MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I should also like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Industry (Mr. Vickar). There has been a kind of confusion on this side of the 
House in relation to your answers. Could you please tell me what is the policy of SEDCO in protecting 
the taxpayers' money in relation to the security it takes? Could you tell me, do you take a debenture, do 
you not register, do you have a private concern in case of bankruptcy? What is the policy of SEDCO? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 

WARMAN LAND DEVELOPMENT 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I should like to direct a question as well to the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar). I asked the 

1528 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

Minister of Industry some time ago, some questions about the Warman Land Development and whether 
Eldorado was proceeding and I asked those questions, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the announcement that 
the Minister, who just made an announcement to the House from his seat, where he said that probably 
Amok would be allowed to proceed with their development notwithstanding the findings of the Bayda 
Inquiry. I ask the Minister of Industry and Commerce whether the Eldorado Development is proceeding 
and whether any papers have been signed to allow Eldorado in a preliminary way to proceed with their 
development in the Warman area? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any 
signatures, any signing of documents at all. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, has Eldorado been advised that it is unlikely that they will be 
able to proceed at the Warman area or has Eldorado been told that if they wait until this formality of the 
Bayda Inquiry is resolved you are sure things will go ahead? What is the state of your negotiations? I 
can't imagine that Eldorado is just sitting waiting hopefully. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no dialogue whatsoever with Eldorado at this time. 
 

JUVENILES IN NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister in 
charge of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). I wonder if the Minister considers it incidental that 
the Government of Manitoba sent four children to these camps in 1976, and inside of two months they 
received only two of those children back. One had committed suicide and one has never been found, 
disappeared and has never been found. They were so concerned that they brought these people back to 
Manitoba; their population was decreasing so fast. I wonder would you call this incidental? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order 
 

BRIQUETTE PLANT AT MOOSE JAW 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I have an additional question of the Minister in 
charge of SEDCO (Mr. Vickar) with respect to the briquette plant located in Moose Jaw. We will see if 
we can get some additional information. You indicated that when the plant was opened a day or two ago 
that SEDCO had sold that land to the company for $45,000. Can you tell us whether you have an 
appraisal of the land or whether any other department or agency of Government has an appraisal of the 
land that you sold to the briquette company? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — I can't truthfully answer that question as 
to whether SEDCO had had an appraisal on that property before it was sold. I think that was the 
question. 

1529 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

MR. CAMERON: — Well, by way of supplementary, would you undertake to determine whether there 
was an appraisal done by your department for SEDCO? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, I will see that that is done for you. 
 

SEDCO — MEANING OF 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar) and in charge of SEDCO Since the Minister has 
assumed the position of Minister in charge of SEDCO, I wonder if the Minister has had consultation 
with his staff, that he may possibly have learned what the letters SEDCO may possibly stand for. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 

IPSCO'S DISSATISFACTION WITH OPERATION RECYCLE 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister in 
charge of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar). It has very recently come to my attention that IPSCO is 
dissatisfied with their involvement in Operation Recycle, because of the cost involved in picking up the 
cars as they get further out from Regina, and I would ask the Minister whether IPSCO has expressed 
those concerns to his department? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — If I get the question right, Mr. Speaker, 
you are suggesting that IPSCO was not happy with the Recycle Program. From the information I get, I 
don't think that is quite true. I understand that IPSCO is quite happy with Operation Recycle. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Supplementary, would the Minister not agree that IPSCO has expressed concern 
about the cost involved in picking these vehicles out when they come in from more than 200 or 300 
miles away? They feel that the cost is too high in picking them up. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I think for the benefit of the Member in asking that question, in a short 
time there will be an announcement made with reference to that particular question, which might prove 
to the Member that his assumptions are completely out of order. It is not true. 
 

JUVENILES IN NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Question to the Minister responsible for the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). You have been evading the earlier questions and I wonder why your 
department failed to implement the recommendations of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
which were made after their investigation of another camp, of which we are well aware, Camp 
Klahonie? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the department did 
not fail to implement the recommendations as far as I know in Camp Klahonie. I want, 

1530 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

Mr. Speaker, to read for the benefit of the Members across the way a part of the letter which was tabled 
yesterday, which they tabled yesterday, because he chose only to read those parts of it that were the 
depreciating part. Let me read from the letter by Maxwell, Inspector Maxwell. I quote from the letter 
which he tabled yesterday: 
 

No charges are contemplated at this time because of the difficulty of providing proof to the 
satisfaction of the court. Many of the boys who were subject to assault are no longer inmates of the 
camp and may no longer be in the province. Some of the counsellors have been discharged and their 
whereabouts are unknown. Additionally, these boys are committed to these camps as a last resort. 
They have been involved with criminal law and may in some cases be beyond rehabilitation. Their 
memories of dates and events are uncertain and their credibility as witnesses may be very low. 

 
But I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that when the information came to the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan they acted immediately and the camp almost one month ago has been closed and the 
license suspended until they can meet the provisions of the guidelines which govern the camp. 
 

POTASH EXPORT SALES 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I should like to direct one final question to the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Order, order, he had . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is the Point of Order? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, you know when you start calling Points of Order, Mr. Minister, 
we will listen to you. 
 
The department's annual report indicated that potash sales were up $10 million, potash exports, and I 
think that is very misleading information because everyone in your department, everyone in the 
Province of Saskatchewan knows that potash sales are very dramatically down in 1976. Could you 
please inform the House what is the extent of the decrease in the export of potash for the last fiscal year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, that question again, will have to go to the Minister in charge of the 
Potash Corporation as I am not aware of that. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

COMMUNICATIONS CONFERENCE IN EDMONTON 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
make a statement to the House on the Communications Conference which took place yesterday in 
Edmonton. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

1531 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to begin by saying, Mr. Speaker, that the tone that this particular 
conference was, I think, largely accurately reported in the press. It was much more conciliatory than 
certainly was the case with the last Communications Ministers Conference. I think the Federal 
Government came to the conference in a much more conciliatory mood. They, I think, took pains to 
reach a consensus with the provinces. The provinces were, I think, Mr. Speaker, accordingly less strident 
in demands. 
 
I can only say about the position of the Federal Government that I congratulate them for it. I wish it had 
come a few years earlier and we might not have some of the difficulties we do now, but nevertheless it is 
welcome when it comes. 
 
We discussed Phase Two legislation, Mr. Speaker. The legislation, in the view of virtually all of the 
provinces, had the effect of extending federal jurisdiction and we each took a turn at pointing out how 
we thought that was occurring. The Federal Government, in turn, undertook to make amendments where 
it was necessary to clarify the legislation. They made it quite clear that it was not their intention to 
extend federal jurisdiction. 
 
I have a couple of comments on their approach to Phase Two legislation apart from the fact that it was 
rather poorly drafted. The comment is that if they keep their undertakings, many of our concerns about 
the legislation will be satisfied. If they don't, and frankly they don't have a perfect track record in 
keeping undertakings to the provinces, then there will be some difficulty with a number of provinces, 
this one included. 
 
We discussed, in addition, Mr. Speaker, cable television, a subject of direct interest to this province. It is 
apparent now that there is no disagreement between the Federal Government and the Provincial 
Government on cable television. 
 
We have said from the beginning that the only rational way to bring cable television into this province, 
is for Sask Tel to own the hardware. It is apparent now that the Federal Government agrees with that 
position. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The question that arises then is: did we sign the agreement with them? No, 
for a couple of reasons. The most important one of them is that the Federal Government takes the 
position that we can't have cable television until we settle the issue of pay television. We think that to be 
grossly unfair. The Province of Ontario now licenses pay television and they have cable television. What 
is so special about Saskatchewan not being able to agree on the disposition of pay television? 
 
We then went on to discuss pay television. I think it is fair to say the Federal Government hoped that 
pay television would be a federal undertaking. Saskatchewan took the position, as did all the provinces 
west of the Maritimes, that pay television is a provincial responsibility. While there are federal aspects 
to it, it is primarily a provincial responsibility. We, therefore, took the step of setting up an 
interprovincial committee, composed of officials from each province, which will develop, hopefully, a 
structure for pay television. 

1532 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

The question that is always asked of me and the one that I will finish on is: when are we going to have 
cable television in Saskatchewan? To some extent that depends on whether or not the Federal 
Government is now willing to reconsider their position, that we can't have cable television until pay TV 
is settled, because that ball is no longer in their court. I think they had hoped that it would be, but it isn't. 
We now call upon them to re-examine that position. 
 
I think, more to the point though, is that there is some misunderstanding in the province about cable 
television. There will not be sufficient cable in place to bring cable television to the people of Regina or 
Saskatoon for another six months, it is true that parts of the city are wired and that creates the confusion. 
The problem is that the main trunks which lead to the back alleys into your local head end and your 
studio are not in place and won't be for a period of several months, six months at the minimum. 
 
I am confident, that long before those six months are up, we will have an agreement with the Federal 
Government and that cable television will be here as soon as the hardware is in place. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, let me say that clearly having given to 
the Minister a fair amount of latitude, indeed, to make some political comments under the guise of a 
Ministerial Statement that I trust the Speaker will give to me the same amount of latitude, although I 
don't think I will be as long as the Minister was. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I have been telling the Minister for the past six months that the 
Manitoba agreement is available to Saskatchewan. Everything indicated that, that a settlement was 
easily available to this province and I am pleased that finally the Minister has been told by so many 
people, from so many different quarters, that he is starting to realize that the matter, in fact, can be 
settled if this Provincial Government stops taking the niggling approach that it has been taking these past 
months. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I indicated, Mr. Speaker, not long ago that as a result of conversations with Mr. 
Boyle and other people involved with him, it was clear that the Government was in a position to settle in 
accordance with their wishes. Whether that is good or bad is another question, but that is the state of 
affairs that, in fact, the Provincial Government has now got 98 per cent of their wishes and I hope that 
now they will stop delaying and proceed as quickly as possible. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the Minister isn't, at this point, going to be able to indicate these 
matters, but perhaps he can indicate to the press. He is quoted in some publications, including The 
Financial Times, as saying that the plant will be in by the end of 1977 and that is close to being true, as I 
understand it from the Minister in charge of Sask Tel. Saskatoon and Regina will certainly be ready by 
the end of 1977 and I suggest to him, from the information that I have received from the industry, that in 
Saskatoon and to a lesser extent in 

1533 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

Regina, they are ready immediately to proceed. I know that in North Battleford they are ready 
immediately to proceed. The indication from the Minister that six or eight months will go by before they 
will sign an agreement and begin moving towards bringing cable, concerns us somewhat. 
 
There are two last things. First, I wonder whether the Minister, when he deals with the matter further 
with the press, might be prepared to indicate to them whether this Government is prepared to have the 
current licensees proceed as the cable operators. If he is not prepared to do that, and the Minister is 
nodding that he is, if he is not prepared to do that I suggest to the House that it would clearly indicate 
that the Government has a bias towards having the co-ops in operation. If he is prepared to proceed with 
these licensees, I consider that good news and Members on this side welcome that. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister says that the federal authorities have said that they cannot proceed 
with cable until pay is settled. I take issue with that, that is not my interpretation and that is not what I 
am advised. Indeed, I am advised that the federal authorities have said, pay is a long way away; why 
don't you proceed with cable and we will resolve pay as it comes on-stream. 
 
I suggest that the Minister, perhaps, has misunderstood some of the communications that he has received 
in that regard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, very briefly as a Conservative caucus, we 
welcome the announcement by the Minister that eventually one of the two warring parties has collapsed 
and that we will now be able to proceed with cable television somewhat in the near future. We think 
that, perhaps, this Government is then doing the right thing to continually adopt a stance of 
confrontation with the Federal Government. Perhaps sometimes you win your case. The unfortunate 
thing is that when the Provincial Government decides to nitpick with the federal and the federal with the 
provincial, the people of Saskatchewan go for months and then years without a service such as cable 
television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in particular we are looking at the situation where Saskatoon Telecable now has been 
waiting since last July to implement their licence and, of course, they would welcome at this point in 
time, some indication from the Minister that he will now get Saskatchewan corporations under the 
Government, and in particular Sask Tel, to open negotiations immediately with respect to how they are 
going to deal with the hardware and what sort of arrangements will be made. 
 
I would ask the Minister to give the assurance at this time that negotiations will commence forthwith 
with respect to how the cable is going to be used. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD — POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. A. N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, my point to be forwarded as a Point of Order 
and I was interested in knowing whether Mr. Speaker was going to continue the practice in the future 
during the Question Period of recognizing the same Member several times during the half hour 

1534 
 



 
March 31, 1977 

 

Question Period while another Member who is anxious to put a question is never recognized at all? I 
should like to know if that is going to be the procedure in the future. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Member raises a point which is sometimes valid. I note that the 
Member, today, got the second question and I don't assume that you are speaking for yourself, but you 
are just making a general comment. 
 
I realize that it is sometimes difficult to recognize the Members evenly when a Member who wants to 
ask a question is aggressively on his feet well ahead of another Member. As a result, I am put in the 
position that I have to recognize the Member who is on his feet first. It creates a problem sometimes and 
I realize that I may, sometime, make an error in judgment as to which Member should come first. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Speaking to the Point of Order, Mr. Speaker. Surely Mr. Speaker doesn't intend 
to discriminate against our caucus because of the quiet dignity and manner in which we present our 
questions. 
 
I should like to point out only for your edification that there could be some geographic problem with the 
location of our seats, in this corner, and I should like to point out that we are always available for putting 
questions to the floor, Mr. Speaker, if you would direct your attention in our direction. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, on the Point of Order, I am wondering if Mr. Speaker 
is attempting to be swayed to a ruling presented by the Members to my right that should a caucus 
decision be made as to the individuals asking questions in a particular day, that the Speaker is to 
overrule any caucus decision. If those are the wishes of the Members to the right, I think that is an 
unwarranted interference in the operation of a political party. I am a little surprised. Mr. Speaker, can 
you show me the rules as to the questions again? We had the petty objection yesterday as to tabling 
documents and I am wondering if you could advise me of the rules as to one Member asking questions. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think that I can settle this matter quite simply. 
 
If some group in the House decides that some person should ask questions on behalf of their group, they 
can quite easily get my eye for that person, by that being the only person in that group to stand up, and I 
will recognize that person. No problem. 
 
I think the Member for Qu'Appelle, in starting off his comments was attempting to ascribe motives to 
another Member in his Point of Order and I don't think that is quite proper. I attempt to get a balance 
between the groupings in this House as much as possible and I think the record will show that. However, 
I am unable to give any guarantees on that. Sometimes it may appear, from day to day, that one caucus 
gets more questions than the other, but I think on balance it works out approximately proportionately. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, could I just say something about the Point of 

1535 
 



 
March 31, 1977 
 

Order. 
 
Clearly the Hon. Member for Qu'Appelle has not bothered to check the rules of your Honour’s paper on 
this matter which clearly indicates that in order to ensure that one Member doesn't dominate the 
Question Period, that you will give preference to a Member who has not been previously recognized. I 
realize that creates some problems for a party which works on one cylinder, but I can only suggest that it 
is a very interesting book and . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the Member for Regina Wascana may have invalidated any 
Point of Order that he had. 
 
MR. LANE: — I think the Member recognizes on the Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, that one cylinder in 
overdrive seems to have won a couple of by-elections. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION — VOTE 8 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, I should be most pleased to 
introduce the staff that is here with me. First of all, Ian Wilson who is the Deputy Minister of Education, 
seated beside me; Mr. Jeff Bugera, Executive Director of Administration, behind me; Dr. Lawrence 
Ready, Associate Deputy Minister; Hugh Thompson, Executive Director of Regional Services; directly 
in front of me, Dr. John Kinard, Development Division, Executive Director; beside Mr. Thompson, Mr. 
Ray Clayton, Executive Director of Administration; and Mr. Wally Sawchuk, Teacher Superannuation 
Commission. 
 

ITEM 1 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Chairman, could I ask one brief question before 
I get out of the way and allow people who went to high school and university to handle this matter. I 
wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I might direct a question to the Minister about something which Dr. Ready 
will be familiar with, the question of entrance scholarships for people who are graduates from the Lester 
B. Pearson Pacific College. I am sure the Minister is aware of that college, named after the eminent 
Prime Minister Lester Bowles Pearson. It is an international college which gives an international degree. 
The result, however, for people who go from Regina to take their concluding years of high school there 
is that they are then not eligible for the entrance scholarships to the University of Saskatchewan. As I 
understand it there is, by and large, agreement that this is an unfortunate situation. I think Dr. Ready is 
trying to do something about that; I think the university is trying to do something about it and it seems to 
me that interceding at the ministerial level may well be the simplest way to resolve the difficulty 
immediately . In this particular circumstance there are two students, both of whom come from the 
constituency that I have the pleasure to represent, who are not able to get those kinds of entrance 
scholarships, one of whom needs the scholarship if he is to go to university. The result may well be that 
though they want to go to university here, that one may find himself going to university at McGill 
simply because he can't get the assistance that he would otherwise have been entitled to. They are 
extremely well qualified students or they wouldn't have gotten into the Lester Bowles Pearson College 
in the first place. 
 

1536 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, I am aware of the College. We do help in the selection of students; the 
department is involved in that. We have been in touch with both of the presidents at the universities and 
the proposal that you make is something that we are unable, at the present time, to accommodate 
because there is no specific assistance available, but we are having this proposal presently under review 
and the scholarship committee is scheduled to be dealing with it at their next meeting. So I think it may 
be in hand. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Chairman, first of all t should like to welcome the 
staff of the Minister of Education to the Chambers. I believe I know most of them on a personal basis 
and I am sure this afternoon will not be a very difficult afternoon for you people. We will move along 
co-operatively and possibly finish before too late in the day. 
 
First of all before we start, I think the Minister indicated in his initial statement or his speech on the 
Budget that the Department of Education this year intended to keep the percentage of the provincial 
share of the education costs at approximately 58 per cent. I believe he also indicated that this was the 
percentage that the province absorbed last year, namely 58 per cent of the total cost. To keep the 
education cost, the province's share, at 58 per cent, the Minister felt that an increase in provincial grants 
of ten per cent would be sufficient. We still don't have all the figures, Mr. Chairman, but unit boards and 
school boards around the Province of Saskatchewan have presently been setting their mill rates. They 
have until tomorrow before they complete setting their mill rates but the nearest indication, the Minister 
indicated this yesterday in the Legislature, is that it looks like there is going to be a possible increase of 
between six and seven mills in the levy on the local taxpayers within their jurisdiction. If we have a levy 
of six or seven mills or average that out to about 6.5 mills, if that is the case for the units of the Province 
of Saskatchewan, 6.5 mill increase I believe would probably indicate that this is about an increase of 13 
per cent. I believe last year the figures that I was able to obtain were that the school units in the Province 
of Saskatchewan had an average mill rate of 49.1 mills. And if such is the case then a 6.5 increase in 
mill rate would represent an increase of approximately 13.23 per cent. Now these, of course, are not, I 
suppose, you might say, statistically sound at the present time because we don't have all the information 
in from all of the boards in the province. The Minister may have more information than I was able to 
gather and when he wishes to comment on this he may be able to indicate whether or not the figures I 
gave are accurate or are not accurate. 
 
The point that I should like to raise, Mr. Chairman, the Minister indicated that 58 per cent was the 
portion that was paid by the province last year and he again indicated that 58 per cent would be the 
proportion paid by the Province again this year and I would wonder if the Minister would not feel that 
probably this year because, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, we have had declining wheat prices and 
cattle prices have been poor for a couple or three years that certainly at that level people are not as 
financially well off as they were a couple of years ago and possibly this 58 per cent was not a figure that 
the province should have retained. I should also like the Minister, when he comments on what I have to 
say as to whether or not this 58 per cent figure that we have, is sort of a magic figure that 

1537 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

the province now feels it has arrived at, the percentage that they think should be contributed towards the 
education in the province or can we expect in a future year that the province may decide to pay 70 per 
cent or 65 per cent. The fact that this year, this 58 per cent becomes a constant in comparison with last 
year, seemed to indicate some arriving, you might say, at a maximum point. 
 
I have a few things I should like to say a little later on and if the Member for Rosetown and I can 
co-operate, we will be shuttling back and forth here this afternoon. Would the Minister comment on 
what I had to say? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, briefly. I should like to make some comments on what 
the Member for Maple Creek is saying. 
 
It is true there are indications as he said, tentative indications at the present time that there is, on the 
average, about a six mill rate increase on property taxes. It is also true that we are maintaining the 
provincial share of direct operating grants to the operation of schools at 58 per cent. There is nothing 
magic at all about 58 per cent. We don't consider it to be something that is enshrined in stone. We 
certainly are serious about maintaining at least that level, but it is not to say that at some point in time it 
may not be deemed advisable that that share be increased from the point of view of the operating costs. 
 
It is not quite accurate only to say though, and I know that's not what the Member was trying to get at, 
that the province- takes up 58 per cent of the total operating grant of the schools because it is closer to 
70 per cent if you consider the Property Improvement Grant rebate for educational property taxes to 
homeowners, small businesses and farms. I indicated in my Budget speech during the Budget Debate 
that if you look at the figures across Saskatchewan from the point of view of school taxes, you will find 
that, in fact, in 1976, the latest figures I have, that the amount of taxes paid for education from property 
is less after you take away the Property Improvement Grant rebate, it is less in 1976 than it was in 1971. 
So even though the mill rate obviously has been going up, the burden on the property taxpayer, in fact, 
has been decreased. And even with the six mill rate increase average that seems to be developing across 
Saskatchewan this year, obviously the spread between 1971 and 1976 will be narrower, but there will 
be, in most cases, a spread so that the tax for school costs that property owners pay in 1977 will in most 
cases still be less than they paid in 1971 in dollar terms. 
 
So I wanted to comment on that and I don't think that there is anything else that you raised that I want 
now to be commenting on, but you naturally will have other questions. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Yes, I have a couple more, Mr. Chairman. First and foremost, the business of 
trying to calculate what the homeowners savings grant or whatever you wish to call it, will be, is, in fact, 
a rather difficult one. The fact that there was no increase this year in that particular grant would indicate 
that for this year, at the present time, there definitely is an additional burden placed on the local property 
owner. 
 
I was looking through some of the Estimates for the previous three or four years and took a look at some 
of the grant increases 

1538 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

and I think the pattern would probably run something like this, that in 1975 your increase in the 
operational grant portion to school boards is about 18 per cent. Then in 1976, your increase was about 
22 per cent. In 1977, your increase was about 20 per cent. If you take those three years previous to this 
year, then the grants that were given to school boards in terms of operational grants increased on the 
average, over the three-year period, approximately 20 per cent. Now if you take this particular year, the 
year that we are now considering the Estimates for, your decision is that the operational grants should 
increase by only ten per cent. I wonder if the Minister would care to comment on that change? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Your figures are reasonably correct; your years are out of place. You said 
1977 — 20 per cent and it is 1976. You are not talking about this fiscal year. The reasons why the 
increases in those years were greater in percentage terms than they are this year, are basically two. One, 
during those years we were picking up in each year, in most cases, a larger share of the direct operating 
costs — of the provincial operating costs. If you look at 1971 or if you look at 1973 or 1972 or in the 
1960s you will find that of operating costs, the provincial share was considerably less than 58 per cent. 
In those years we were increasing that share and naturally some of the increases were greater. 
 
Secondly, if you take a year like last year, the increases in the cost of school operations certainly were 
much more dramatic than it is anticipated they will be this year. Teacher salary increases last year were 
settled at a substantially higher level than they may settle this year. The indications seem to be that the 
initial request by the teachers was ten per cent this year; it was higher than that last year. Keeping those 
things in mind, I think that the ten per cent that is being allocated this year is a reasonable figure. In 
1971, the provincial share of operating costs, direct operating costs was 45.8 per cent. We all know that 
today it is 58.1 per cent and it has gradually been increasing each of the years since then. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I realize what the Minister is saying, but still, if we do arrive at 
an increase of 6.5 mills there is going to be a greater contribution on the part of the school boards than 
there is on the Department of Education and the level will not be retained at 58 per cent and, of course, 
as I said earlier, the point is whether or not it should be retained at 58 per cent. 
 
The comment I will make will be about the period of time since your own Government has been in 
power, since the year 1971. I was also doing some further calculations on the total amounts in Estimates. 
If you eliminate that portion of the Estimates that has gone to the Department of Continuing Education, 
your technical institutes in this group, I find that as it related to the entire budget of the Province of 
Saskatchewan in the year 1973, the Department of Education at that time, for the regular school system, 
the one to twelve system, was receiving about 19.8 per cent of the provincial pie. In other words, the 
priority of the Government at that time indicated that about $1 out of every $5 should be spent on 
education. In 1977 they are now paying 15.1 per cent, that's the year past; these figures are coming from 
the Estimates. Simply taking the total budget of the province and taking the amount spent on education, 
I think you will find it works out to 15.1 per cent, but I am using the Member for 

1539 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

Kindersley's calculator which has sometimes been known to make the odd decimal error. In 1978, if you 
take the total figure allocated for the education program, I believe it probably works out to about 14.8 
per cent. 
 
What I am saying, is that in the five years in which your Government has been in power, there has been 
a decrease in the amount the Provincial Government is allocating towards education. Now if that 
increase is five per cent, and I realize the 1973 figure might be questionable to the extent of removing 
those parts of the Estimates that are devoted to the Department of Continuing Education, there might be 
a little weakness there. But I think it is clearly indicated that when you look at the total amount spent by 
the province and relate it back to education, there is a smaller percentage of the total provincial budget 
being spent on education than in the first Estimates that your own Government prepared back in 
1972-73. Is that not correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I first of all want to say that figures are made to be worked 
with and you can develop any kind of argument you want with them. The fact of the matter is, that the 
priority of our Government on education is clearly indicated by a number of initiatives. I am not, at this 
time, going to go into the program of initiatives that have been taken. But if you look at the allocations 
of funds to schools and at the same time, you know, school boards have also been raising more money. 
That is why we have the Property Improvement Grant Program, so that it makes it possible for them to 
do that better. The SSTA, and School Trustees in general, argue that. And I don't argue against that; that 
they need, and want to be able to raise some of those funds at the local level, and that is fair enough. The 
fact is that the amount of money provided through the Department of Education in grants to school 
boards, has been increasing dramatically over the years that we have been in government. You can also 
find that by looking at Blues over the years, and you are not arguing that. I don't think it is completely 
accurate to simply take those figures and say that the priority of the government on education has been 
reduced because the percentage of the total budget is less. Somehow I don't think that that s the way to 
evaluate this kind of a thing. The fact of the matter is that in government there are other things that have 
developed which, at one time, did not exist program-wise and so, therefore, you are actually considering 
many more items when you are working on this kind of a percentage basis. I can't accept the argument 
on the percentage part; I think if you look at the figures alone and the increases, it clearly shows that the 
priorities in education have not in any way become less. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I just want to make a comment. The Minister indicated kindergartens and some 
of these programs. I should just like to remind him that those programs came in later; they were not 
included in the original Estimates to which I refer. So, clearly, there is less support for education than 
there was back then. Mr. Minister, I would suggest, this year in particular when we have a depressed 
agricultural economy in the Province of Saskatchewan, there should have been a greater proportion of 
that provincial pie devoted to education. 
 
MR. R. H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — I too, should like to welcome the staff of the Minister. 

1540 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

I can assure the Minister that I'll be as co-operative as I always am. Maybe you are not as fortunate as 
the Minister of Continuing Education, who happened to catch me away for a day on a very important 
assignment, but I can assure the Minister of Continuing Education that there will be other opportunities 
within the Estimates and that he will be hearing from me. 
 
Mr. Minister, no matter what way you want to cut your cake — you can talk about your Home Owner 
Improvement Grant, or whatever you like — the fact of the matter is that education is costing us a great 
deal more money that it ever did. I know that the Minister will try to point out that we've increased the 
grants, but there's one distorting figure there, Mr. Minister, which is a distortion, as far as the press is 
concerned, as to how people read it. I'll take my own particular budget, which I helped prepare, and the 
budgets of those school units that happen to be in my constituency. I'm talking about an overall ten per 
cent increase. What you were talking about in my own particular case, and I can go to the other school 
units, you're talking about a 6.4 per cent increase in grants in my own particular school unit. That's not a 
6.4 per cent increase in the total cost of operation, as sometimes is the misleading thing that goes out to 
the public; you're talking about a 6.4 per cent increase in the some 30 per cent grant that the unit board 
actually gets. So if you really want to take a look at it, Mr. Minister, and no matter which way you want 
to cut it, the local taxpayers are facing a tremendous amount of increase in the cost of education. You 
can handle figures all you like and you can throw figures out, but the figures that really count are when 
the people get the envelopes and open them up and they take a look at what the total taxes are. Those are 
the figures that count. 
 
In my own particular case, Mr. Minister, the increase of the government grant amounted to about 
$57,000; $57,000 out of a total budget of some $2,700,000. When you take this 57 per cent and you take 
a look at how the budget was arrived at and some of the factors which bring the budget up to the amount 
of $2,700,000 — over 50 per cent of the increase, over 50 per cent of this $57,000 goes to the increase 
in fuel, cost of heating our schools, increase in the lights, increase in the telephone bills; that alone, Mr. 
Minister, takes care of 50 per cent of the increase in the grant. 
 
Now, if you want to take a look at teachers' increments without an increase in salary, the grant was 
minus; it wouldn't have looked after those. We would still have had to go out and try to gather up two 
mills without any increase in salary or anything else. 
 
It's fine for you to come and say that the people aren't paying anything more. Is the Home Owners' Grant 
and the rebate on the Home Owners' Grant, solely for education, or is it solely for municipal? What's it 
solely for, simply to offset education? I hope the Minister makes that clear, because if that be the case, 
then of course, the municipal people are going to be asking a few questions too. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of things that I should like to discuss a little later on, but I want to deal 
with a few points right now which, I think, are important to the people of Saskatchewan, and I think are 
important to school boards of this province. It would appear that education, basically, has done a 
tremendous job over the years in this province. It would appear that our educational system, from the 
very beginning, has been a 

1541 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

highly respected system and for that reason boards of education at the present time are facing a number 
of dilemmas, you might say; they are facing a number of unanswered questions. 
 
Last fall a brief was sent out to us from another department of the Government. Hearings were held, and 
while these hearings may be the advisable things to have, I think the Minister and the entire department 
had better ask themselves these very basic, fundamental questions: What is the purpose of our schools? 
What purpose are they designed to serve? Are we going to get into and take over part of the program of 
the Social Services Department? If we are, I think the educators and the school boards across this 
province should know the answers now, so they can properly prepare for that. 
 
I see too, in a few years, that somebody is going to come up with the idea that the day-care centres 
across Saskatchewan should also be attached to schools. Now, Mr. Minister, these are concerns that 
boards have across the province. If education has done such a good job, then perhaps we should start 
attaching other services to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to just mention a few other things, in passing, to the Department of 
Education. We have fewer students attending our schools today than we have ever had and when you 
look at the Estimates over the next ten years you will see that we have a drastic decline again, as well. 
The individual cost per student is rising at such a significant rate that it almost staggers one's 
imagination as to what it will be in a few years. There are some rural boards surrounding the cities that 
are facing increases in enrolment, but basically most of rural Saskatchewan is facing a rather rapid 
decline and the dilemma that they are in at the present time is that they cannot reduce costs and they 
cannot reduce staff at the same rate as the student enrolment, and therefore, they are getting caught in 
the pinch the way the grant system is allocated. 
 
We have this problem in that while we administer the same given area in the province, the cost per 
individual student is a staggering cost. 
 
Very quickly, Mr. Minister, and without using exact figures and given a 200-day school year, if you take 
the total budget — I know that there are some debt debentures in there and so on, but it's the total 
amount of money being spent — and divide that by the number of students who are in attendance at 
schools, in my own particular case it comes close to $1,800 a year per student. Now divide that, in turn, 
by 200 days and that means that for every child who goes to school for one day, we are spending a sum 
of some $9. Now it's true that the kindergarten students will not be recipients of that much expenditure, 
whereas the Division IV student could well be as high as $15 to $16 per day. 
 
I think what we have to do, Mr. Minister, is take a closer look at some of the pressure groups, some of 
the lobby groups, that are coming to the Department of Education today. Somebody said it's the school's 
responsibility to teach a student to drive. I don't know whether it is or not, but it's obviously the most 
logical place for them to take driver training and now every time an issue comes up in society, such as 
students who don't know how to spend their money, therefore, we should bring in consumer education, 
or that students need to be aware of family life and sex education, and therefore, it becomes the 

1542 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

school's responsibility. Now I'm not arguing the point whether it is or whether it isn't. The point I'm 
bringing up, Mr. Minister, is that boards of education across the province are continually being 
bombarded with requests, not just to maintain services, but rather to increase them, to answer all the 
questions of society within the school system. 
 
Getting back to my original question, I think it's time now we ask, "What's the purpose of the school? 
Why are schools operated?" Is it to bend to every lobby group that comes around? Are we going to get 
back to the cry that has come up in the last five years and say, "Look, we have become deficient in some 
of those things that we once had expertise in, and maybe we are lacking in something, so let's get back 
to some pretty basic teachings and some pretty basic understanding by the students?" 
 
Your office has expanded, Mr. Minister, into eight regional offices; eight from six. I must say that I want 
to make it abundantly clear to the Minister that I am not criticizing in any way, shape, or form, the 
regional men and their assistants who man these offices. I know them all personally; they are all very 
fine gentlemen, but that in itself does not justify the operations of eight regional offices in 
Saskatchewan. If you take a look at the regional offices in other provinces in Canada, you will find that 
one regional office in Ontario will handle as many students as we have in the entire Province of 
Saskatchewan. If you take a look at the regional offices in Manitoba or go to Alberta, you will see that 
the regional offices are designed for one point, one function, and that is to provide a consultative 
function to the various regions under their control. 
 
I want to assure the Minister that at this point in time I don't think that Saskatchewan needs these 
regional offices. I'm convinced that they don't need the eight regional offices and until they begin 
functioning in the way that it was originally deemed that they should function, I think that we are not 
really providing any educational service with the regional office and I'm saying that, with all respect to 
the men who man the regional offices. 
 
I want to bring up a point on curriculum, Mr. Minister. I don't think that the school system has ever been 
in such a hubbub and a hubbub in curriculum, as at the present time. If you don't believe me, go and ask 
the people who have to work, or try to sort it out. It's in a complete mess. We've had curriculum 
committees working on some subjects for as long as six years and we still don't have, unless it has come 
within the last four days, recommended text books in some subjects. I think this is deplorable. I can 
remember the days when Hank Jensen was almost a one-man curriculum committee in this province. 
Maybe that's longer than the Minister can remember, but I can remember that. We did, in fact, have 
more stability; we had more direction and the teachers knew more about where they were going in a 
particular matter than we have today, and I would hope, Mr. Minister, that eventually we get a grip on 
this thing so that the boards and the administrators' staffs can start looking and planning programs with a 
little more efficiency than we've had in the past few years. 
 
I have a number of other points, Mr. Chairman, that I should like to raise, and I'll be raising them as we 
go through the budget on education. 
 
There's one last comment that I should like to make and it's 

1543 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

the thing that bothers me a great deal, Mr. Minister. The movement to locally employed superintendents 
is something which has spread very quickly and I'm not criticizing that. I happen to be a locally 
employed superintendent myself. But, I am criticizing the way the department has handled recognition 
of their own superintendents. I'm not talking about the regional superintendent, but when you have 
department men out in the field and you are expecting them to accept less salary, in many cases, than the 
principals and the teachers which they are called upon to supervise, I think that that's a deplorable 
situation. These men have been loyal men to the department; they've been with the department for years 
and the salary which they get and the recognition for years and years of service, yes, today in 1977, is a 
shameful thing for the Department of Education. These are fine men, many of them having given many 
long years of service, and you recognize them in a way that is truly discriminatory when their salary in 
many cases, is $2,000 and $3,000 less than the people they are required to supervise, by the Department 
of Education. 
 
I will have more to say as we go through the budget. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, if I may make a few comments on the comments of the 
Member opposite. When he talks about the percentages of grant increases to his school district, I think 
you have to keep in mind, and we must keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, that when I talk about 58 per cent 
of total school operating costs I m talking about the provincial level, I'm not talking about the local 
school district level. It has to be clearly understood that one of the greatest merits of the foundation grant 
formula is that it recognizes the ability of each individual school district to generate or raise its own 
funding and so, therefore, in areas where there is more wealth, it is only reasonable that maybe the 
portion or the percentage of the provincial grant may not be as great as in areas where the school district 
is much poorer and that's why it's not a straight ten per cent increase in grants for all of the school 
districts across the province. I don t think there's anything unfair about that. I think if we believe in equal 
opportunity, we always have to recognize that principle and we have done it and we will continue to do 
it. 
 
The Member wants to know whether the Property Improvement Grant is solely for the purposes of 
covering education taxes. We have always said that that was the case, Mr. Chairman. We continue to say 
it and it's unfortunate that some people haven t either listened, or don't understand, but those are the 
facts. I don't know how many times I have to say it, but I hope I’ve made it clear now, so that the 
Member will understand. 
 
The Member talks about dilemmas that are faced by boards. I want to make one thing clear, and that is, I 
don't think there is anything wrong with the approach that we are taking in dealing with questions like 
the question of the developmental centres. I have met with all of the superintendents in Saskatchewan 
during the past year at the regional level. We have discussed this, as well as many other items. I have 
met with school boards individually; I have met regularly with representatives of the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees' Association. As a matter of fact, I meet with the chairman every month. And, it has 
clearly been stated that those were only proposals and that we certainly are not sold on any of them at 
this point in time. But, they are proposals on which we want the views and the opinions of school 
boards, because they would affect them quite strongly. And that’s 

1544 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

the process through which we are going. I think that everybody understands that and the school boards 
certainly understand it. As a matter of fact, it was only on Thursday that Mr. Wilson, the deputy, met 
with a committee of the Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association to pursue this thing. And until we 
have given an opportunity for all those school boards and the SSTA to be able to consider this subject 
carefully, as we will with any other major proposals, we are not about to make any set of decisions, and 
say, "Folks here is the way it's going to be." I hope that I have clarified that. 
 
I recognize the problem that the Member talks about when he refers to declining enrolments. We attempt 
to assist the boards to some extent with the sparsity factor that is included in the grant formula so that 
when the enrolment of a school district declines, there is some accommodation made through the 
sparsity factor. This is always under review, and right now it is very seriously under review because of 
the kind of dramatic changes that are happening right now, so we may in the future, and probably in the 
near future, be making some adjustments to that. But the mechanism is already there because several 
years ago when we established the formula, we foresaw this kind of a problem. I don't argue that it's a 
problem. 
 
The boards, you say, are being bombarded and the department is being bombarded by what the Member 
refers to as pressure groups. Well, I don't object to that at all. I think that when a school board is elected 
to serve a school unit or a school district, the ratepayers of that school district should have every 
opportunity in the world open to them to express to their school board what they think they want to see 
happening in their school, from the point of view of programming. And then the board or the 
department, whichever it may be, or together, have to make same basic decisions on those kinds of 
representations. The Member complains about these lobby groups and I don't want to be in agreement 
with him. I hope that they are always there. I hope that when an organization of parents feels that it is 
important to have a family life education course in their school, in Humboldt or Rosetown or in Maple 
Creek, I hope that they will go to their board and say, gentlemen and ladies we think that it's important 
to have family life education in our school, and here's the way we think it ought to be. Will you please 
consider implementing it in our school? That kind of opportunity should exist and we will continue to 
encourage it to exist. 
 
The interesting thing about the Member's comments, Mr. Chairman, was that he raised a lot of issues, 
and that's fair enough. But not once did he indicate what his position was on those issues. If he's going to 
do that, I will be most happy because I am interested in knowing what it is. As a matter of fact, if we 
know maybe we will be able to accommodate some of them, because I just might happen to agree with 
some of them and take them under advisement. So, if he's going to get around to that, that's great. There 
is an insinuation in what he says about somehow in our educational system in Saskatchewan, there being 
a de-emphasis or a breaking down of the teaching of the basics. No, that's not the word that was used, 
but that's essentially, I think, what he meant. I don't want to agree to that. I want to qualify my 
disagreement by saying, yes, obviously we have to revise what we are doing, and if we can improve our 
methods of dealing with individual students so that we can meet their individual needs, then we'd better 
be making those improvements. But all of the statistics and studies that have been made by the SSTA, 
by individual school boards, indicate that the quality of 

1545 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

the basics taught in our schools today is as high and as good as it ever was. I don't accept that argument 
at all. I don't accept either, Mr. Chairman, as the Minister of Education and as an educator, that the 
basics can necessarily be defined today only on the basis of reading, writing, and arithmetic. They are 
absolutely essential. Society today is much more complex than it was in those days, the so-called good 
old days that some people seem to be talking about, and therefore, our educational system must be 
preparing our students and our young people to be able to cope with that society. And therefore, we need 
to have more than those good old days type of education systems. Let's keep in mind that in those good 
old days, Mr. Chairman, there were only a small portion of the students who went all the way through 
school and graduated from high school. Today, a very large portion of them do. Let's keep in mind that 
in those good old days we really had an elitist education system. We had an education system that did a 
good job for a few, and didn't do very much for the large majority. And, I don't think we want to go back 
to those kinds of good old days. We'd be going down the wrong track if we did. 
 
One more point, or maybe a couple, but another point that I wanted to comment on — sorry I'm taking 
so long, I have to keep up with his time. The Member mentioned regional offices and that's right, we 
increased the number of regional offices, but I think it is unfair to compare them to Alberta and Ontario. 
If you look at the situations in Alberta and Ontario, they have dozens of people, in Ontario maybe 100 or 
so, in the regional centralized office. We have eight regions in which we have two full-time people, a 
regional superintendent and his assistant. And then we have provisions for contracting consultant 
services to the school districts in that region. So, I don't think it's accurate to say that it is more efficient 
or more effective in Alberta or Ontario because I think that their approach is wrong. They are top-heavy 
with personnel because they have so many. They don't have the flexibility because of that, of utilizing 
existing professional staff that is in the field already. We do, with our kind of decentralized approach to 
providing regional services. 
 
One last comment — I don't want to be here for three days — on the curriculum — it being a mess. Let 
me say that maybe the Member can be helped by my clarifying it, but every year there is a circular that 
goes out — it's entitled "1976 Text Books Circular." This one is 1976. And pretty soon there will be one 
for 1977. So the work of the curriculum committees is being done. I think it is being done well, and I 
think that the fact that we do have them on a continuing basis has helped keep the standards of our 
educational system at a very high level, and so we don't have to use the panic approach that they are 
having to use in British Columbia, where they are having to make complete turn-arounds because they 
may have gone overboard one way or the other, in the past. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I want to get away from the 
philosophical aspect and get into something rather more mundane. And, I think I'm going to ask the 
Minister some questions about the teachers' pension plan, which are rather frightening. And one of the 
general concerns about pension plans across Canada, and across the United States, is the lack of funding. 
 
Many people are beginning to question how non-funded plans 

1546 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

are eroding the education or the dollar of an individual service department to the extent that it is 
staggering. And, I am going to give the Minister some figures, and I am going to go back just five years. 
In 1972, in the Department of Education, the teachers' pension and cost of living bonus was $1,300,000. 
In other words, the consolidated general revenues of the province put in $1,300,000 for teachers' 
pensions. Of course, you and I know that teachers' pensions are not funded. Now we are here five years 
later, and pensions and the cost of living bonus has risen to $20,036,920. Let me give you a summary of 
what has occurred in the last five years, with the teachers' pension plan. 
 
In 1972, as I indicated, it was $1,300,000. In 1973 the same; in 1974 it jumped to $4,890,000. In 1975 it 
jumped to $8,853,000. In 1976 it jumped to $10,828,000. Last year — to $13,581,930 — and this year 
to $20.036,000. In a five-year period, Mr. Chairman, up 1,500 per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is 
frightening, and I don't blame the Minister and I don't blame the current officials in the Department of 
Education. This has been the way the teachers' plan has been financed and negotiated years and years 
ago. But, all of a sudden a few years ago, the cost of living bonus was put in, and all of a sudden 
inflation took off, and all of a sudden $20,000,000 of our taxpayers' money that should be going in to 
help education, is now being used to pay teachers' pensions. And it has gone, I want to repeat, from 
$1,300,000 in 1972 to $20,000,000 this year. Now I should like to ask the Minister and the department if 
you give it another five years and another 1,500 per cent, there will be absolutely no money for teachers' 
grants, or for ordinary expenditures for education. There will be nothing for school grants. There won't 
be anything for anybody. 
 
What does the department foresee in the future for teachers' pensions; what kind of a drain do they see 
on the general revenues of the province? What kind of a drain do all the non-funded pension plans — do 
they foresee as a drain, and how many more are there, I wonder? Because, all of a sudden we're talking, 
when we start talking, about these astronomical increases, and the astronomical drain on the service of 
that department that it has ill forebodings for the future, and it is certainly incumbent on your department 
and your Government, to consider what is going to happen in the future and what kinds of changes are 
going to be made. There are a lot of questions that can be asked. 
 
The teachers put in a good portion. The Government just uses the general revenues to match it. Are the 
assessments enough on individual teachers? Should the Government be matching it or doubling it and 
putting it aside in a special fund and investing it properly? What are the questions and what are the 
solutions? But this particular pension plan has jumped 1,500 per cent in five years, and you know that 
there is a steady movement to lower the age of retirement for teachers. You know that it is based on the 
maximum five years of their salary. Salaries are continuing to go up at a pretty steady rate and a pretty 
high rate. Last year, what was it, an average of 21 per cent increase in teachers' salaries or 18 per cent? 
I'm not going to quote — you can tell me what the exact figure was — I forget; I could dig it out. And 
with this kind of inflation and with this kind of an increase each year, and based on the top five years of 
teachers' pensions or salaries,, or six is it, and the movement to lower the age of retirement, the numbers 
of years to contribute, this situation is not going to get any better, it's going to get much worse. And if 
the last five years are any indication of what has happened, my God, the taxpayers in this province and 
the taxpayers right 

1547 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

across Canada, and all non-funded pension plans are in for a serious jolt. And it's time, right now, that 
your department and your Government stopped and took a look at this. And I say that, not as a critic or 
as a Member of the Opposition, but as a Member of this Legislature and a citizen of the province and as 
a taxpayer. Because, my God, we are in for serious trouble. But what is even more important, education 
is in for a serious problem if this drain continues to take the dollars that should be tunnelled into the 
education of children in order to pay pensions. 
 
And I would like to ask the Minister and the department officials, and I know that those department 
officials including the Deputy Ministers, are well aware that this pension plan has jumped from 
$1,300,000 to $20 million since 1972, what are their concerns? What are their fears? What have they 
recommended? What is the Government as a whole doing? And this well may be the most important 
single issue of the entire Budget in Saskatchewan, or of the entire Estimates. And it's one that perhaps 
everybody in this province and this country should be zeroing into, because when you start talking about 
what's happening in the Federal Government with its indexed pension plans, you know what they are 
saying, that now that people are retiring in the federal field at minimum retirement age and are taking 
their pensions, and if they live to be about 70, they are going to make far more in their pension than they 
did at the top of their earning year, because of the index and because of inflation. It is a frightening drain 
on the federal tax dollar. All of a sudden federal officials are becoming very, very frightened about the 
prospect of indexing pension plans, and I am sure that you people are too. 
 
So I throw these thoughts out in an honest concern. I hope the Government is concerned. I hope that 
your department has begun to look at it, because there is no more dramatic example of what has 
happened in the last five years than with the teachers' pension plan and the drain on the general revenues 
of the consolidated fund of the Province of Saskatchewan, because it is a non-funded pension plan. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. I think I have been quite lenient here and I know that we are 
dealing with Item 1 and I think that is the overall administration of the Department. I think the 
Honourable Member will realize that Item 21 is dealing with pensions and the cost of living bonus. I am 
just drawing it to your attention that I think as closely as possible, we can adhere to these Items and I 
will give the Minister an opportunity to reply to you now, but I should like to refer back to the 
administration again after that please. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I am not arguing with the Member raising it 
here, although I was going to bring the point up with you that you just mentioned. I certainly would like 
to make some brief comments on what the Member has mentioned. I want to say that because there is a 
greater need for providing from the consolidated fund for teachers' pension under the provisions in the 
Blues under Section 21, that does not in any way mean that there is a drain of the funds that are being 
provided or will be provided in the future for education proper — if I may define it in that way, certainly 
not as long as we are the Government of Saskatchewan. The funds are coming from the general revenues 
of the province. And, we consider education to be too important an 

1548 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

investment in our people, to de-emphasize it. But the Member raises some good issues; I think he's not 
alone in his concern on the overall bigger question, that is the overall bigger question of pensions, not 
just the teachers' superannuation commission in the teachers' plan, the question is a lot bigger than that. 
He alluded to the national situation with respect to pension plans. We have heard, I have been reading in 
the press sometime ago and still now, about some concerns in the city of Saskatoon and other places, 
about pensions. We, as a government, are concerned about the pension plans and are interested in the 
future of plans. There is, as is well known, provision for an actuarial study in this year's budget of the 
teachers' superannuation plan. The Government presently, through the Department of Finance and 
through the policy planning branch, is undertaking a complete over-all study of the pension plans in 
Saskatchewan. And so we are dealing with this question very aggressively, because it is certainly 
something which should not, and is not, going to be avoided. It is too important to do that. I don't think I 
need to say much more than that. I think basically what the Member was asking was whether, in fact, we 
recognize that there are some things that we have to be doing about the pension plans. And my answer 
is, yes, we recognize that there are some problems or difficulties in the plans that exist now, in the 
longer-run period, and because we do recognize it, we are aggressively now reviewing all of the plans 
and trying to identify what some of those solutions might be. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I am going to comment very briefly on this and I 
appreciate your comments even though I have always understood that Item 1, because of the broad 
general nature of the question, relates to pension plans. 
 
First of all, I think the Minister knows that what he says is nonsense, about the fact that no matter where 
the pension plan of the teachers goes, it is not going to have any impact on the education dollar. If the 
teachers' pension plan drains $100 million from the consolidated revenue of this province, that $100 
million dollars is not available for education or health or anything else. Please don't give me the 
sanctimonious 'we think it's too important.' Please come out to my school unit and tell them about it 
when they have a $15,000 increase and a deficit last year and a drastic increase in mill rate this year. See 
if you can convince them of that statement. So all I am saying to you is let's get away from the beautiful 
phrases and get down to reality. I also want to say that I know that the Government has a pension study. 
They announced it about four years ago. But I am losing all confidence in this Government. They are so 
frightened to take a stand. The NDP is supposed to be proud that they were going to be the ones that are 
fighting the causes. You fellows are even afraid to put in compulsory seat belt legislation in this Session. 
You don't want to rock the boat. You have a by-election coming up. You are scared stiff. You tell me of 
one little single item of controversy that you have brought in this Session. You have just brought Bill 
after Bill that has two lines. All you want to do is get in here and get out. So all I am saying is that I 
don't have much confidence, Mr. Minister. I think we need a little stronger statement than that. I can 
assure you that I am going to be directing some questions on pensions to the Minister of Finance (Mr. 
Smishek), with a hope that he can give me something more concrete, but please don't pass this over by 
saying we are starting a study. The study, the figures are obvious, the facts are obvious, the implications 
are obvious and the results are 

1549 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

going to be disastrous if you don't do something about it and do something about it pretty quick. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I want to once again reiterate that the study has been under 
way and something will be done. That should be clear. I just wanted to ask the Member whether he will 
support the seat belt legislation when it comes into the House, if it comes into the House. He obviously 
indicated that he thinks it is a good idea by his comments and we will see what he is going to do when 
the vote comes up, if the legislation shows up in the House. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I would be glad to give my answer if you sit down. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Just a minute, I want to hear. I just want to also say that I don't agree there 
is not a great deal of legislation in this House. There is. I think the Estimates are equally as important as 
the legislation and we are giving all the consideration that the Opposition wants given to all of the 
matters before this House. Those are the rules of the game and that's the way we are going to play them. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Just one little comment . . . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — . . . seat belts side . . . 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I would like to serve notice right now that I'm going to vote against the seat 
belt legislation .. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please; I can't see how seat belts should be entering into Item 1. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, Mr. Chairman, and I can't accept that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Neither can I; then let's go back to Item 1. 
 
Mr. MacDONALD: — I reserve the right to answer him. I don't like you telling me what to do, and I 
serve notice right now . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, please: I acknowledge the Member for Elrose. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, this question I have for the Minister is very definitely on Item 1, even 
though it may be related to the Member's question for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that we have reached a time, the time is now here, when we are going to 
have to, and Ministers opposite are going to have to, follow the thinking, very logical thinking, of the 
Minister who sits in front of you, the Honourable Minister of Health. We are going to have to take a 
look at items which are commonly known as superannuation or pensions as really being deferred salary. 
Does the Minister agree in the present, say teacher negotiations, that the amount 

1550 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

of money that is being submitted from other sources to the welfare of an individual should not be 
considered as salary? Did you get my question, Mr. Minister? All right let's look at it this way. A certain 
percentage of a teacher's salary is deducted at source and that is sent by the employing boards to the 
Superannuation Commission. On top of that, we have other funds coming from the Government to build 
up, or support the superannuation fund. Now, should not all funds being contributed towards an 
individual-be they a teacher, policeman, whatever — should they not be considered as salary for the 
purposes of salary negotiation? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That's not the case in any sector that I'm aware of at the present time. It's a 
cost, obviously, but it's not considered salary. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think he meant to try to hedge the question. I'm asking you, as 
the Minister of Education, who has a very large number of people on superannuation – contributing to 
the teachers' superannuation — ail I'm saying is this, "Have we not reached a point in time — 1977 — 
when individuals should have the pension fund classified as a deferred salary payment and consider any 
other funds that go to support that as part of their salaries?" Does the Minister not agree that that is part 
of the salary? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — . . . cost obviously to the employer, but there in pension plans, not in this 
plan, but, well indirectly I guess there is, where there is the employee and employer contributions and I 
think clearly the employer contribution is obviously a cost that should be recognized, but in my view it 
is not and it should not be considered as salary. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — In other words then, Mr. Chairman, the Minister is saying that regardless of how 
much may be contributed from taxation to the welfare of an individual's salary, which he is going to pick 
up when he retires, that it should not be considered as salary? What if somebody upped it, say 20 per 
cent, and you still don't consider that salary? Mr. Minister, I am going to suggest to you if that isn't 
considered salary, and if we don t change our way of thinking in the way of using a proper term for this 
— deferred payments — you know these pension schemes could easily break the province in time. And 
I am very disappointed that the Minister will not support that concept because that's a concept which has 
to be taken. Otherwise we could well go down the road and find ourselves in the position where we won 
t have any funds left for the operation of our schools, that rather, they'll be eaten up in pensions and 
superannuation plans, not just for teachers, but for other groups as well. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It's a strange kind of double accounting logic that the Conservative Party 
seems to have, Mr. Chairman. I stand behind what I said. First of all, at the time that the contribution is 
made into the fund by the employer, it is not salary. At the time that it comes out in the form of a 
pension to the employee, when he or she retires, it is then salary. I don't think you can have it both ways. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, it is the Minister who is providing the 

1551 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

double talk . . . double talk. If the employer is matching a pension in any amount, the individual will 
eventually become the recipient of that amount of money. Therefore, whether it's salary in 1977 or in 
1987 or 1997, when he retires, it's still a deferred salary payment. You can't get around that. You can 
talk and call it all kinds of names and it is part of salary. If my employer today is, in fact, contributing 
$50 a month on my behalf and eventually if I live long enough that I'm a recipient of that money, that's 
part of my salary. It's deferred for 20 years, or 10 years, whatever the case may be. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you're the one that's using the double talk in this, not myself. Not myself. That's 
money that is being put away on my behalf. It's salary, there's no question about it. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — What the Member is asking for then, Mr. Chairman, and I think that that 
point has to be made very clearly, he is asking, for example, that when the employer puts into a pension 
plan this fringe benefit, it's a fringe benefit, just like coffee breaks, to oversimplify the issue. He is 
asking that when the employer puts that into the fund, that the employee has it considered as salary, and 
therefore, he should pay tax, income tax, on it. You'd have to. You can't avoid it, if you count it as 
salary. He is then saying that when the employee retires and receives his pension, he should, once again, 
pay income tax on it. That's in fact how it would happen. And that doesn't make any sense to me. 
 
To say that you should consider this one fringe benefit as a salary item is the same thing as saying that 
you should consider all other fringe benefits as a salary item. If you have, in an employer-employee 
contract, that the employer must provide during every coffee break, coffee to the employees at his cost, 
that obviously should be included as part of salary, and once again I know that I am oversimplifying it 
by using that kind of an example, but it's basically the same kind of an argument. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please! I drew to the attention of the Honourable Members earlier, that 
there is an Item covering this. The Honourable Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, I think, stated that he 
didn't think that my ruling was proper. I would like to refer you to Beauschesne, page 201, Chapter 239 
— 
 

The whole management of a department may be discussed in a general way when the Committee of 
Supply is considering in a first resolution of the Estimates of that department. But the discussion 
must not be extended to any particular item mentioned in the Estimates of that department. 

 
That was the basis of my ruling. I should like to ask you again to try to adhere to it, because again may I 
explain – the Members who are in here at present, perhaps you are going to get the answers and so forth 
that you want, but I know when we get to Item 21 or 22 again, this same thing is going to come up 
again. And we have to go through it all and I do not think this is fair to the House and that's why I ask 
you to try and relate back to Item 1 and I will acknowledge that. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Let me clarify this and I respect your ruling and I know 

1552 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

from what you are reading. What I am talking about is something which is currently going on in the 
Province of Saskatchewan and that is not in the item. There is no Item to cover this. I'm talking about 
teachers' salaries and the way in which they are computed. That's what I'm talking about. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Pensions . . . 
 
MR. BAILEY: — No, I'm not talking about pensions. I'm talking about teachers' salaries. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You don't know what you're talking about. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Oh yes I do. It's you people that can't understand because you're so involved with 
some other kind of ideological thinking. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, order, please: I find it difficult to see where the subject that you are 
talking about refers to Item 1. But I would again ask you to relate back to Item 1 and try to proceed in 
that way. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to move back to Item 1. 
 
Just to go back to one of the problems I think many school boards have been faced with during the last 
two or three weeks, having gone through the exercise myself, I can assure the Minister that there was no 
surplus of funds and there, indeed, had to be some cutting here and cutting there. The thing that bothers 
me, when you start cutting one of these educational or school unit budgets or school board budgets, is 
that many things are fixed. Your services on buildings and your debt charges are things that you can do 
very, very little about. 
 
When it comes to taking out the knife, I suppose there are two sections that you can work on. One of the 
sections, again, is also very difficult and that's transportation, depending on the lay of your unit and the 
miles that you have and the location of your students. It becomes very difficult at times to start cutting 
bus routes. I know in the particular situation that I'm working in, we have children getting on busses at 
ten minutes after seven in the morning and travelling 180 miles in a day, the total length of the bus route, 
so you can't do much there. 
 
So, the next area you move into, of course, is the instructional area of the budget. And so it usually 
means that either you have to start cutting teachers, and if you start cutting teachers, you start cutting 
program, or if you start cutting program, you start eventually working back towards teachers. 
 
Then the other area, of course, is the area of supplies and equipment. This is another area which you 
come back to. This is the area that, when you are short of money, really seems to receive the crunch. 
This is the area from where money can most easily be taken, and if you are involved in education and 
arguing for that particular portion, it's where you have to be most forceful in trying to get as many 
dollars as you can. 
 
I understand, and I've been told in trying to contact some of the people in the business of education, that 
because of shortages 

1553 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

of money in this next year, we are going to be running into school units and we are going to be phasing 
out their Industrial Arts and their Home Economics programs. We are going to run into other school 
units, in which we are going to be phasing out their band programs. We've run into other school units, 
and I have a list here I believe that, two or three or four of them have deficits of $103,000, $104,000 and 
$91,000, $184,000 – figures that were given to me. 
 
Mr. Chairman, no doubt there definitely is a shortage of money. When we start looking into the future, I 
think it is going to become even more critical. I was very happy to hear you say that something may 
have to be done with the formula that you presently have under the grant program. I realize you do make 
some allowances for sparsity variables and enrolment decline that is serious, but you also, I am sure, are 
aware of the bulge in our educational enrolment in Grade VII, Grade VIII and the Grade IX area. When 
you move down into Grades VI and below, you have fewer students. It was much easier to consolidate 
and to establish multiple-grade classrooms in Grades I, II, III, IV, V, and VI. in Grades VII, VIII, IX, X, 
XI, and XII, what is going to be happening is, not only are we going to, in some of our smaller centres, 
see the establishment of multiple grades, no doubt, but we are going to have to be eliminating some 
programs in some of these. And, I am sure if the Minister takes the time to have his officials check, he 
will find that there are many schools that are going to have to make alterations in programming. 
 
The Member for Rosetown mentioned the large number of different programs that have been developed 
during the past few years. It is true that boards don't have to implement those programs, but really what 
often happens is the creation of these programs has a tendency to whet the appetite for some of these. 
And after they are introduced and they 'bought a bomb,' then you come to the period of contraction, and 
you start eliminating — this is where our problem comes. I suppose you would rightly say that those are 
tough decisions and you are paid to make them. There is no doubt about it; we have to make them. But 
then, of course, what I am saying is that there was this creation of desire to offer these programs. They 
have been there for maybe a year or two years and then you have to eliminate them because of the drop 
in enrolment. You only have one alternative when you start moving into a decrease in enrolments. You 
can centralize further. 
 
Now, everybody knows what happens when you start centralizing or closing down high schools and 
moving them elsewhere. It has a definite impact on the community. People are withdrawn from the 
community — are taken out of the community. New people don't want to go into the community. 
 
Now, your Government has a statement right in the budget. They say that nowhere in Saskatchewan will 
we close a hospital. Now, I come from an area in which there are three hospitals in the entire area, and I 
could probably argue with you that I should be like the Member for Rosetown and have seven hospitals 
in my area — hospitals that are 12 miles apart. I suppose we should be coming to you and saying we 
should build some more hospitals so that the people in the area around Maple Creek have the same 
opportunity for services as the people in another area. The hospitals, maybe, are necessary. You are also 
very concerned about the elevators and the effect of transportation. I hope that you will have the same 
concern when it comes to 

1554 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

schools. School units can, of course, close schools — Grades VII, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII — there are 
special regulations. But, when it comes to closing down an elementary school, you of course, are going 
to be really the fellow who is going to call the decision as Minister of Education, because no one can 
phase out an elementary school at those lower grades without getting your permission. 
 
And I would hope that in the future you are going to get requests to close these — requests from 
villages. I can name you one particular unit which is on a programmed computer budget that has gone 
around and has been holding meetings in the last while with villages of populations of 200 and larger, 
and indicating to them that if they don't get in more funds, they are going to be closing the schools — 
they are going to centralize further. 
 
My suggestion is this, and this is where I get to be sort of positive; you are going to have to get some of 
the people within your department to do something about those smaller schools if we are going to keep 
them. And that school is more essential to the small town than either your elevator or your hospital. You 
take the school out and you take the life and the blood and the heart of the community. It has to stay 
there. Somehow, and in some way, you are going to have to adjust your formula to enable these small 
towns to keep, or small villages to keep, the schools that they've got, so that they don't have to close, and 
I hope the Minister will find some way of doing it. 
 
One fellow came to me, living in an RM that is a very highly-assessed one, and he said if you have an 
assessment of $4 million, the school unit is presently charging you a mill rate of 50 mills. He said, 
"They are taking $200,000 from our RM in the form of a local levy, and now they are suggesting that we 
should not even have one school" — one school in that area from which that $200,000 is subtracted. If 
that school closes, the children are already conveyed — the IXs, Xs, XIs, and XIIs — to another centre. 
And I would just hope that the Minister could give us some assurance that he is going to try to provide 
some special assistance for the small village schools which will have to be phased out unless there is 
special help given to them. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, Mr. Chairman, briefly I certainly want to acknowledge the legitimate 
concerns of the Member for Maple Creek. But, I also want to say this. We are now, as I have said 
several times already this afternoon, carrying 58 per cent of direct cost of schools through operating 
grants — 70 per cent with property improvement grants. And, I guess we have to basically decide, and I 
would wonder what your position is, what level do you think the province should carry — 40 per cent, 
80 per cent, 100 per cent? The Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association tells us that in their view we 
should not be carrying 100 per cent, because in their view they want to be raising some of the money 
locally, to give them that flexibility to be able to meet local needs, as identified by the school boards, by 
the teachers, and by the parents who live in their communities. 
 
I also want to say that the state of our school jurisdiction in Saskatchewan, financially, is a very healthy 
one. For example, in 1969 the revenue fund surpluses of school boards in Saskatchewan was $22 
million. In 1975 that revenue fund surplus for Saskatchewan for school boards was $30 million. So, 
overall, that is an indication of a pretty healthy state that our school jurisdictions are in, generally. True, 
there are some school jurisdictions that, last year, ran a deficit and they are going to have to 
accommodate that in some way in their budgeting for this year. That's what they have superintendents, 
other consultants, 

1555 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

secretary-treasurers for — to work out their budgets so that they are able to operate within them. I am 
not arguing against the concerns that you raise, that the Member raises. Mr. Chairman, we do have the 
sparsity factor that we have in the formula. It is under review. Circumstances change as years move 
along. Maybe enrolment depletions have been rather rapid in the last couple of years, and so therefore, 
maybe we will have to make some adjustments. The Member asks, and I can assure him, that we are 
making this kind of a consideration. But what I am saying is, yes, the foundation grant formula is under 
review every year and we are making a point, particularly, of reviewing the sparsity factor component of 
it. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I would just comment on the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. W. H. 
Stodalka), as well as the response from the Minister. 
 
I think that the Minister well remembers, and if he doesn't I will say it again, that in my time, which is 
over a quarter of a century, the present grant formula is probably the best grant formula we have ever 
had in the Province of Saskatchewan, and I am certainly not quarrelling with it. I agree that it is a very 
difficult thing to come up with a grant formula for the various school boards across the province, to 
which everybody will agree. It is also difficult to come up with a grant formula without some 
imperfection. I will reiterate what I had said before, that I think that the grant formula itself that is 
devised, has been probably the fairest and the most consistent way of getting money out to the various 
school boards across the province. 
 
There is one thing, Mr. Minister, however, that we are moving down in use. When you first established 
this particular grant formula, your department recognized some of the things which the Member for 
Maple Creek was talking about. Therefore, you have drafted into that, a sparsity factor covering that 
particular school unit or school board jurisdiction. 
 
I want to suggest to you and your advisors this afternoon, Mr. Minister, that perhaps it is now time that 
we take another approach, or perhaps a different approach to the budget and to the grant formula so that 
the situations such as the Member mentioned can be averted. I am not simply talking, Mr. Minister, 
about the two-room schools that are left, or the three-room school, which if they are withdrawn from a 
community, kills the community — there is no question about that. 
 
I am talking about that, as well as the smaller high school. What do you do, Mr. Minister, when you 
have reached the smaller high school and there is getting to be more of them in rural Saskatchewan, for 
which there is no further centralization possible, and yet in order to maintain a high school there and in 
order to maintain the service, the grant formula, based on how many noses go to school, simply doesn't 
make sense anymore? I think you are going to have to go, as the song goes, "We've gone about as far as 
we can go." Boards have gone about as far as they can go in the reduction of staff, and you are going to 
have to look at a new aspect in the formula, the grant formula, which recognizes that small schools — 
no further centralization – and the grant formula at the present time, simply will not be adequate for the 
operation of that school. 
 
So, I would hope that while you have made an attempt through the sparsity factor in the grant, you take a 
new look now. Some 

1556 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

jurisdictions are losing a hundred students a year. You are getting down to the situation where you have 
a kindergarten to Grade XII and you have 11 teachers or 12 teachers, and to withdraw a teacher from 
that staff simply means that you are going to deprive the people of services in subject areas in rural 
Saskatchewan, and I don't think that's right. I think you have to take a look at the small high schools that 
have completed centralization, and come up with something different in the formula, a different way to 
recognize the need that the people want those high schools there. I can think of one in my own area. I 
am sure that the Member for Maple Creek can; there are getting to be more of them in the province. But, 
f the grant formula continues as at the present time, boards are going to face the most difficult task in the 
world in trying — not further centralization — but rather, a complete closure and finding some other 
means of providing education which will be very distasteful, indeed, to the communities and to the 
citizens of this province. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I want to comment on a couple of things that were . . . Sorry. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I am not going to repeat what I have already said. I have 
indicated that we are reviewing the question of the sparsity factor as it is in the formula, to meet those 
kinds of situations. I would not want the impression left that we are encouraging the mass closing of 
schools as once happened in Saskatchewan a few years ago. We certainly are not. We believe that 
schools should be close to the community and that, certainly, is the philosophy that we have adhered to 
and that we intend to adhere to, and that as time goes on and the circumstances change, obviously, we 
will have to look at ways of assisting school boards to be able to also accommodate that position that we 
take, and I know that most school boards take. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just a couple of comments. I guess maybe the Member for Rosetown and I are a 
little bit more sensitive at this time of year than we might be at any other time of the year, about such an 
issue as that. I would like to hope, I suppose, that the Minister will consider the things that we have said 
this afternoon. It gives us an opportunity when the Minister is here with all of his officials, to indicate 
what we feel are some of the problems in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
A couple of things I should like to talk about. This matter that was raised by the Member for Rosetown 
which I raised in the Assembly last year, and I know you have had a difficult time handling because of 
the Compensation Board down the street, and that's the salaries of superintendents within your 
jurisdiction. I can only hope and trust that after the controls are lifted they can be put into their proper 
perspective. 
 
I just hope that you will consider that as soon as you have the available — I suppose you might say, the 
legal right to do so. About developmental centres, the only comment I would make about those is, in my 
own mind, I wasn't able to attend the one hearing that was in Swift Current. I was in another meeting at 
that time. I only begin to worry sometimes where you separate learning from training. Now, there is sort 
of a difference in there, just when pretty well anything that you can train a person to do can be classified 
as learning. And when we talk about the educational program within the schools, is it really responsible 
for training as well as learning? I haven't made up my own mind on this 

1557 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

particular matter, but it is one of the things that sort of bothers me, as to where does training leave off 
and learning start? 
 
About the regional offices of the education — no particular criticism there, expect it seems you have a 
chief and a sub-chief and a few Indians in these regional offices. You have, and I think I said last year, 
that the business of seconding consultants into the regional offices is fine and it works well. My only 
worry about this, and this is talking to some people who have taken this particular task on, is they tell me 
that they wouldn't go back for a second time because of the demand that is made on them — being away 
from home, staying away from home and the small remuneration of what the consultant's fee is. I am not 
sure whether it was $1,000 — it seems to me it is related to whatever your particular jurisdiction pays. 
But, I know just recently I have had a person come back on my staff who, according to other 
superintendents, did a very good job, but she said it was very demanding and I have been told this by 
other people as well. I do hope that in the future this turns out right, that you won't have problems 
seconding these people. I am a little bit afraid that you may have. 
 
I notice, a little later on, that you have made some provision with one of the other items under Special 
Education. I don't know how that's going to relate to these consultants. You do, or have had, I guess 
maybe, what, one consultant at each one of the regional offices, plus some of these seconded people, 
which probably adds up to one or two? I asked last year to get a copy of the specifications of the 
Assistant Regional Superintendent's particular tasks because, personally, I've never quite been able to 
decipher the difference between what the Assistant Regional Superintendent is doing and what the 
Regional Superintendent is doing. So, I have no particular qualms, you might say, about the regional 
offices as such. But, as I say, you seem to have a chief and a sub-chief and a few Indians. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I can first of all assure the Member that those specifications 
of the duties of the people in the regional offices are available, and we will make a point of seeing that 
you get them so that you can take a look at them and understand what they are. 
 
I regret the speculation you make about the consultants in the region. I think they do a tremendous job, 
and I know that that's not what the Member said, but he did say that some of them are indicating that it's 
not a job they would want to do and that they will never take it on again. I don't think that that's a 
general feeling. I just don't think it is. Records will show that most of the people who have taken on 
those responsibilities, of course, first of all know what those responsibilities entail when they take them. 
And many of them have stayed on for two — three years. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Those are the full-time ones. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Not the full-time ones – on contract. And, they have the same kind of 
duties to perform as a full-time consultant would have anyway. That is a part of the job. I want to 
support the work that is done through the regional offices by the consultants who are hired on contract 
from the field. I am quite confident, and I know the department is, and I am sure that most teachers 

1558 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

in school jurisdictions are confident that they do a pretty good job and should be commended for it. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I certainly did not want to convey the idea that these people are not doing good 
work. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I just want to caution Members that the questions are once again varying on a 
number of Items and I would ask you to try to base your questions on the Items in question. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I think this relates to Item 1. They have a little technique here this afternoon. If it 
refers to any other, rather specifically, the ruling was we can't go on to it. 
 
MR. E. C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): On a Point of Order, Mr. Chairman — I believe the 
tradition in this Chamber is to allow a great deal of latitude on Item 1, even if it does infringe upon other 
topics in the Items. Now, I am sorry I wasn't here when you made your ruling, but are you suggesting 
that you are going to keep us to Item 1 in our questioning? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I believe the Chairman in the Chair read the regulations to the Members earlier. 
If you want I can repeat from 239 of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms that whole 
management of a department may be discussed in a general way when the Committee of Supply is 
considering the first resolution of the Estimates in that department, which reads as follows: 
 
General administration (amount stated) but the discussion must not be extended to any particular item 
mentioned in the Estimates of that Department. 
 
I believe this was the ruling earlier, and I think we have given the Members a lot of latitude in going 
from Item to Item and I ask you to consider Item 1. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — This is a false impression. I did not indicate that these people were not doing 
good work. In fact, I have yet to find one whose work wasn't praised. But I still say the people who are 
seconded on a full-time basis are different from those on a part- time basis, and to my knowledge I don't 
know of any people who have gone back two or three or four years running on part-time basis. I stand to 
be corrected on that issue; maybe there were some, but I would say that the vast majority of those who 
were on a part-time basis were not the same as those on the full-time basis. I don't know whether I'm 
right or not. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, if I may just make a comment on the statement that you just made and 
the Member who occupied that Chair before him. It's my understanding that you could question Item 
No. 1 in any particular part of the Government Estimates. There are a number of questions, that if you 
don't ask them in Item No. 1, you have no other opportunity in which you can ask them, because once 
we move from Item No. 1, then we are very definitely restricted to that particular item. I have a number 
of questions yet I would like to ask, simply because I'll have no other 

1559 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

opportunity to ask them except in this particular Item. Is that agreed, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes, I think you can ask any general question on Item No. 1. I think the number 
of questions have been asked in particular Items where I have called you to order. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to address a couple of questions to the Minister with 
regards to his department. I'm not asking this question to embarrass any of the gentlemen that the 
Minister brought with him, in any way. I'm asking a question for some straight information from the 
Minister with regards to, not only the figures in Item No. 1, but in some of the other Items coming again. 
It has been a common tradition, Mr. Minister, along with, not only the Minister of Education, but also 
other portfolios as well, that the Deputy Minister be selected, and I think that's generally agreed by 
everyone. 
 
You have a third level, Mr. Minister, in your department. These people who are now in this so-called 
third level, I think you understand what I mean, were tendered or you bid for them from other members 
within the department. We have some senior members in the department; I know them very well. Did 
they have an opportunity, with their background and experience, to bid for these particular positions? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — At the executive director level, Mr. Chairman, and that is the case in any 
department, the people have been selected. They are very qualified people. They do an outstanding job 
for the Government and the Department of Education and education overall in Saskatchewan, and 
therefore, going directly to the question that you asked, they are not positioned; they are advertised on 
that kind of basis, as you indicated. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I agree with the Minister that they are very competent people. I'm not quarrelling 
with that, but I'm quarrelling with what appeared to be no opportunity for senior members of the 
Department of Education, with many years of long-standing service, to be looked at for these positions, 
in a way in which we traditionally look at senior positions within a department. Does the Minister not 
agree that perhaps these positions should be ones of competition? I'd like to have his opinion on that. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, I don't agree. Senior people in the department, as other people without 
the department, are considered in the selections for positions the Member talked about. That has been 
the case and that is going to continue to be the case. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, another question I should like to direct to the Minister, I alluded to 
before and I should like to get his opinion on it before we pass on Item No. 1, because I'm very 
concerned about it. 
 
How did it happen, Mr. Minister, that your own people, your own district superintendents of education 
out in the field, that you or someone within your department was neglectful in not seeing that their 
remuneration did not keep up to, and fell behind, those people which they supervised? 

1560 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the Member obviously is suggesting that we ought to 
interfere with the collective bargaining process. We are not prepared to interfere with the collective 
bargaining process because that is not the way it ought to go. Salary negotiations take place between the 
SGEA, which is the bargaining agent for those people. I don't deny there is some difficulty with salary 
relationships between the principals, in some cases, and the locally-employed superintendents, but I 
would hope that down the road, through negotiations which is the right way to go, that will get rectified. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased to hear the Minister say that he believes that the 
Government should not become involved in the salary negotiation process. I hope that that particular 
statement is underlined a thousand times in this House. 
 
The Government does not particularly want to become involved with the salary negotiation process. Can 
the Minister explain, having just made that statement, why at the provincial level he would support a 
five-man government team with four trustees in this provincial team, if you are not concerned with 
salary negotiations? Let it have it's due process! Why then would your Government load up the 
negotiation team with five government men and only four trustees? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, now the Member is twisting the issue. He was asking, under 
the other question, for the Government to directly interfere in the negotiations that take place between 
SGEA and the Public Service Commission. I said, "We are not prepared to do that, nor are we going to 
be prepared to do that." He is now taking that and applying it to the case of the provincial negotiations 
and teachers, trustees and the Government of Saskatchewan. It's a different question altogether. We feel 
that the Government has a role, along with the trustees, in a co-operative manner, and that's the way it 
has worked to be involved in the negotiations. The Government pays a great portion of the costs of 
education and I think that's one of the arguments. 
 
And, secondly, when the legislation was being introduced into this House a couple of years ago, we 
asked the Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association whether they would accept complete negotiations 
provincially between trustees and teachers, and at that time they said no. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, what's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. You make the 
statement that because you have such a major input in dollars and cents into the operation of the schools, 
therefore, you should have the majority vote in determining salaries. Let me suggest to you, sir, that you 
make a far greater contribution to the operation of the hospitals in the Province of Saskatchewan, 
percentage-wise. Would you then agree that you should also be the determining factor in settling the 
wages of the nurses which staff the hospitals? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It's a different set of negotiations, different circumstances. I want to point 
out that the Member says, "Why shouldn't the Government be involved; why is the Government not 
involved in the negotiations with PSC and SGEA?" On the non-political level, 

1561 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

I guess the Government is involved, because essentially the SGEA negotiates with the Public Service 
Commission, which is a government agency. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I want to get back to another topic which I feel has to come in on 
Item 1. 
 
Not too long ago you tabled in this House, the White Paper on Education, which is now being discussed 
at length, I hope, throughout the province, and I don't want to bring in any detailed discussions on the 
White Paper on Education at this time, by any means. One of the things that is of concern, and it's on the 
minds of every board across this province at the present time, both rural and urban, is a suggestion made 
within the White Paper that we have a different approach to what is commonly known as the tenure 
policy among teachers. Does the Minister — and he doesn't have to answer this if he doesn't want to — 
does the Minister agree with the proposal in the White Paper on this item? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, if we, as a government, or I a Minister, had decided 
precisely that we were going to do certain things by legislation, we wouldn't have a White Paper. Mr. 
Chairman, we have a White Paper after 18 months of study and consultation with an awful lot of people 
throughout Saskatchewan. I indicated then we would have some further consultation opportunities as 
requested by the school trustees and many other people, and therefore, we did decide to use the White 
Paper approach and raise all of the issues — the consolidation issue, the issues that were brought 
forward to us by teachers' organizations, by trustees' organizations, by principals' groups, by 
superintendents' associations, by parents — and put them in a form of a White Paper to which is 
attached in the appendix, some indication of what a Bill might look like, and I am not in the position to 
indicate what we are going to do, precisely, with them. I think it would be unfair, and I really think you 
would agree it would be — somebody used the word once today 'farcical' — for me to say, "Here is a 
White Paper folks," and say to the superintendent from the Elrose School Unit, "Here is a White Paper. 
Tell us what you think, but here is what we are going to do." I am not going to do that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I commended you on using this White Paper approach before, and do so again. 
You made mention of 18 months, I believe, in what you just said here a short time ago. Can you give us 
some sort of an indication then, if it is your intention — this next sitting of the Legislature in the fall or 
the spring sitting — to bring back the Bill and to present it to the Legislature for approval? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — My personal desire would be to do that, but the decision has not been made 
on that. Once again, that will depend on the kinds of discussions we have and all the work that's done, 
and it will be a decision of the Government, so we have not decided precisely that we are going to do 
that. If you are asking me what I would like to do as one individual, I would like to introduce it in the 
next session, yes. 
 
We have been studying school law in Saskatchewan for 20 years. When I was in university in 1962, 
when I started, I remember people talking about the need for consolidation of school 

1562 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

law and bringing it up to date. We looked at some of the legislation that had certain things in it that I 
thought were out of date by 30 years, then. We now finally have done it and I am rather proud that we 
have, and I just don't think we want to take another 20 years to finish the job. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — How are you going to gather up the different opinions from different groups? 
Are you going to have some meetings of your own or are you just expecting the School Trustees' 
Association and other bodies to send in written submissions to you, as to what their suggested changes 
are? Do you intend to go around the province, holding regional meetings; what are your intentions? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We have sent out something like 4,000 copies. I think every school 
jurisdiction has numbers of copies. We are getting letters now, requesting more copies, and we will be 
accommodating those requests. We want as many people who are interested, and I hope many people 
will be interested, to get involved in the consideration of these proposals. I will, personally, be making 
an effort, along with some of my staff, to attend — and I have already taken on some commitments — 
school trustee regional meetings, some of which are being scheduled for April. As a matter of fact, I 
received an invitation from your region and I am trying to cancel some other appointments so that I can 
get out there. Certainly, we will be doing that. I, my officials, or all of us will be meeting with people 
like the Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association, STF, and so on, so there will be a very extensive 
consultation mechanism that we will have. We will, of course, also be accepting the written submissions 
which obviously will be made. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I see in Item 1, Mr. Minister, that you have reduced the number of permanent 
positions by one, and yet the total expense under the Executive Administration is up some $70,000 — a 
fairly high percentage. Perhaps the Minister could explain that $70,000. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The reason is the Item doesn't, to a large extent, relate to salaries only. 
Previous to this indication of the budget in these Blues, things like the School Law Review Committee 
and the Educational Council and the Fine Arts Committee, which we have been operating in the 
province, now were funded under another Item — under Development Division. They are now funded in 
this item. They are, essentially, Ministers' committees. So we have decided in the allocation of the 
information in the Blues, to put them where we thought they ought to legitimately belong, and that's why 
it seems like an inflated figure. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, then that would explain the increase in other personal services by 100 
per cent. Is that what you are saying? That would explain the increase under other personal services 
from $27,000 to $53,000. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Part of it is explained that way, in fact, I think the largest amount, but there 
are other items in there. Mr.Bergstrom, who works for me as a special advisor, is included in that. He 
will be retiring in about three months, or he is due for retirement, and there are payments that are made; 
that's all worked in there, so it's not just totally the three items that I mentioned but that as well. There is 
also a provision for an extension of Mr. Bergstrom's services, which I anticipate I will need because 

1563 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

of the work that we will continue to do on the School Law White Paper. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that the number which is shown 
here has been reduced from ten to nine? In fact, is it true that it's really no reduction, you've just taken 
the one and put it under other personal services? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It's a reduction of the position of the special advisor position. As I 
indicated, that period of that position expires at the end of the year. We have provided some money for 
extending that, but not on an on-going, permanent basis. But the reason for the deletion is because of the 
reduction of that position on a permanent basis. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if that position is going to be extended, and it appears 
that it would cover most of the year under review, should you not have left it as ten and ten and not 
shown it as a ten and a nine? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The position is not extended. We will be keeping on the person who is now 
occupying that position which is going on for a short period of time; we're looking at something like 
three months at the present, and there is provision of money for that period of time. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 

ITEM 2 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of questions about correspondence schools. Last year 
you phased out the operation of the section of the correspondence schools that provided programs, I 
believe, for Grades I through VIII, and made some sort of an arrangement with the Province of Alberta. 
I was just wondering with regard to this particular arrangement and the effect of it, did the number of 
students enrolled in this type of a program go down, or was there an increase when you compare last 
year to the previous year in which you operated your own program from Grades I through VIII? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, I am told that there are only one or two that are being served 
through Alberta. Last year there were 80 children in that category that you are talking about, who were 
at home; now there are 25 children who are at home. I read from that, that really there is a net benefit 
that is gained because we are finding that those children are in school and, quite frankly, although I 
appreciate the importance of having correspondence service in cases where attending school is just not 
possible, still I think it is better, where it is possible, for the student to be in school. If you look and 
compare the 80 to the 25, then I think there is actually a major benefit that is proof. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Have you made provision to continue the arrangement with the Province of 
Alberta or any other body, to take care of those people who cannot attend school and have to take some 
form of 

1564 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

correspondence course? What arrangements have you made in the coming year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, it keeps on . . . 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Another question, I notice under the correspondence school for high schools, 
that the number of students that enrolled I believe, in your Type A service, was something like 7,268. I 
am reading this from your annual report, from page 66. One of the things I have always wondered about 
was the difference between the actual enrolment and the number of people who completed the 
correspondence course. I have had the feeling over the years that there were many people who started 
the program and then had a tendency to drop out. I wonder if we can get some sort of a relationship 
between that 7,268 and the number who successfully completed the course. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We will find that right away. I don't know whether it was raised when we 
attended the regional meeting in your area. If it was, I was thinking I was going to send you the 
information, and I don't know whether I have, but we will get it right away. The 7,000 obviously, that 
register initially, don't go all the way through the system and finish it; there are some drop-outs in the 
process during the year. We will get the precise figure for you. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to tell the Minister, and I would hope that he would take 
back to the people at the correspondence school the very positive attitude that I have towards the 
Government Correspondence School. I want to say, Mr. Minister, that if all the branches of the 
department, of any department, were as effective as the branch — the Correspondence School branch — 
I feel that there would be very, very few complaints within the Province of Saskatchewan. Over the 
years, in working with these people, I find that the service which they provide is second to none. I want 
you to, and I wish the Minister would take that remark back to the people at the Correspondence School, 
because I really feel that one phone call and the action and the immediate attention that they give to 
people like myself out in the field, has to be absolutely superb. I wish you would take that back to the 
Correspondence School, the work that they are doing and have done over the years is tremendous and I 
should like to make this comment — that not having worked with other provinces at all, but I am sure 
that there is no other province in Canada that has as fine a correspondence school service as do the 
students of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I might just say I want to thank the Member for those comments. I certainly 
agree with him. I just want to say that all the branches of the department, and the personnel in them, do 
an excellent job, but his specific reference to the Correspondence School is noted. I have an answer, in a 
general way, to the question of the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka). I will give some examples 
and then will give you some details later on, because it takes too long to go through them. But, I will 
give you an example of the Grade IX Literature course. The number of students who registered, some 
people register and are not serious about it, was 65. The number of active students was 41, and the 
number that finally wrote the exam was 35. So it is really the figure from 41 to 35, that I think is the 
usual figure. You can take Arithmetic IX — the number of active 

1565 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
students is 6, the number who wrote the exam is 5. Literature 20 — the number of active students — 36, 
the number who wrote the exam — 32. Mathematics 20 — the number of active students — 13, the 
number of students who wrote the final exam — 11. I am trying to find a worse one for you, but I'm 
finding it tough; the record is pretty good. Social Studies 20 — 33 active students, 24 who wrote the 
final exam. That sort of runs the course. Here's one for Literature 30 — 103 active students but only 36 
wrote the exam. So there is quite a spread, but if you like I will get this compiled and copied and get you 
the whole thing. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I want to make one further comment to the Minister. I have full confidence, as I 
stated earlier, in this branch of the department. I want to suggest to the Minister that although the 
amount of activity may show a slight decrease in the number of students being enrolled, I suspect Mr. 
Minister, and perhaps just a bit of forewarning, that in the years ahead with boards facing some of the 
difficulties they have, and are now facing, with the reduction that is going to be necessary in certain 
programs, of finances, that the amount of activity at the Correspondence School is going to increase. I 
think it is going to increase rather rapidly. I wonder if the Minister would be prepared to meet that 
challenge at that particular time, because I can see more students being enrolled in some of the subjects 
offered by the correspondence schools. I think its activity is going to increase in the next few years. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told that our budget this year maintains the present level. Actually, if 
enrolment increases, we have to take a look at the budget in future years. That is done with every 
sub-vote and every item. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — One final question, I notice in the 26 employees, the number of employees is 
constant but there seems to be quite an increase in the total funds in the lines of permanent positions. If 
my mathematics is correct, I think it is almost a 40 per cent increase for the 26 people that are there. I 
wonder if you can tell us how a 40 per cent increase is justified. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There was a re-adjustment of $12,000 because of deleted positions. Then 
there were adjustments of $69,270 because of salary increases and another $15,000 adjustment because 
of increment increases, which brings the adjustment to $74,270. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — It seems to me, if my mathematics is correct, that it is about a 40 per cent 
increase, and I just can't see how this is possible, with guidelines and all these things I hear about. I have 
been rolled back to six per cent myself, and I just wondered how somebody else did so much better than 
I did. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Let me clarify that. What you have here in that increase is the adjustment 
for increases for two years — 1975, October and 1976, October, yes, an adjustment for two years, plus 
the increments, plus a provision for anticipated salary adjustments in this year. Negotiations have not yet 
been completed, but there is some provision in here to accommodate that. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — . . . guidelines I presume. 

1566 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

Item 2 agreed. 
 

ITEM 3 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, we have here again, as the Member for Maple Creek raised the 
question, the same topic in Item No. 2. I find that you have 76 employees, dropped to 75 employees — 
permanent positions; yet we have an increase there, Mr. Chairman, of some one-quarter of a million 
dollars. That's a pretty healthy increase. I would like to have an explanation for that if you please? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Now the approved budget in 1976-77 was $758,150. There were deletions 
that took place during the year, of $7,970, leaving an adjustment base of $750,180. There was a 
reclassification of a Child Care Attendants to Parental Care Supervisors, which brought an increase total 
of $15,300. There were the negotiated increases of October 1, 1975, which were $165,450. There were 
range adjustments — April, 1976 — of $15,080, annual increments of $26,330, and there is also a 
provision, as I indicated in the other Item, of $77,790 for anticipated salary increases in this coming 
contract. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the Minister's reply, but an increase within a group of 75 
people, in salary, of about a quarter of a million dollars, reclassification or no reclassification, you have 
one fewer employee, and yet the total salary goes up by a quarter of a million dollars, surely 
reclassification alone doesn't bring about that amount of salary increase. Is that what you are saying, that 
these people had a reclassification to end up with almost a quarter of a million dollars more in salary? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There was a reclassification of Child Care Attendants to Parental Care 
Supervisors, part of the reclassification that took place, and that accounted for $15,300 of the increase 
that we see before us. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — But, Mr. Minister, that is only $15,000 of this sum of $250,000. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Let me go through it again for you then. That was one of the components of 
the increase that you see there. The negotiated salary increases accounted for $165,450. In the 
negotiations, there were certain adjustments in the ranges, you know what they are, of $15,080. There 
were the regular, annual increments, and that accounted for $26,300. There is provision for $77,790 — 
the anticipated increase for this year. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just a question about the type of personnel. I identified a couple of different 
groups that I wasn't acquainted with. Would the Minister outline what type of teachers and other 
personnel you have working in the School for the Deaf? Give some sort of an indication. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — All teachers have to have a valid certificate, of course, 

1567 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
that's first of all. And then they are required to take certain special classes through the university, geared 
to the needs of teaching in this kind of a circumstance. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — What was the enrolment of that school? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — One hundred, forty. Further on with teachers, let me give you an idea of the 
kind of staff. There is a principal; there is a supervising teacher; there is the Dean of Residence; there is 
a teacher psychologist; and then there is a regular teaching staff that I was outlining a minute ago; there 
is a Parental Care staff, of whom there are 39, and three clerical and one social worker. 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Minister how are the students 
being channelled for the School for the Deaf now? Are you strictly taking them in a vocational way? Are 
there any students going to Gallaudet College, or are they all channelled to higher education in 
Edmonton? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There is a placement officer who tries counselling the students on further 
education. There are students in Gallaudet, Washington, yes. There are students who attend vocational 
training at Red River Community College in Manitoba. I am told that there are some students who come 
out of the program here and attend in Minnesota. So we do assist students in taking vocational training. 
They are 100 per cent funded; we provide that assistance, and we also assist in placement in 
occupations. 
 
The Committee recessed from 5:00 o'clock to 7:00 o'clock p.m. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I should just like to continue on a little bit with the Minister, regarding the School 
for the Deaf at Saskatoon. I asked before, if they were getting the proper training now, that they were 
giving them the opportunity to go on to university as they have been in the past, to go on to college and 
to become degree students. There used to be four or five students a year — some years more, some years 
less — coming out of Saskatoon, and I am wondering if the students of the School for the Deaf in 
Saskatoon still have the opportunity to come out and to go for a degree, other than vocational. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, certainly we prepare them. They have the opportunity if they can meet 
admission requirements of the university. The opportunity is there. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I am speaking specifically about Gallaudet. I don't think our teachings 
in western Canada, so far, have been brought along enough so that these students can be brought in to an 
accredited Saskatchewan university. I am talking about a simultaneous teaching university, where they 
teach sign language and oral at the same time. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am not sure what you are asking, but there have been in the past, and 
there now is — okay we are not sure of now, but in the past we have had students from here go to 
Gallaudet in 

1568 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

Washington, so I think the program obviously must prepare them. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I agree, in the past you have had this. In fact, I had a daughter 
graduate from Gallaudet College in Washington, as you know. But, I believe this opportunity is being 
taken away from the deaf students now, and I don t believe that you have deaf students leaving the 
Saskatoon School for the Deaf for Gallaudet College now. I believe you might have only one or two 
students in there now, and I understand the program is being phased out. And the reason I am taking this 
approach, is because the governments of the past have been just terrific in helping these students along, 
and you in your commitments to these students, say anybody who can't be educated in Saskatchewan 
will get the proper education elsewhere. The province has been very, very good at this. All past 
governments were. And, I wonder if now you are not trying to channel these people the vocational way, 
and this is what worries me. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I don't know where the Member gets that impression, Mr. Chairman. There 
is no lessening of emphasis on training to prepare students for going to a place like Gallaudet if they 
want to than there ever has been. But, it's a choice that the students have to make. Maybe in one year 
there may not be students who want to go to Gallaudet. We don't take them and put them there. We 
provide all the support that they can have. We will provide full support; we have in the past; we will 
continue to do that now. As a matter of fact, in the last two or three years there have been some major 
improvements in the programs of the School for the Deaf, and I think the Member may know something 
about that, and if anything, the program has improved. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I agree with what you have done for the School for the Deaf in 
Saskatoon. I had my tongue in cheek when the Opposition Members were questioning the finances of 
the School for the Deaf because I have a soft spot in my heart for it naturally. But, we did see a 
reduction in students, and I am wondering when you mentioned they can go anyway they want if, at the 
same time, there was a program that was oriented and leaned to encourage students, when they had the 
qualifications, to go to Gallaudet. We have seen a falling-off of that. Now, are you encouraging this or 
are you letting it go its own way and let it slip? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There has been no change in policy at all; I can assure the Member of that. 
We have counselling services that are provided; they are there. All of the opportunities available are 
clearly brought to the students and there is just no change, I can assure you. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Well, I am very happy to hear that. One other comment I should like to make and 
that is that in Saskatchewan the Government of Saskatchewan has spent many dollars on these students 
and many of these students are very, very intelligent students and have proven this. In many cases, the 
jobs they take on are done just as well, or even better than in some cases of hearing people, because of 
their concentration. But I think that the Government has been guilty, and I brought this up in the past, of 
wasting this talent. We are not giving them enough job opportunities in Saskatchewan to stay here, and 
as a result, 

1569 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
not only the graduates of the deaf colleges, but also people of other vocations, are having to go to other 
places to seek jobs or else they are put into too narrow a field, and this also concerns me. I think, even in 
the Deaf School at Saskatoon, the only place a graduate from the college, a degree graduate, can get a 
job, is supervising a dormitory for children. Now, I wonder if this is right. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There certainly is no attempt not to provide employment for students who 
come out of the School for the Deaf. For example, you take the School for the Deaf itself. Three of the 
House Parents are deaf people and two of the teachers are deaf people. Three of the domestic workers 
are deaf people. So, even within the system we have made, I think, a fair effort in finding employment. 
If you go, and I am just saying this now from experiences that I have had because I know a number of 
people who are deaf, there are quite a significant number of people who work within the regular Public 
Service of the Government of Saskatchewan. And, I agree they are just as capable as anyone else and I 
will also agree with the concentration argument that you provide. We have a staff placement officer, am 
I correct on that, in the School, who assists in this and goes out and tries to place students, not only in 
the public sector, but in the private sector as well. 
 
I don't disagree at all with the importance of providing this kind of a service, and providing job 
opportunities. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased to hear that some of the staff at the School for the 
Deaf are, in fact deaf, because this was one of the problems that graduates out of Gallaudet were having, 
coming back home and getting a job teaching with the Saskatoon School for the Deaf. At that time, a 
few years ago, they were rejected and only could get jobs as House Parents or other maybe less menial 
jobs. I am not belittling the House Parent job because it definitely helps mould these children, but I do 
hope you will take a close look at these graduates and encourage people to go on to Gallaudet College, 
because there are only a few of them that qualify to go on. I would hate to see anything happen to that 
program. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Before we had the supper break, I had mentioned that I would ask some questions 
regarding the some one-quarter of a million dollar increase, Mr. Minister, and you gave me some 
explanations in regard to classification, increments and so on. 
 
No matter which way you want to cut the cake in giving the explanation, Mr. Minister, I find that it is 
about a $3,000 raise per individual. It amounts to about $3,000 and I am not saying they are not 
deserving of the raise at all, but I am saying that $3,000 per individual is a fair raise in one year, and I 
think the Minister would have to agree. 
 
There is one other question I have. Are there any federal funds going into the School for the Deaf? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am sorry, I was discussing something with my staff. You ended with a 
question and I didn't hear you. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I had two questions, Mr. Minister. The first 

1570 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

question was in regards to the staff increase in salary, no matter which way you want to cut it, and give 
me reasons for it, still is a salary increase of something like $3,000 a staff member. The other question I 
asked — are there federal funds for the School for the Deaf? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, first to your latter question — no there are no federal funds that come 
directly; there are none. Indirectly, in this way, the Northwest Territories have some students who are in 
attendance and some Indian Affairs students who are in attendance, therefore, they pay the tuition fees. 
So indirectly in that way, that is the extent of the federal funding. 
 
On the salary question, I have given you the breakdowns; I don't know if I can do any more to help you. 
And I want to clarify that you know we are looking at that increase over two stages — there was an 
adjustment in October; there was an adjustment in April, and don't leave out the fact that there were the 
increments and there also is provision in here for anticipated increases due to the 
presently-being-negotiated agreement. I don't know whether you included that in your average 
calculation, but you have to remember that. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just one question. I was just wondering what sort of fees you charge the Federal 
Government for the students from Indian Affairs. I notice that if you take the total budget for the Deaf 
School, which is $1,237,000, and if you divide through by the number of students enrolled, 104, you 
find that it is a rather expensive proposition — $8,841 per student, compared to last year of $6,800. I 
was just wondering, could the Minister outline what sort of services the students have. Is it a boarding 
school? I think maybe I heard the Minister indicate that it was. What sort of fees do you get from the 
Federal Government? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, there are resident students and there are about 120 students in 
residence. The tuition fee that is paid by the Federal Government for their students is $22 per day. Sure 
it's an expensive program, but it is, I guess you can define it as a program for a special need, and it is 
obviously going to cost some money. I think we can economize or try to economize, but we shouldn't 
cut corners in this kind of a program. I think it is too important to do that. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, just one more question. I wonder if your department is aware of the 
amount per capita spent on the blind in Canada, and the amount spent on deaf people in Canada. I wish 
you would look at those figures. It is just almost staggering; it's almost unbelievable. Just to show you 
why I think the School is a wonderful thing and just how much it is out of proportion — they are two 
handicaps and both very bad handicaps — but I wish you would look at those figures. They are just 
staggering. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am interested in them too and we will do some looking at them. I don't 
know the figures. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 

1571 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
ITEM 4 

 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, just a question. Could I ask the Minister under which section we 
will be dealing with the future certification and the Director of Teachers' Services? Which section does 
that fall under — that of Personnel Services or under Administration? Where do we include this? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Either 8 or 9. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 

ITEM 5 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, looking at this particular section, we see a tremendous increase. We 
have the staff going down by one; we have the total amount budgeted for this particular Item at $68,000, 
almost $69,000. Mr. Minister, is that not a tremendous increase in one year, with a staff reduction of 
one? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Okay, not necessarily. Let me give you what the increases are. This is the 
salary component. The base was $34,380 — 1976-77; but there were deletions of $6,100 because of the 
deletion of a Clerk II, so the adjusted base is $28,280. Negotiated increases in salaries on October 1, for 
1975, were $4,740. There was some reclassification which brought some adjustment in salary, which 
resulted in $2,400 additional money. There are the annual increments which amount to $1,160, giving 
you $36,580, and then there is again, a provision for anticipated increases for the contract being 
negotiated and there is provision in here for $2,930. That is the salary component. There are other 
increases, of course, that deal with just the cost of printing. The department does a considerable amount 
of printing within-house, and there is a substantial increase in printing costs and in the acquisition of 
graphic supplies, which to some extent, is not really controllable. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Why do we have this under 'Other Personal Services'; a sum of almost $13,000 this 
year, and it didn't appear last year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That is provision for a halftime publications coordinator and a half-time 
graphic artist. That is what that is for. It didn't exist prior to this. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Why wouldn't you keep that in 'Permanent Positions' then? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It is not in 'Permanent Positions.' It is in 'Other Personal Services.' They are 
not permanent positions. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — The question that I am getting at here is we have an Item in the Budget, Mr. Minister, 
that was not there last year, to the tune of almost $13,000. Now does that involve the hiring of another 
individual? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Because of the cost saving of doing in-house graphics and 

1572 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

in-house printing we require some of the expertise that a publication coordinator and a graphic artist can 
provide. They are part-time people; they are half-time people. It is not on a full-time basis, and 
therefore, that is why it is under 'Other Personal Services'. If it were a full-time job with a fulltime 
person, it would show up in the category just above it. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, if the school systems, which are performing the same services, were to 
increase in proportion, we would be out of business in the province. You have increased this one 
particular item in the budget by some $28,000, and at the same time you show the hiring of one less in 
the way of staff. That is a tremendous increase for one year, is it not? You have here the percentage that, 
to me, is a very high percentage. You are going from $45,000 to almost $69,000. Now, we are not 
allowed to do that. We would be out of business. The department, I think, is not setting much of an 
example for us here. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Your argument is incorrect because if you go further into Items 8 and 10, 
or 9 and 10, you will find out that there are decreases in spending on printing. That is reflected in the 
kind of work that we are going to do in this area that we are discussing right now. You can’t take one 
isolated Item and say that there is excessive spending taking place; there is none. Sure, this particular 
Item has shown an increase in total from $45,000 to $68,000. But when we get to the other Items, which 
I mentioned, you will find that the reductions there, more than compensate for the increases that we have 
here. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — The other day when we were doing one of your other departments, 
you said that the increased amounts, and I am using your figures here of dropping four to three, were a 
10 per cent basic increase before implementing the 5 per cent increment, and 10 per cent again for an 
increase. If that is the case in 1977, what was the case in 1976? You must have done the same thing 
again, when I look back and see the amounts rising. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You are talking about another Item in another department, right? 
 
MR. KATZMAN:: — It reflects in this department as well. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, not necessarily, not because of the difference in the department, but 
because of the different kinds of employees who may be in the particular Item. When salary negotiations 
were completed, there was an average percentage increase of 10 per cent in some categories. There are 8 
per cent increases in other categories; 50 per cent increases in other categories; so that 10 per cent 
figure, as it is applied there, may not apply here. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The point is that the other day you said that there were two increases and an 
increment involved in all three things. If that is the case, then are you telling me that in your last year's 
Estimate there was no incremental increase, I mean no increases, sorry? 

1573 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Once again, it depends on where you are. Where we were at the prior Item, 
there was a situation where there were two increases. There was one in October and then there were 
further adjustments in April. In this Item, that does not happen. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 

ITEM 6 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister would tell us what is included under this 
particular Item? What services are we talking about here? We have 19 employees. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, in this area, the activity is responsible for the provision of all support 
services in the department, which includes personal and office services, the liaison with Government 
Services, Central Purchasing, printing, rentals and so on; that is really what the whole raison d'etre of 
this is. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Well, then let me ask you this question. You moved from the Ivory Towers down to 
College. Is this the result? Does it result in a savings to the Department of Education? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — In what way? 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Obviously, you are renting space, right? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, the Department of Education . . . 
 
MR. BAILEY: — You have certain funds you have had to pay. You now have located in Parkview 
Place on College and is there a savings by having the department there? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The Department of Education does not rent the space. The Department of 
Government Services rents the space. So, I can't answer the question. No, you would have to ask the 
Department of Government Services. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
Item 7 agreed. 
 

ITEM 8 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to direct a question to the Minister. I understand that 
there is a possibility that the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon is going to be changing the 
enrolment quotas for the College of Education. I believe this last year they enrolled something like 900 
students in the first year. There is some talk right now that the enrolment this coming year will be 
drastically cut to, I think, the figure is around 450 students per year, rather than, say, the 900 students 
who were enrolled this year. 
 
I was wondering whether the Minister would care to comment 

1574 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

on what effect this might have on teacher supply, three or four years down the road, when these people 
have finished their university training. I don't know whether they consulted you. Maybe the Minister can 
indicate that. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — This is a contemplated action. The Board of Teacher Certification and 
Education has had this; it has been directed to them by the universities. The board has expressed some 
concern about this contemplated action and there are some discussions that are taking place. It has been 
communicated to the . . . 
 
MR. STODALKA:: — Mr. Chairman, I heard the people from the university indicate that they don't 
feel that there is going to be a shortage in three or four years down the line. It is hard to visualize, 
particularly now, in certain areas of the province. The thing that bothered me a bit more was the method 
of selection for admittance into the program. The people at the university indicated that they were going 
to use the Grade XII average. I have some concern that it is going to be rather hard under the present 
system of evaluation, to equate one school with another school. I have a feeling sometimes, that within 
one school it is just a little bit easier to get the 75 percentage than it is, possibly, in another school. The 
university is going to, according to what they have said, admit Grade XII students on the basis of their 
Grade XII average. This, I have some concern about. I was wondering whether they had taken this 
matter up with the Minister. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I agree with the Member's concern. We have expressed our reservations 
about the question which you mentioned before and about the method of selection which is being 
proposed. That is very clear. The board, on which we are represented as well as other education 
authorities, is certainly dealing with this and considers it a pretty high priority and important item. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I just want to say I think the university is moving in the right direction, but it 
disturbs me if this is going to be the primary method of selection. I wonder if the Minister indicated to 
them and gave them any ideas as to how he felt they might select students. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, we have to accept the correct base. The university can, in the 
final analysis, and does accept their system. We have, the board has directed its concern about the 
proposals and in these preliminary stages, that is as far as it has gone. Your question is, have we 
specifically said what method of selection should be used? No, at this point in time we have not. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I didn't mean specifically. I was just wondering whether you gave them any 
suggestions, and maybe while you are on your feet, I haven't heard of any similar move at the University 
of Regina. Is there such a move here? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told that, yes, we have heard that it is being contemplated, but there 
has been no indication of that in any formal form to either the board or myself. 

1575 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman, I have some concerns that I think that I agree with 
the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) in that something has to be done to regulate the number of 
students going into the College of Education, because I am quite sure that we are facing more of a 
surplus than many of us realize right now. There are a considerable number of young people who will 
not have teaching positions this fall, who would like to have teaching positions. This will be greatly 
increased over the next few years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to share the same concern as the Member for Maple Creek. We have, on several 
occasions, discussed admittance based on the Grade XII average. I know, and you know, and everyone 
in the province who has anything to do with education knows, that what has happened in the last few 
years is not something which one can place too much validity in. And I am talking about the Grade XII 
marks. When the Minister, himself, left high school, the government bursaries were based on Grade XII 
standings, and they were allotted in zones. When our system of evaluation and grading changed, the 
percentage of average marks that the students received, particularly in some schools, greatly increased, 
so that some schools got all the bursaries. The department recognized this deficiency and in doing so, 
allotted them on a quota system to each school. I think, and let's be honest, that is the reason it was done 
in that way. There is no use kidding ourselves. Certainly you can make up all the excuses that you want, 
but that is basically the reason why it was done. Now, if you are going to take Grade XII averages only, 
you are going to find that the difference in two schools, 30 miles apart, could well vary by 20 per cent. 
So, I would suggest, in support of what the Member for Maple Creek has said, that you emphasize very 
strongly upon the College of Education that this is only one criteria, but marks in themselves, should 
very, very definitely not be the major criteria. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 

ITEM 9 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Question. I noticed a drop in your department staff from 20 to 16. Does this 
mean there is going to be a change within the internal operation of some sort? Would you describe what 
these changes are going to be? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The reason is not because of a deletion of staff. It is a transfer from one 
area to another. For example, it is the transfer of three staff to Management Information Services and 
one to Consultant Services; that is why the reduction. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Could you explain to me why Other Personal Services have taken such a drastic 
jump? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The answer is that there are three consultants who are now charged here 
and were charged to Contractual Services before, so therefore, it didn't show up that way. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — They will be shown missing in what other item? 

1576 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The next one. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — If they are showing in the next one, there is only a $20,000 drop there, where we 
are showing over a $100,000 increase. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There is a $70,000 drop in the next one, in Other Expenses — from 
$285,000 to $215,000. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 

ITEM 10 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I would assume that this is the one area that the Minister said that he 
would show up as a savings; is that correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Items 8 and 9. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Pardon, 8 and 9. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I'm sorry; it is 9 and 10. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — That is not much of a savings. I’m looking for a quarter-million dollars in savings 
here and it hasn't shown up here has it? 
 
Item 10 agreed. 
 

ITEM 11 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Question. Would the Minister distinguish between Regional Services No.11, and 
I believe there is another entry a little later on — Regional Services again — I think it is probably 
No.15? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The Regional Services is a divisional heading, and that is in No. 11. All the 
other consulting services, Special Education, superintendents, and so on, are part of that regional set-up. 
All that you have in No. 11 is sort of the heading of the whole branch. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — That means that the ones in . 15 are people that are attached to the regional 
office, and the ones in No. 11 are attached to the department in here? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The regional offices are in No.14; superintendents and the districts are 
provincially-employed — that is in No. 14. 
 
Item 15 is — I think maybe I misled you a bit — Item 15 is a different area. It begins to deal with school 
administration, grants and this sort of thing. If you are looking at the regional offices and where the 
provision for the employment of superintendents is regional and our district superintendents — that is in 
Item 14. 
 
Item 11 agreed. 

1577 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

 
ITEM 12 

 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, again I should like to point out to the Minister that we have here, in 
some of these sections, a tremendous increase. You have increased staff by two, only, and you have 
about a $200,000 increase in this Item. Mr. Minister, there has to be more explanation than we have 
been getting for this tremendous increase in these various branches of the department. If the 
hundred-and-some school boards across the province were to follow this example, we wouldn't be in 
business. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Don't get confused or don't confuse the fact that there is a big increase to be 
related to salaries alone. This is the Item where there are some major things happening which entail an 
expenditure of new money. It is here that the increases relate to the expansion of the DWI counter-attack 
program which is going to be expanded this year. It now exists in three centres; it is going to be 
broadened out into a number of other centres in Saskatchewan. In here, also, is provided an increase for 
the Safety '77 program which the department is going to be undertaking as part of the total Government 
package on Safety '77 — the preparation of material for schools dealing with safety, the in-service 
training of teachers and superintendents, and a number of other things. That is why there is a bigger 
increase here from the point of view of increase alone. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Last year we found out that there was $10,000, or something, to do with this dental 
program; we caught that up in Education some place. While this may be attached to the Department of 
Education, and while you may facilitate the schools and what have you, in the Safety '77 program, does 
it belong here or does it belong with the program itself? How much did Safety '77 cost the Government? 
We find some in Education; we find some in Highways; I question that, Mr. Minister, putting little 
dribbles in each department like this. You mentioned just that one. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We will determine at the end how it was spent by the Government by 
adding up the figures. I think we have a program that is coordinated; there is a coordinating committee 
that is established; there is a coordinated Minister's committee that is established, of which I am a 
member. Clearly, it only makes sense that there be a many-pronged approach to Safety '77 — highway 
safety. 
 
One of the areas that has some responsibility is certainly, I think, the Department of Education — all of 
us who are involved in education — because that is one of the major ways in which to improve highway 
safety, is to change attitudes. The formation of attitude is a pretty important function that happens in the 
school. If we can help our teachers become more informed about the need for safety on highways and 
help them to help their students approach highway safety in a more positive way, then I think we will 
have made a major contribution. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Would the Minister indicate what branches these 11 consultants, or the staff, are 
going to work in? Could you give us a run-down please; that is 13 this year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Can you repeat the question again? 

1578 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I notice the figure calls for 13 — under Item 12 – consultant services — 13 
permanent employees. Would the Minister just itemize what these 13 employees do? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The personnel that you see listed there are: one who is a director; there is a 
Chief Physical Education Officer; there are education consultants — six of them — two are French 
consultants, driver education, guidance, industrial arts, Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association; 
and then there are six clerical and stenographic staff. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I am trying to remember what was in the department last year and comparing it 
to what is in this year. Where did the two additional people go? Are they secretaries — clerical? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You mean who the two extra ones are? Okay, there is the reinstatement of a 
French consultant, which was not included last year, and the transfer of a physical education consultant 
into this area. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, again we see something here. Mr. Minister, it is just too hard to pick 
up. You have an increase; you list an increase of two individuals from 11 to 13, with about $106,000 
difference. For two people, that is not good enough, just to have it there, $106,000; you have increased 
your staff by two only. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Let me give it to you again. The approved Estimate in 1976-77 was 
$156,380. There were positions transferred in, and that accounts for $21,090. So there is a new adjusted 
base from which we work, and that is $177,470. The negotiated increase as of October 1, 1975 was 
$30,320; annual increments added another $3,340. There was a reclassification of a driver education 
consultant, which added another $21,080. There is a provision for a music consultant — $9,170. There 
is provision for anticipated increases in the new agreement which is being negotiated. This gives you, 
step-by-step, what the increases are. 
 
MR. G. N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Did you say the DWI Course was in this Item? Can 
you tell me how much money you have set aside for the DWI Course in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — $117,000. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Can you tell me how much of that is for the Prince Albert area or the Prince Albert 
program? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We can get it; we don't have it broken down right here. If you want we can 
get it. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Can you tell me how much money was spent on the DWI program last year and in what 
centres it was? 

1579 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I can give you the gross figure. I can't give you, right now, the 
broken-down figure for each centre. The total figure last year was $36,000. It is really a substantial 
increase to $117,000. 
 
MR. WIPF: — And you can't give me a figure on how many places it was held in last year — other 
than Prince Albert? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I think there were three centres, but once again I can't break down the 
$36,000 right away, until we have had a chance to work it out on the basis of money. There were three 
centres. 
 
MR. WIPF: — How much of that $36,000 was on the trip to Qu'Appelle for the seminar sessions they 
had there last summer? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Once again, I guess that is more of a Public Accounts question than it is an 
Estimates question, for this coming fiscal year. We don't have that information with us. I can give you a 
'guesstimate’. I don't want you to say that this is the final figure, but the fellows think it is around 
$2,500. 
 
MR. WIPF: — With this $117,000, you plan on going into five centres this year. What plans do you 
have now for distributing this money to the centres? Is it to be like it was over the last couple of years, 
where you spent your own money, then waited for your money to come in, or is there going to be a 
special fund set up for these committees, so that the instructors will have some money? And, also, out of 
this $117,000, are they going to buy projectors to run this course, or will the committees have to go 
around borrowing and begging projectors again? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, the Member raised this with me several days ago. The 
department indicated that there has been recognition to some of the difficulties with the funding part of 
it, or the method of funding, therefore, there will be some changes in that. The review is being 
undertaken. The other question was, will the department be buying projectors? The answer is, no. There 
is, we find, more than adequate equipment in the communities now. It doesn't seem to make sense to 
duplicate expenditures and duplicate this kind of equipment. It is a community program and we want to 
see the community involved. And I think it is more effective because of that. The answer is, no, we are 
not in here, budgeting for the purchase of equipment. 
 
MR. WIPF: — As a community program then, can you advise me on where we will be able to pick up 
these projectors in a community? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Community colleges have this equipment; schools have this kind of 
equipment; other agencies I know, have this kind of equipment. Our consultant is more than ready and 
willing to help arrange for this equipment. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I have been involved in this program ever 

1580 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

since its inception, in fact, I was one of the people that started this program in Saskatchewan. Your 
department, I think, and you are flying a kite there when you are saying you can get the equipment for 
this from the community colleges and all that. Our counsellors or instructors have spent evenings 
running around trying to pick this equipment up. I know that one of the requests for over a year has been 
to get a projector. I think the worst thing that could happen to this program is when the judge has 
sentenced 15 people to the course, then you don't have the equipment there. It is impossible, at least in 
the Prince Albert area, to get a projector from the community college or the schools, when they are tied 
up somewhere else. You have to return these projectors; if you borrow them at night, you have to return 
them. If you have a course running every night or every second night, it would be much more adequate 
to have an equipment budget worked into this. It is one of the real short- falls of the program. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — As I said, the consultant has done an outstanding job, and I know the 
Member agrees with me, because we have talked about it. If there is difficulty in a community because 
of timing and because of equipment being tied up, then I am sure that through the consultant, you can 
make arrangements to get equipment that the department already has. Instruction Resources has some 
equipment. It can be arranged easily and quickly. If we can help, we will. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The Minister is then guaranteeing me that we can get equipment from your department 
for these courses at regional offices 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am not guaranteeing that you can get it on a permanent basis. I am saying 
the first priority and the first emphasis has to be at the community level. There is equipment at the 
community level. You have to go look for it, but once you identify where it is, most community 
organizations, and especially community colleges, are most happy to provide it. In cases where there are 
difficulties, I am saying, work with a consultant and I am sure that he will be able to try to arrange 
something from the department. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you fail to understand. Your consultant is in Regina, and a telephone call 
to him at 2:00 p.m. in the afternoon saying we can't locate a projector — and this has happened — won't 
work. I have been involved in this for a long time. You have 15 people sitting there. If you can't put on 
the program, you are going to have breaches by them, and I think equipment is a real, necessary part. 
We are spending lots of money on this, hopefully to save lots of money in the future. The price of a 
projector will just make it that much easier. This projector can be used for other things. This program 
can be taken out and put into schools. We have tied it in with the Driver Education Program, and that is 
not bad because you can go into a school and get a projector. But this is one of the things that really 
disturbs us, and it is this problem of equipment. A thousand dollar investment is just going to make it a 
lot easier. It is one of the reasons why instructors are so frustrated about the whole thing. They end up 
with no material. We can't expect the consultant in Regina to drive up, even if your consultant would do 
it. He would leave here at 3:00 o'clock in 

1581 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

the afternoon, and be there in time, but that is a little difficult for him. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Surely, if you are putting together a course for September 22, you don't just 
realize at 2:00 o'clock in the morning of September 22 that you are going to have the course in the 
evening. I just don't believe that happens. I don't disagree that maybe there have been problems in 
getting equipment, but what I am telling you is, if there is a problem, we will assist as best we can. 
There is equipment in resource centres, and all you have to do is pick up the phone; but obviously, if you 
pick up the phone at 2:00 o'clock on a certain day and say you have to have it that evening, the logistics 
of that are a little difficult. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I understand your feelings on that, but this has happened. You go and rent, 
or tell the community college, that you want a projector — then something else comes up and you can't 
get it. But what I am asking for is a simple $1,000 outlay, probably. We've had a problem with this 
program right from the start. When we tried to get it going, first of ail we had a problem with the 
Attorney General's Department; then we had a problem with other departments. I hope that you can do 
something about this and release $1,000. There's a lot of money floating around, it seems anyway; if you 
can release $1,000 that's $5,000 this year to get a projector for these people. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I don't know whether the Member doesn't want to talk with people in the 
community, but every school has projectors and they are not utilized every night. In fact, they are 
seldom utilized at night and the availability is there, and when it is not, then we will help, okay? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — In other words, Mr. Minister, what you are saying to the Member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake is, that somewhere you can borrow equipment and if you arrange it three months 
ahead of time it should be there. That's what you are saying to him. Have you ever had the problem of 
borrowing equipment and had it turned down five minutes before you get there because the program has 
changed, the equipment breaks, that you borrow. He has a sound argument that you are totalling 
ignoring. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I just want to add one more thing here. One of the plans of the program 
was to do some satellite work in the Prince Albert area, and have an instructor go out to Wakaw or up to 
Big River, and save these people from having to come in – the can't drive in anyway — and you can't 
borrow a projector from a school and yank it out and take it to Big River. They don't go for this. If you 
are in the school, okay, but it is very, very difficult in my area to get a location for this. We were in the 
Community College, in the School of Social Work, in many, many places; now we are located in the 
Court House in Prince Albert, and they don't have a projector there. They just don't seem to go for too 
many films, and they don't have a projector, so it is a case of bringing one in every night. If we had our 
own and, as the Member for Rosthern says, there have been several occasions when the projector was 
broken — we have received a broken projector from another department — if we had our own, we 
would maintain it, take care of it, and I think it would be one way to help this program get going. It's 
new and it's needed. 

1582 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — All I can say is we will talk to our other consultant tomorrow or the day 
after, or next week, and if he can identify the problem, we will see what he has to say about it and if we 
can assist, I have already told you, we will assist as best we can. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I should like to get into a topic here with the Minister, with 
regards to the relationship of the Department of Education with the community college, on a number of 
items. I don't know whether you would agree to have it at this particular time under Consultant Services. 
I don't think that is the particular topic and it has been mentioned, so I think, with the Minister's 
permission, I should like to direct a few questions to him. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is some concern among school boards, and I am sure you have heard the concerns, 
about the availability of some of their community college courses to students attending school. I am not 
talking about a ceramics course in the evening or woodcrafts, or a wood class, whatever it may be; but 
rather, I am referring to the potential operation that looks inevitable in credit classes. I think you 
understand what I mean. 
 
Students attend community college classes in the evening for 20 or 30 credits. Now, obviously, your 
department has looked at this. Have you given any guidelines as to the number of hours they must be in 
that class and whether they have permission from the school which they are attending, to enrol in that 
class? We are into a new area here, Mr. Minister, that I think is going to have to have some clarification, 
and it will have to come from the Department of Education. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There is a continuing committee that exists and there is also a Minister's 
Committee which, when I was Minister of Continuing Education, we talked about in Estimates. It has 
made some recommendations, and the situation now is one in which the students are not entered into a 
credit class unless they have the permission of their principal and the board. Obviously, the 
superintendent is in the picture. The board then has to have some kind of an arrangement or an 
agreement with the community college; that's the policy. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister sees that particular policy changing. We are 
under some pressure that permission should not have to come from the principal of the school. The 
pressure is that the student is old enough to have a free choice and, therefore, that all that is required is, 
really, his permission to attend. I am afraid that there is some merit to that particular argument, that if a 
student wishes to take a class, it is up to that student, I suppose. The thing that concerns me, Mr. 
Minister, is a class being offered in a particular subject while that same subject is being offered in 
schools. You know, we could get into a duplication of services here, and it could be very costly, and it 
could be a demoralizing thing to the school as well. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That's why the policy is as it is and that's why, I guess you could say, it's 
restrictive in that sense. No, there is no intention at the present time to change it. I think there is 

1583 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

probably nobody better-qualified to decide, along with his board and his superintendent, than the 
principal. We certainly have no intention of changing. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — What is the minimum number of hours required for a credit class being offered in the 
30-level through the community college? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told that in community colleges they are using about 60 to 70 hours. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — That compares, Mr. Minister, to approximately 100 hours. 
 
Item 12 agreed. 
 

ITEM 13 
 
MR. STODALKA: — A question, Mr. Chairman. I notice an increase from 7 to 12. Does this mean that 
the department is embarking on some new programs within the special education section? If you are, 
would you please outline them? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The major thing you see here and you speak about is, in fact, some 
anticipated new thrusts in special education. We have an increase in the number of regional special 
education coordinators and the purpose of this staff increase is to provide additional regional 
coordinators of special education services in more areas of the province. 
 
I am trying to find a brief way of giving this to you, and here, in fact, is what is going to be happening. 
Here are the duties of these people: To assist in the organization and implementation of a special 
education planning committee at both the local school jurisdiction and the regional level; to organize 
and to engage in surveys and other information gathering strategies designed to identify the educational 
needs of handicapped children; co-ordinate the work activities of support personnel from other 
Government departments with which there are sometimes difficulties — the co-ordination aspect of it – 
and the Member smiles, so I think he knows what I am talking about; and private agencies as well, and 
to provide just more of major consultative and in-service assignments in the area of education of the 
handicapped; to help and assist local school superintendents in all matters pertaining to the designation 
of a student that is handicapped; participation in the orientation and planning meetings with the special 
education section, and so on. It is similar to the pilot project which has now been operating for a little 
while around the Weyburn-Estevan area; we are expanding that. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Are these people going to be attached to the regional offices, or are they going to 
be working out, and if they are going to be attached to the regional offices, does this mean that there will 
be one special education person working out of one office, or will there be one for two offices or..? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We are moving towards one in each. They will be in the 

1584 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

regional offices. That's the most accessible place and I think it's the right place. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to hear the Minister say that he is moving, because I go 
back about 15 years and, of course, we have the then-famous — we were going to establish the HEW 
Committee. That wasn't Hugh Thompson; that's Health, Education and Welfare. The conflict among 
these three departments has reigned supreme ever since, and it still does. I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, 
that not only school superintendents, but school principals and parents themselves, are totally confused 
at times when they have people coming from Education, they have people coming from Health, and 
sometimes from Social Services as well. We are getting three different stories and they are confused and 
we sit back and wonder what is going on. 
 
At the present time, one of the most confusing things to us in the field of education is that sometimes, 
unknown to us, the people from the Department of Health show up and they have this particular story. 
About a day later, the people from Core Services show up and they have this particular recommendation. 
It has been a period of long, long confusion in being able to deal in this field of special education. Mr. 
Minister, is there not a committee presently working within the province to try to, I hate to use the words 
'HEW Program', but to try to revive a coordinating program? It seems to me that we've got something 
like this going, and if it is I would like to know something about it. I understand that we have a group 
working in the western part of the province to try to alleviate some of these problems we have had over 
the last number of years. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I agree that co-ordination is important and that is really one of the things 
that these experienced people are going to be doing. The pilot project, I find, is an excellent one. In the 
new regions where this is now going to be happening, the superintendents and teachers of schools will 
find it to be very useful. Yes, there is a committee in Government that is looking at the coordination of 
services and it has representatives from Health, Social Services, Core Services and other departments. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, this whole process of identification, I know is not a timely topic at 
this particular time, but I know that there are many, many people in the province who share this concern 
with me; it is designation of the handicapped, and I certainly will welcome, wholeheartedly welcome 
assistance in this particular area of education. I see that you have increased the staff by five, and 
hopefully, that will alleviate a lot of the problems that we have been facing. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, as so often happens, people from other branches of the Government will go out 
to a special education case that is coming up and the information which they provide is not always 
accurate. Let me say that it is most always inaccurate. They tell the parents, and sometimes they come in 
without even acknowledging the fact that there is a local superintendent there. They often come and they 
tell the parent that this is what the Board of Education will do for you. I question, Mr. Minister, whether 
these people in other branches of Government have the right to come in and designate a policy outside 
of their own department. 

1585 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The project in the southeast puts together a team that is involved with the 
designation and so on. I know the Member has a standing concern about the kind of thing you talk about 
and obviously, from time to time, there may be human error, but I would not want to leave the 
impression that I would be inclined to agree that it's a general thing that happens across the province, 
where the left hand says one thing and the right hand says the other. I happen to have a great deal of 
faith, which I have developed during my years on the Executive Council since 1972, a great deal of faith 
in the public service of this province. I think it is probably one of the — I can't compare it to other 
provinces, so I won't attempt to — but from the experience that I have had with the public service in 
Saskatchewan I think I can go anywhere in Canada and boast about it. I just wouldn't want to leave the 
impression that I would agree that there is a constant, nagging kind of a problem like you seem to 
portray to me. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — No, no, Mr. Chairman, I am not criticizing individuals. I am simply stating the case 
that this co-ordination which you are talking about is long overdue, that's all I am stating. I am not 
blaming the individual from the Department of Health or the Department of Welfare. I am just saying 
that they are going about attempting to do their jobs, when you should be working together with the 
other department before individuals are going out on their own, not knowing what the other department 
is doing about this particular case. It is bound to cause confusion. Now don't tell me that this has only 
happened in my area. Nonsense! That has happened across the province and the Minister knows that it 
has happened across the province. All I am saying is that because it is a source of embarrassment, and I 
don't care about trying to embarrass the superintendent, but it is a source of embarrassment oftentimes to 
the families involved, and if we can get a coordinating effort going here, particularly the designation of 
these students, the better off we are going to be. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — A question to the Minister. When you 'indicated that these people were going to 
be working in special education, I began to wonder if this wasn't already sort of indicating, or you might 
say accepting the fact, that developmental centres are going to be transferred to the school systems and 
these people would be there to help with that type of work. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, that's not . . . 
 
MR. STODALKA: — That doesn't follow. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It's disconnected . . . 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Will these people be working then, with Core Services and with the Department 
of Health officials, or is it a possibility that maybe Core Service people will no longer be in the field? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — These people are the coordinators. They do what the Member for 
Rosetown-Elrose essentially talks about. They bring it together, the people who are involved in this area, 
and provide the co-ordination that way. So, therefore, there is a team effort that is then put together. Our 
experience shows that it has some very excellent results. 

1586 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, the Member for Maple Creek raised the very important question and 
the Minister answered, no, that that's not a movement towards the developmental centres. I want to 
suggest to him that more and more people are demanding — I think that is the right word, and I can 
sympathize with them — more and more parents who have students who would be designated to special 
education in very severe cases, are demanding that they have the services provided to them within their 
own schools. I think that is a very legitimate demand. Now the Minister is well aware that in order for 
any school to look after the severely handicapped, as we have in special education, that it often becomes 
an extremely expensive proposal because of the numbers factor alone, that these students in rural 
Saskatchewan stay within the confines of their local school. Now in many cases, Mr. Minister, this is not 
possible. It is not possible because of facilities; it is not possible because of staff, and therefore, 
arrangements are made by local boards to purchase services elsewhere. I think in rural Saskatchewan 
you will find that in the majority of cases the student is then provided with room and board and tuition 
by the sponsoring board, in order to meet that individual's rightful request for an education. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is a group in Saskatchewan at the present time, which has come up with statements 
such as 25 per cent of all students attending school need special education. I suggest that is a highly 
exaggerated figure. It is making it extremely difficult in some areas to meet the demands, that is to be 
able to provide the type of education that particular child needs at that particular school. If you 
attempted to provide that type of instruction for them, it would almost mean a one- to-one situation. 
 
I want to suggest to the Minister that we will continue to designate and make provisions for purchasing 
services elsewhere. The boards across the province are being pressured more and more every day that 
they must provide these services at the local level. If boards do attempt to provide these services at the 
local level, I want to assure the Minister that with the type of grant structure that is available, boards are 
going to find themselves in very, very difficult positions, in order to meet all of the demands at the local 
level. 
 
In my own particular case, I know that we are setting up a type of development centre, because there are 
three or four students in one particular school. Now that is going to be extremely costly to the board. I 
think the Department should look at the cost of special education, because boards do not have their 
expenditures recognized. They are being recognized if you transport the students out, or purchase 
services elsewhere, but they fall far short when you attempt to provide this type of instruction within 
your local framework. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the Member on several occasions, keeps talking about 
pressure on the school boards, pressure on the superintendents, pressure on teachers — so what? That is 
what democracy is all about. If there is an interest group that has something that they think is important 
to them, or important to society, then we ought to provide them the opportunity to make it heard. I make 
that point because I feel strongly about it. I realize that there are some difficulties and I agree with him 
about school jurisdictions with 1) the handicapped and 2) not being able to provide a program. And one 
of the things that the 

1587 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

regional coordinators would do, as has happened in the Estevan-Weyburn area, is to facilitate 
co-operative ventures in special education among school jurisdictions in the region. I think that we have 
to look at that kind of approach in some cases. I think you will find that they will do a very excellent job 
of that as experience has shown. 
 
I recognize that it is a higher cost program. Last year we provided, I think, $3,000 in 1975; this has now 
been adjusted so that in 1977 the grant will be $4,140. So we are increasing the amount of assistance 
that we have been providing, in recognition of this greater cost factor. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I took a look at that and certainly that is one step in helping the 
situation, but in many instances, unless you provide this special education at home, for these individuals, 
and if you can't and the child has to attend someplace else, it simply means that the family has to pull up 
roots where they are because they are not going to let the child go on his or her own. 
 
In effect, what happens within a school, is that you set up a classroom for three very special educational 
students; a grant will come through of approximately $12,000 and immediately you are $12,000 short in 
the operation of that classroom with only three students. I am saying that is making it very difficult for 
boards to look after the needs of that type of student at home. It is a very, very costly business and if we 
are going to encourage these people to stay at home, and I believe they should be at home, I think you 
are going to have to do a great deal more in the field of education by way of recognizing the cost, than 
the department does now. 
 
Item 13 agreed. 
 

ITEM 14 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I notice the reduction in staff. Does this mean that you have a number of 
jurisdictions that are moving towards local employment in the coming year, and if you do would you 
give us an indication of the number and what jurisdictions they are? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — This figure is a reflection of what has already happened; school boards who 
have, in fact, since we last talked in Estimates, changed from provincially-employed to 
locally-employed. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Are the assistant regional superintendents included in this particular section? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I understand that you are going to be making some change in the status of an 
assistant regional superintendent in comparison to past years; some different arrangement in the contract 
arrangement that they have with the Department of Education. 
 
Would the Minister please outline how the employment status of these people is going to change? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — These people used to be district superintendents 

1588 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

attached to the regional office. They have now been reclassified. There is a step difference when 
reclassified, and therefore, they are in a different category. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Minister, I understand that you have eight regional offices and I think you 
have six assistant regional superintendents. Am I correct in that statement? It has also been indicated to 
me that possibly the people who are in the positions at the present time may not necessarily be in -those 
positions next year, that the change of classification has opened up the positions for competition. Is this 
correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Would the Minister please outline then, exactly what procedures will be used in 
selecting the people for these positions of assistant regional superintendents? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The normal Public Service Commission procedures will be used. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Would the Minister indicate whether or not these positions would be open for 
locally-employed people as well as his own people. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It is in-service. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Is it the Minister's intention to keep the assistant regional positions in-service? I 
wonder why they would not be open to other superintendents who work within the Province of 
Saskatchewan. Why the closed shop? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — At some point in time, I think it is fair to say that circumstances will 
change. Right now there is some movement by some boards to locally employ superintendents. There is, 
there- fore, some priority given to people already employed in the Public Service who are the district 
superintendents. I think that is fair and reasonable that these in-service people be given some priority 
provided they meet the qualifications. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just one other question. I think you indicated, and I think you said that the 
placement of these people or the appointment of these people would be run under the usual procedures 
used by the civil service. Would you please underline what the usual procedures are? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It is in the collective agreement and there is a bulletin that goes with 
in-service, and therefore, everybody has access and is notified accordingly and can apply in a normal 
way. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I find it a little bit difficult to believe that the assistant regional superintendent 
position would now come up for competition. When earlier I asked you about positions within your own 
department, you said that they weren't for competition but rather appointments. I know that you will say, 
"Oh, that is 

1589 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

a different ball game." I don't agree with you. I think that it is all within your department. All of a 
sudden your regional superintendents, who were appointed for the position and obviously they were 
appointed because they had certain expertise, they came up through the ranks, and now their positions 
are thrown open for competition in this reclassification. 
 
I think there is no consistency within the department, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There is no discrepancy at all. The positions that you talk about, which are 
executive positions, are out-of-scope positions — clear and simple. The positions of the assistant 
superintendents are in-scope positions and that is the difference. Nothing new; it's governed by the 
agreement which is negotiated and perfectly okay. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — With that explanation, why don't you throw the regional superintendent, not just the 
assistant, why not throw these positions open for competition as well? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — They are. Where have you been? I am surprised that you never applied. 
They were advertised and they were filled on a competition basis. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I am talking about the existing positions. I am not talking about when a new position 
opens up. That was advertised, I will admit, but if the assistant regional superintendent position is now 
open for competition, why aren't the regional superintendent positions open for competition? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am informed that the regional positions, not only the new ones, but the 
existing ones were filled by competition. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Would the Minister indicate why the change in the procedure from last year? 
There must be some reason for changing this classification. Would you also indicate whether or not 
there was a pay raise involved? I understand that new classification has the effect really, of creating a 
new group, a new group whose salaries would be higher than the existing district superintendents . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The reclassification is a result of the duties and the role. It is a service and 
the job entails a wider scope, a bigger region than a district superintendent. 
 
In reply to your second question, there was a pay increase. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Would the Minister indicate the extent of this pay increase? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It was two and one-half increments. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — In dollars that means? 

1590 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I can't tell you precisely. We can get it. It would be pretty close to say that 
an increment is worth about five per cent. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I presume the Minister is aware the creation of such a position that pays five per 
cent more than existing positions creates a new sort of competition. I would like to assure you, from the 
people that I have talked to that have worked in this area, that you have a morale problem in this area. 
People arc worried as to whether or not they are going to be located in the same position this year as 
they were last year, because your positions are now open. If you want to use the railway term, they feel 
that there may be a chance that they may be bumped and will have to leave. 
 
Would the Minister care to comment on this? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The Member is right, Mr. Chairman, There is an opportunity for a 
challenge. In fact we have some challenge procedures that are taking place right now. There is an 
Appeal Committee that is dealing with some challenges in the working place. And, yes, there is a 
possibility of bidding. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I just want to make sure that the Minister is aware of some of the changes that 
are really existing. People feel that they are going to probably relocate after having lived in centres for 
some length of time. There is no guarantee that the job that they have been holding for the last two or 
three years is going to be theirs. They may have to move to a different area; they may be transplanted; 
they may have to dispose of their home. These are some of the things that these people are going to be 
faced with. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I must give the Minister a great deal of credit, because he has the 
ability to kind of get around some of these questions. We have eight regional superintendents, two of 
which have their positions by competition. The other six were appointed by the department. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — They weren't appointed by the department? Are you saying that the other six regional 
superintendents received their positions by competition? Let me ask that question first. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Sorry, I have to disagree. My people tell me that those positions were filled 
by competition. You take the regional superintendent in the Weyburn area; that was a competition. That 
is not the two new ones. I guess maybe we are talking about two different things. I am talking about the 
regional superintendent. I am assuming that the Member is talking about the regional superintendent, 
Mr. Chairman. If we are talking about the same people, then the positions were filled by competition. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, let us get one thing straightened out here. 

1591 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

Were the existing, not the two new, but were the existing assistant regional superintendents' positions 
competition, or were they appointments? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That is the problem; we are not communicating. You, up until now, have 
talked about the regional superintendents; now you are talking about the assistants. Are you talking 
about the assistants? Okay, now we are talking about two different things. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Do regional assistant superintendents have their position by appointment or by 
competition? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It was a transfer; they were district superintendents. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — They were in the regional office as assistants, and then, of course, they received that 
position by appointment. Is that correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — At that time, the position of an assistant regional superintendent did not 
exist in the classification. It was simply a transfer of work responsibility. It was a transfer from the 
district to the regional office. 
 
That reclassification has now taken place and they have officially been designated as assistant regional 
superintendents within the appropriate classification category provided. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, we have it then at the present time, where the regional assistant 
superintendents' positions, those who came over, transferred from the department, their positions have 
changed so there is now a competition as to whether they will retain that position or not. That is correct, 
is it not? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There is something . . . 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, let me say this then; if their positions are now open for competition, 
the regional superintendent positions, those who were in before, they gained their position by 
competition — is that correct? The eight regional superintendents gained their positions by competition, 
and therefore, you are trying to get both the assistant regionals and the regionals so that both positions 
are by a competition. 
 
Item 14 agreed. 
 
Items 15 and 16 agreed. 
 

ITEM 17 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, this Government was fortunate in a way, in that coming into office in 
1971, they were not facing as the previous government had done, a tremendous building program 
throughout Saskatchewan. Admittedly, there are some extensive building programs taking place in the 
cities, where in most of the rural areas we are not faced with building programs. The problem is on the 
other side of the ledger now, trying to find 

1592 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

enough students now to make use of all of the building facilities we have. 
 
Under grants to schools in capital, Mr. Minister, I want to suggest to you that there is one common 
problem throughout Saskatchewan in relationship to schools and that problem, of course, is a problem 
which the boards are facing large capital expenditures, mainly to the roofs of schools. This is running up 
almost to the cost of what the original school was when it was built and it is not being recognized by the 
department and the department is not recognizing these used expenditures in such a way. I'm wondering 
if the Minister can explain why these major renovations, which are necessary, are in fact not being 
recognized at this particular time? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I'm glad the Member asked the question, Mr. Chairman, because it 
provides me with an opportunity to make an announcement. We, in fact, recognize the problem with 
roofs in schools and therefore, shortly, those gentlemen will be getting, as superintendents for their 
school boards, a directive or a memorandum outlining what the policy is and it will meet this need 
which I agree with the Member wholeheartedly, is an important need and I'm most pleased that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, will in this year, be able to accommodate it. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I agreed with what he said, Mr. Chairman, because that's the best news, that's the best 
news that's come out of the Department of Education for a long time, I can assure you. 
 
May I beg the indulgence of the Minister? Could you ask the gentleman to your left there, if he has any 
idea as to what this amount will be? I feel like running up and phoning and telling them to pull the pails 
out and let it rain. Let's hope it does rain, so that we don't have to put these pails out. Can I have some 
indication as to what these funds may be? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Obviously you wanted the rain sheet to find out where the holes are. 
 
In a general sense you get the details, and I think that is a better way to do it, but it will be on the same 
basis as capital grant allocations are right now. There will be a one mill requirement in there, but it will 
generally be on the same basis as the capital grants provided for school construction and renovations. 
 
Item 17 agreed. 
 

ITEM 18 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, I notice this amount is not increasing that much. Eventually, of course, 
at one time this was a fairly large amount. Could you tell me how many are involved at the present time? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told there are 15. 
 
Item 18 agreed. 

1593 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

ITEM 19 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Will the Minister outline who these agencies are, these organizations? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, Canadian Education Association, Canadian Council for Research and 
Education, Council of Ministers, Canadian Studies Foundation, Saskatchewan School Trustee 
Association, Saskatchewan Federation of Home and School, Superintendent Short Course, University of 
Saskatchewan, Principal Short Course, Saskatchewan Education Week Committee, Council for 
Exceptional Children, Overseas Book Centre, L'Association d'Education de Langue Francaise, 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, French Workshops, Youth Science Foundation, Guidance 
Counsellors' Association and Advisory Committee on Indian Education. 
 
Item 19 agreed. 
 

ITEM 20 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, the report from the Provincial Auditor, I believe it was No. 19 or 20 
in his report, mentioned some difficulty with the auditing of the Teachers' Superannuation Commission. 
Could we perhaps have an explanation as to what the Provincial Auditor was talking about? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am lost. To the best of our knowledge there was no problem. We will 
check. I guess I am not quite correct in my reply. In the year previous there were some $43,000 which 
were not precisely accounted for. The Auditor pointed it out to the Commission, and necessary steps 
have been taken and the Auditor has now indicated that there is no problem. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — In the section of Other Expenses, there is a rather dramatic increase of $65,000 
to approximately $124,000 under Item 20, and I wonder if you can indicate what that change is. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — . . . computer services have gone up. Obviously, this area of the department 
utilizes a great deal of computer services. Secondly, something which I mentioned earlier in the reply to 
the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, there is provision here for an actuarial study that is being 
undertaken. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — No, just one moment, seeing the Minister brought up the actuarial study, I just 
have one comment. 
 
A few years ago, the Government decided to ignore the Trustees and put in collective bargaining on a 
provincial basis with the majority of people excluded from the thing. But one of the moves that they did 
at that time was they put teachers' superannuation under collective bargaining at the provincial level, 
which has some very serious implications if you want to rectify the situation that you are talking about. 
 
I can't see teachers deciding to increase their contribution on a negotiated level. Very rarely, have I ever 
heard of any individual going backwards on his or her fringe benefits. 

1594 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

Suppose the actuarial study comes up and says, "Yes, there is a very severe problem here; a severe 
problem for Saskatchewan as it is in the national level, on all non-funded pension plans." Does he not 
now see the error of his way, putting superannuation at a negotiable level, or does he see this creating 
any difficulty? To me, I see this as being a very, very difficult situation. I happen to be a former teacher, 
and I don't have pension benefits, and I probably never will. But I know that if I was a teacher, there 
would be no way that I would rectify or go backwards in that particular regard. 
 
How does the Minister see this business of collective bargaining at the provincial level, with 
superannuation being a negotiable item affecting what may have to happen to solve this whole problem 
of pensions? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I guess I have more faith in reasonable people getting together over a table 
and discussing mutually the problems that they have, than the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley. There 
may be a negotiated increase in the contribution, but that is something that obviously he won't have to .. 
negotiation. There in fact, was in the first provincial agreement, a negotiated increase in the teachers' 
contributions. That was agreed upon around the table by all of the representatives there. There is give 
and take, of course; that is one of the procedures of negotiations. I don't discard the possibility out of 
hand. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — There is no question about it that teachers did negotiate an increase in their 
contributions, for good reason. They got the cost of living bonus and they got some of the other things 
that has caused the very problem that we are talking about. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, earlier we were talking about this very item. I want to straighten the 
Minister out just a little bit, in that he said earlier that you couldn't count on negotiations for an increase 
in pension, an increase in amounts of what I would call a deferred salary, as being salary; otherwise you 
would have to pay income tax, and that is nonsense. You pay the income tax on it when you take it out, 
like you do a personal registered retirement savings plan. 
 
What I am saying, Mr. Minister, is that sooner or later we are going to have to agree to this, and not just 
with teachers but with other groups as well, that the amounts of money that are being contributed on the 
individual's behalf, are going to have to be considered as the total salary package. And until we do, we 
are not getting a true picture and an accurate picture of negotiations. After all, an individual could be 
facing an increase in salary of 5 or 6 per cent, and to get an increase of even 11 per cent in the 
contribution being made to his superannuation or pension, and you say that doesn't constitute an increase 
in salary. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you can't have it both ways. You can't have money being spent on an individual, 
whether it be in a salary cheque now, or a salary cheque twenty years from now. It is very definitely 
salary and we are going to have to consider it as such. 
 
Item 20 agreed. 

1595 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I should like to ask leave of this House and permission from the Minister to 
revert to Item 17. Apparently, I overlooked someone that would have liked to have asked a question on 
that. 
 

ITEM 17 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, under the Capital Grants for schools, there is a grant given for 
construction. We have a specific problem in my constituency, of which your deputy is well aware. 
 
My question is: why when you have to renovate school or change the classrooms over, you don't call 
that an expense under capital, yet when you build another school it is all in capital? For example, you 
are going to build a new public school, because you say that you cannot build a high school under the 
capital grant. If you are going to fix up the present school for a high school, and then build a public 
school because it requires less capital grant, why don't you put them in one package and say the cost to 
make the whole thing work — the high school and the public school — is so much, and allow that in the 
capital grant rather than different budgets? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — If it is realistic and it makes sense to use the approach you are using, if 
there is a major renovation involved, we recognize under capital assistance grants, or provide grants in 
the same way as we do for a major capital construction of a new facility. If there is a specific problem, I 
am not sure which one you are talking about. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Yes, the Minister has a specific problem in mind, but unfortunately you didn't 
reply to our letter for over two and one-half months and the time lag has now beat us. That is my 
problem in that constituency with the school. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, that is just not good enough, for the Member to get up and 
make some insinuation about not replying to a letter for two months, and trying to hide behind some 
generality about a specific problem, which he is not prepared to identify and I just won't accept that. I 
want him to identify what the problem is so that I can look it up. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — As I said when I started, your deputy minister knows the whole total story. 
 
Item 17 agreed. 
Item 21 agreed. 
 

ITEM 22 
 
MR. BAILEY: — This increase that we see here amounts to the increase in the amount of coverage that 
the new insurance prevents. Is that correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am going to try to explain this; it is a little technical. I am told that the 
figure here is as large as it is, because of 

1596 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 31, 1977 

 

the global accounting that is used. We have to pay the insurance company in advance. Then when it all 
sort of comes through the chute, it really costs the Government of Saskatchewan $117,000. 
 
Item 22 agreed. 
 

FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, we have an increase here of $300,000. I am assuming that the federal 
contributions to the bilingual program are for the designated French schools of the province. Am I 
correct in that assumption, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, basically you are right, but it is not only designated for, it is for 
second language programs in general. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Has the Minister a break-down as to the various languages — for instance of this 
$800,000, how much is going for, say, the Ukrainian instruction in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Out of this, none. There is no federal contribution to other second 
languages. The assistance we provide in the department is strictly provincial. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, then this sum is strictly for the French language in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Can I ask a question then, in connection with this, Mr. Minister? When the 
Department of Education establishes a designated school, or say a designated kindergarten, in so doing 
are any of the funds which we see here, used once you've made the designation? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The answer is, yes. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Is the total voted fund, Mr. Minister, in the designated coming from this amount or 
does the Department of Education add something from their funds? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The provincial money is in the regular operating grant formula. The school 
boards get that. What this is, is a nine per cent thing; this is really extra money. It's special money 
designated for this special program, second language program. That's in addition to what the provincial 
component is, which is part of the formation grant formula. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the Minister, when a school is designated, or one 
classroom is designated or a kindergarten is designated, and of course, they get the normal operating 
funds as an ordinary kindergarten in the province, you know so much per student that's there, and so on, 
why does it cost more money to have a kindergarten in French than it does to have a kindergarten in 
English? 

1597 
 



 
March 31, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told that there is the cost of special material that is required; it's not 
the sort of normal material that you buy for the whole system in an English kindergarten program, which 
is fairly standard. There are special material costs. There may be extra teacher, or extra instruction costs. 
So, there, in fact, are extra costs that are involved. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, how many designated projects are there in Saskatchewan, that would 
be the recipients of this $800,0007 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Fourteen. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, there are 14. These are mainly, Mr. Minister, designated 
kindergartens, are they not? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There are 14 designated school schools. Of this $800,000, all of it doesn't 
go to the designated schools only. There are others. Some of the funds are utilized for the provision of a 
French consultant, provision of audio-visual material, so I would think maybe I misinformed you 
accidentally. I would not want to leave the impression that the full $800,000 goes to the designated 
schools. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — To save any further questions, I am wondering if the Minister could provide me with 
the break-down of the expenditure of this $800,000, and give it to me within the next couple of days. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. 
 
Vote 8 agreed to. 
 
MR. STODALKA:: — Mr. Chairman, I should just like, before the Minister and his staff leave, thank 
you for your co-operation this afternoon in the five hours we have been with you. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:03 o'clock p.m. 
 
 

1598 
 


