


























































Hansard: March 30, 1977


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

28th Day 
 

Wednesday, March 30, 1977. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o'clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. E. C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you I should like to introduce to 
all Members, 55 Grade Eight students from Sherwood School. They are seated in the Speaker's Gallery. 
Their teachers, Pat Pitsula and George Dobrescu, brought them to the Legislature. I plan to meet these 
people about 2:45 after they leave the gallery. I understand that among the Sherwood students here, is a 
young 13 year old student who has won two gold medals for figure skating. This young person is Lone 
Edwards and I am sure that Members will join in congratulating him for his achievements. Members 
join me, I am sure too, in welcoming these people. We hope their stay with us today is pleasant and 
educational. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I am very delighted to introduce to you and 
this Legislature, 85 Grade Seven and Grade Eight students from the River Heights School in Saskatoon 
Mayfair. I want to welcome them to this Legislature and hope they have a pleasant and worthwhile 
afternoon here. I look forward to meeting with them in the rotunda area a little later on this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, if I may take a minute, through you, to 
introduce a class of students from St. Matthew School in my constituency in the company of Mr. Lund 
and Mr. Kleisinger. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce them to Members of the Assembly 
and I look forward to seeing them in a few minutes outside the Assembly after Question Period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to join with my colleague 
Mr. Cameron, in welcoming the class from St. Matthew. The school is very close to the area that I 
represent and I think I know many of the young people and their parents. I am sure that all Members 
welcome them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker. I should like to introduce to you and to the 
Members of the House a group of 19 Grade Twelve students from the Richie Public School of Richie, 
Montana. The visitors are in the Speaker's Gallery. They are accompanied by their 

1478 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

teacher Dave Peters. I want to extend to them a very warm welcome to this Assembly and I do hope that 
they do have a very interesting and enjoyable visit to our Province of Saskatchewan and to the 
Assembly. I will be meeting with the group later this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B. M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I should like introduce to you and to this 
Legislature 47 Grade Seven students from St. Edwards School. I believe they are sitting in the west 
gallery and they are accompanied by their teachers, if I can pronounce them correctly and I apologize if 
I don't, Mr. Drabyk and Mrs. Mertworth. I can tell by the sounds in the gallery that perhaps I didn't 
pronounce them correctly. I hope you have a very enjoyable afternoon in the Legislature and that you 
find it informative. I look forward to meeting you later on in the afternoon in the rotunda area. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

MARRIAGE FOR MODERNS TEXTBOOK 
 

MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education (Mr. Tchorzewski) 
has had ample time to consider the use of a certain text-book that I raised in Question Period in the 
Legislature last Wednesday. Would the Minister not agree that that particular textbook was 
recommended for use by the Department of Education and that really the Department of Education was 
responsible for the use of the textbook and not the boards and superintendents as indicated? 
 
Of course, we can only use textbooks as approved by the Department of Education. 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — No, Mr. Speaker, I would not agree. I have 
checked further since the time that the Member, who is a superintendent, brought it to my attention. I 
find that the textbook referred to, as one of the two textbook recommendations, was a 1974 edition. That 
1974 edition has now got a new edition which is a 1976 edition. It is substantially different in content 
and more complex than the 1974 edition. Action, even prior to the Member raising the question here, 
had already been taken by the department so that it is no longer recommended as a textbook but only as 
a teacher reference book. Therefore, there is not the problem that the Member thought that there had 
been. I would like to remind the Member that it is up to the superintendent to recommend to his school 
board and to his staff whether a textbook is to be used. There was an option, even on the 1974 edition, of 
two text books that could be used and it is, therefore, a matter between the superintendent, his school 
board and his teachers in the school unit. 
 
We also have as a policy in the department, Mr. Speaker, and it has been for years, that superintendents 
and district superintendents can bring to the attention of the department concerns of these kinds. I would 
certainly hope and perhaps the Member has, prior to raising the question, expressed his 

1479 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

concern as a superintendent of schools to the Department of Education. I don't say that he hasn't, I just 
would hope that he had. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The book bureau of the Province of 
Saskatchewan is also operated by the Department of Education. That Book Bureau is selling this 1976 
edition as a textbook and it is the only one that is available for use in Saskatchewan schools. Is this not 
correct? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I don't know, as I have not checked with the Book Bureau. If the Member 
says it is being provided by the Book Bureau, I have no reason to believe that it is not. I am sure that the 
Member is probably correct. The fact of the matter is that in a new circular that is going to be coming 
out it is clearly stated as a teacher's reference book. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — A question to the Minister. When was this direction brought forth, that indicates 
that this textbook is going to be for reference purposes only? It is certainly not in the hands of the school 
boards at the present time. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It has not yet come out. The decision was made . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The one other factor, in the determination and the recommendation of 
textbooks and reference books, is curriculum committees. This book was recommended by the 
curriculum committee dealing with this subject area, on which there is a representation of teachers, 
university professors, superintendents and school trustees nominated by Saskatchewan Schools Trustee 
Association. That curriculum committee did recommend the book initially, the earlier edition. That 
curriculum committee only recently has considered, on the request of the department, the new version. 
That curriculum committee, prior to the 1st of March, recommended that it be reconsidered and, 
therefore, it is being reconsidered. That information will be going out in the new circulars which are not 
yet out, as usual. There is nothing new or different about that. 
 

BORROWING OF $340 MILLION — SaskTel 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Perhaps this question should be directed to the Minister of Saskatchewan Telecommunications (Mr. 
Byers), however, I think he has successfully warded off all questions that might come about in this 
Session. 
 
The Minister of Finance has indicated in his Budget that some $340 million will be borrowed by the 
province in the current fiscal year. Of this, he has indicated that $73 million is for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications. Could the Minister tell this House today what areas this will be used in, in SaskTel 
and also what areas or what markets he proposes to borrow these funds from? 

1480 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the money will be borrowed for the 
expansion of services that SaskTel is proposing. The Hon. Member may be also aware that there are a 
number of requests from rural telephone companies that they turn over their facilities to SaskTel and in a 
number of areas there is need to upgrade the service. Also there is need for some upgrading of buildings 
and equipment. The Hon. Member is probably aware that SaskTel will soon appear before the Crown 
Corporations' Committee. I think that you can get the details in the Crown Corporations' Committee as I 
do not have them readily at hand. 
 
As far as where the money will be borrowed, we have been borrowing basically in three markets, in the 
Canadian market, in the American market and in the European market. At times arrangements are made 
for private placements and these will be continued to be used. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Minister has indicated that much 
of this money is to be used for expansion in SaskTel services and the Minister knows full well that the 
information is not available in Crown Corporations, that is a year old. 
 
Can the Minister assure this House that, of the funds being borrowed, they are not being used to provide 
the required capital in order to put the tremendous number of miles into cable hardware which is 
presently being installed throughout the province? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister agree that the cable that is 
now being installed, has no prospect, or very little, of drawing any revenue in the current year? And 
would the Minister not agree that perhaps the increase in STC or SaskTel rates of almost 10 per cent this 
year is a cost which telephone subscribers must pay in order to subsidize the Government putting cable 
hardware into the ground from which they cannot receive revenue and, therefore, telephone subscribers 
are in effect paying for this? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, no, I certainly would not agree with the propositions the Hon. 
Member is posing in either case. 
 

JUVENILE NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a question to the Minister 
responsible for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Bowerman). Over the past year and 
one-half there have been many public reports of physical punishment of children and juveniles in 
northern camps, licensed and supervised by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I think the 
Minister has seen the public statements. The allegations include physical abuse and the allegations have 
been very serious. Have any criminal charges been laid as a result of the allegations in the various 
camps, have any criminal charges been laid against any staff members of any of the camps? 

1481 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps I should answer that 
question or endeavour to answer it because it does, I think, pertain more to the Department of the 
Attorney General. I think that the best answer that I can give is that investigations are being conducted 
by members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. You will appreciate my giving the answer off the 
top of my head. I don't believe that any charges have yet been laid. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Attorney General, by way of supplementary. Some of the allegations go back 
nearly two years and obviously over that period of time, a decision was made not to lay charges. My 
first supplementary is: —  was the decision not to lay charges on the earlier allegations/ the decision of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan or a decision of the Department of the Attorney General or 
the Cabinet as a whole? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan has nothing to do, 
whatsoever, with the determination of laying the charges and neither does the Cabinet in criminal 
matters. This is a matter which is handled through the normal channels, by the RCMP, through the 
Criminal Justice Branch or the agents of the Department of the Attorney General. If no charges were laid 
in past instances, they were not laid simply because the allegations were either not made or, if made, in 
the judgment of the appropriate officials, they were not sufficient to warrant the laying of charges. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of supplementary, Mr. Minister. I am going to table for the House a photocopy 
of the Prince Albert detachment of the RCM Police investigation in the Wilderness Challenge Camps, 
east and west Norvert Lakes, Flint Head Lake, Saskatchewan, forwarded to the Department of Social 
Services under the date of February 10th, and included with that is an RCM Police investigation of the 
camps. The RCM Police investigation of the camps made very serious allegations of abuse, assault, 
perverted treatment of children, humiliating treatment of children... 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I'll take the Member for Regina South. 
 

OPEN HOUSE CANADA 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I have a question for the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. 
Tchorzewski), Mr. Speaker. On Thursday last, the Federal Government introduced a program which is 
being widely acclaimed by all, which is called Open House Canada. It is a program which permits 
young people in the province between 16 and 22 to travel on an exchange basis to other regions of the 
country with their transportation being paid. I would like to ask the Minister whether his department is 
considering, or will consider, a complementary Saskatchewan program to encourage and assist people 
between the ages of 16 and 22 in this province to take full advantage of that program? 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. I am 

1482 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

glad the Member asked it because I am most happy to be able to say that we certainly welcome the 
principle of the program. When the Young Voyageur Program was deleted by the Federal Government 
last year, we very strongly expressed our disappointment because we thought it was a good program 
with which we did have some joint funding. So, therefore, we are happy that they are announcing the 
intention of reintroducing a new program. As to what we will do with it, on our part, I am unable to say 
at this time because unfortunately the Federal Government once again did not consult us or discuss with 
us the new program. Therefore, we do not yet know what the details are. When we know them and I am 
sure that they will be coming shortly, we will then consider the extent and scope of the program and 
what we might be wanting to do. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — By way of supplementary then, Mr. Speaker. If the Minister will direct his 
thoughts to Hansard as of Thursday last, he will find the details of the program there, which I think 
might interest him. I want to ask you, when considering this, whether you will consider a provincial kind 
of program which would provide some assistance with respect to sustenance, with respect to the 
exchange of housing and with respect to promotion within the schools, the universities and the technical 
schools to publicize the program widely. As I say, it is receiving tremendous acceptance across the 
country in getting young people to know their country better. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I realize that there were some details of the program in 
a newspaper. I think I would rather find out the details of the program from the Federal Minister in 
charge rather than the newspaper. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Check Hansard. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, I don't think I should have to find out through Hansard either. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we have not at this time considered the question that the Member asked and will not 
consider it until I receive some communication from the Minister in charge at the federal level about 
what the program is. As far as publicizing it through the schools, there is certainly no difficulty with that 
and we will encourage that to be done. As far as the funding is concerned, our Budget has been set. We 
have made no appropriation in the present Budget because we had no knowledge of the program being 
developed. When we get the details, we will then look at it. 
 

JUVENILES IN NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question to the Department of 
the North. In a photocopy of a police report tabled here in the House by my learned colleague from 
Qu'Appelle (Mr. Lane), the stated objective, it appears, of the program is the rehabilitation of young 
people. The question I ask of the Minister for the North is — I believe first of all that your department 
funds this and licences and supervises these camps. My question is this: —  what sort of rehabilitation 
program requires the beating of children until they require hospitalization, forced feeding of children 
until they vomit and forcing 

1483 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

them to eat their vomit, forcing children to strip naked before members of the opposite sex — it's 
contained in the document, Mr. Speaker — now what sort of a program or department requires children 
to eat raw birds and that nature? Is that a matter of rehabilitation in your opinion? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, the Member is 
referring to two camps, one called Camp Klahanie, which is operated by a private board, many of whom 
are residents of the city of Regina. The other wilderness camp operating in northern Saskatchewan is 
Wilderness Challenge which is a camp sponsored and operated by Ranch Ehrlo. They are both privately 
owned, operated and financed camps. They operate under a licence which is given by the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan but there is no relationship by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan with 
the manner of operations, although they are to maintain certain standards. Both camps are independently 
owned and operated and are governed by independent boards of directors. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary. You admit then, Mr. Minister, that your department licences them and I 
believe your recent words in the House have indicated that you felt some responsibility? Now the 
questions which I would like to put to you are: —  do you feel that this particular behaviour, on the part 
of the staff out there, has gone over the lines of normal human behaviour and what steps have you taken 
to do something about it? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The ignorance of such a question, Mr. Speaker, is hardly worthy of an answer. 
No, I do not feel that such treatment is proper. I say again the camps are independently operated camps, 
they have independently appointed boards of directors, many of whom are not associated with either 
northern Saskatchewan or any relationship thereto. The one camp, Camp Klahanie, as the press reported 
some time ago, had its licence suspended as a result of a certain incident which occurred at the camp. 
Camp Klahanie is operating under a temporary licence at this point in time. With respect to the other 
camp, Wilderness Challenge, operated by Ranch Ehrlo, it is not now operating as a result of actions 
taken by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan to close that camp as a result of press statements 
and press releases which were made some time ago. That camp is closed, closed by the officials 
themselves when they learned of the method in which their camp was operating. They will not open that 
camp until their licences are again reviewed by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The camp 
does not now operate. 
 

MARRIAGE FOR MODERNS TEXTBOOK 
 

MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — May I ask a question of the Minister of Education, Mr. 
Speaker? I would like to return to the topic of Marriage for Moderns, the seventh edition, from which a 
copy was circulated to the Minister last week. I want to ask the Minister why he would suggest to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that there would be one book for teacher reference in each room, when the circular 
for textbooks given out by the department, says that a few copies would be valuable in the classroom for 
use by students? I want to know why he would attempt to mislead the House in that 

1484 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

way. That is my first question. My second question, Mr. Speaker, is why the Minister insists on 
transferring the responsibility for this book being available in Saskatchewan school classrooms to other 
groups, teachers, superintendents, and school boards, when it is the Department of Education's 
responsibility to authorize every textbook that exists in this province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, I object to the Member 
indicating that I am misleading the House and I would suggest that he, in fact, is misleading the House 
with his statements. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — He is misleading the House Mr. Speaker, because he is using an old 
circular that refers to the sixth edition and not to the seventh edition of that textbook. The sixth edition 
was recommended as a textbook, and as I initially answered in my first reply to the first question in this 
House this afternoon, the seventh edition is not to be recommended as a textbook. It is to be 
recommended as a teacher reference, as recommended to the department by the Curriculum Committee. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister prepared to give us his assurance that 
this textbook is not going to be available for students' use in Saskatchewan schools? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am saying Mr. Speaker, that it is the position of the department, as 
recommended by the Curriculum Committee, on the advice of some teachers and some superintendents, 
(I don't recall the names of any of these gentlemen listed on that list), we reconsidered the seventh 
edition; it has been reconsidered and I can assure the Member it is not being recommended as a 
textbook. 
 

PRINCE ALBERT JAIL RIOT 
 
MR. G. N. WIPF: —  (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social 
Services (Mr. Rolfes). In my earlier question, you stated that the recent disturbance at the Prince Albert 
jail was a minor matter caused by horseplay. Would the Minister not admit that the matter was more 
serious than you have let on and that, in fact, one inmate and one staff were injured at the time and that 
several more inmates were injured when they were put into the gymnasium and beaten up by other 
inmates? Do you still call this a minor disturbance? 
 
HON. H. H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, nowhere did I state that it was 
merely horseplay. I did not make a former statement on the disturbance in the Prince Albert Correctional 
Centre. I simply answered his question yesterday, that I was not aware of a riot in the Correctional 
Centre and that was the extent of my response. I am not aware of the details, whether an inmate was 
injured in the 

1485 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

gymnasium or not. I could well walk down these steps and be injured. I don't know the circumstances in 
which the inmate may have been injured and, consequently, I am not able to make a more specific 
answer at this time. I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that later on today on the Ministerial Statements, I 
will be issuing a statement on the Correctional Centre. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Supplementary Mr. Speaker. When you weren't here Mr. Minister of Social Services, 
the Attorney General advised this Assembly that only around $2,000 worth of damage had been done 
when, in fact, there was roughly $1,300 worth of glass broken alone. I wonder if the Minister of Social 
Services would report to this Assembly now about the rest of the damages or would you like me to 
report on it? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, if you want to, you can report on it because I am going to make a statement on 
it later in a Ministerial Statement. I would like to know what your report is. 
 

MARRIAGE FOR MODERNS TEXTBOOK 
 
MR. S. J. CAMERON (Regina South): — A question to the Minister of Education. I would be 
interested to know under what authority he suggests that a teacher can be reprimanded for using a text, 
which is sold by the Department of Education and recommended by it for use? 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — No authority, Mr. Speaker. The intent of my 
statement was that if it is the policy of the school board that a certain book is not to be used, I realize 
that is not precisely the way I said it, and I am glad to have the opportunity to correct it, and it is used, 
then certainly it is the position of the superintendent to take some action with the teacher using it. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — By way of supplementary Mr. Speaker. Why then, last day when the questions 
were asked about this text, did you indicate so readily that if the teachers in the province used that text, 
the teacher ought to be reprimanded? That is just what you said. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I think I just corrected what the intent of my statement was. 
I thought that is what I had said. When I looked at Hansard, I found out that I had not completed the 
statement, but I have just done it now and that corrects the situation. I am glad that I have been provided 
the opportunity to do so. 
 

SGEA STRIKE 
 
MR. E. F. A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to 
the Premier. It would appear that the SGEA is moving towards a strike situation with the Government of 
Saskatchewan. In the past the Government has appointed a separate group, some of whom intended to 
come out of Cabinet, to handle the management end of strikes and strike situations. I wonder if the 
Premier 

1486 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

would indicate who will be looking after this likely strike and whether the Government, in its view of 
the matter, has any indication of when the SGEA will go out, if indeed they do go out, as they appear to 
be intending to do? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I find the question highly speculative, and I will take the next 
question from Saskatoon-Sutherland. 
 

JUVENILE NORTHERN CAMPS 
 
MR. H. W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of the 
Department of Northern Services. It would seem to me that where there is an allegation of beating 
children, that any delay beyond hours or perhaps even days, at the outside, would seem excessive. Now 
why, Mr. Minister, does it take so long to shut down these Government licensed torture camps? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I will take the next question. 
 

GRANTS TO SCHOOL BOARDS 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — A question to the Minister of Education (Mr. 
Tchorzewski). I am sure that your department officials have had an opportunity to assess the impact of 
the grants that have been announced to school boards, and that you are likely aware that the average mill 
rate increase in Saskatchewan units is going to be in the neighborhood of between six and seven mills. 
Would the Minister give the House any indication whether or not his department has any plans in the 
light of that, to increase grants to schools this year? 
 
HON. E. L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — No, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to a similar 
question previous to that, we are not at this time contemplating any changes in the grants which have 
been indicated in the Budget. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Supplementary Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister aware of the impact of deficits incurred 
by school boards during the 1976 fiscal year, deficits with operations that ranged in the order of 
$184,000 with one board, $104,000 with another, $103,000 with a third, $91,000 with a fourth? Would 
he not agree that if there's another year of that kind of operation, which is very likely to be the case, that 
it would be better for his department to rectify that situation now, rather than let it wait another full 
fiscal year and have two problem years in a row? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, I am also aware of some school boards that have had surpluses, Mr. 
Speaker, in this last fiscal year and I am sure that the Member is also aware of that. School boards are 
given a certain amount of money in the form of operation grants, that is clearly stated to them at the time 
of the year when budgets are set. I realize last year that the budget announcements were a little late, but 
that certainly was no fault of ours. 

1487 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

There were other people in this House seated over there that had something to do with that and I regret 
that very much. The establishment of school board budgets is something that school boards do and I am 
sure that, keeping in mind some of the deficits that some of the school boards had, the 
secretary-treasurer, superintendents and their school boards will be putting their budgets -together 
accordingly. 
 

STATEMENTS 
 

PRINCE ALBERT JAIL RIOT 
 
HON. H. H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a brief 
statement in regard to the recent disturbance at the Prince Albert Correctional Centre. I would like to 
inform the Members of the Legislature that Bill Logan, a solicitor with the Department of the Attorney 
General, has been appointed to conduct an investigation regarding the recent disturbance at the Prince 
Albert Correctional Centre. Mr. Logan will focus his investigation on factors which created the 
disturbance, the method by which the disturbance was handled and what measures could be taken to 
avoid such future incidents. He is a 25 year veteran of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and is 
responsible for matters related to policing in his present position with the Department of the Attorney 
General. Mr. Logan will provide a report to me later next week. 
 
Following a study of the report, I would like to assure the Members of this Assembly that, based on the 
findings of the investigation, my department will take whatever steps are deemed appropriate regarding 
this matter. 
 
For the edification of the Members of this House, normal programming has been resumed at the centre. 
Inmates were moved out of the gymnasium Monday and are back in their regular quarters. The total 
damage, including the cost of labor for repairs, is estimated at $3,148. About half of this cost is for the 
installation of new glass. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might just say a word or two in response. It is our 
view and I think it may be shared by all Members of this House, that these kinds of incidents can 
frequently lead to the repetition of the same sorts of incidents. I think that, had the federal jurisdiction 
reacted in a stiff way when the first hostage-taking incident arose, we would not have seen the whole 
series of incidents that arose through the penitentiaries. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister and 
whoever conducts the investigation will decide that charges proceed against the individuals involved, if 
it is possible at all to prove the identity of those individuals, and that the Government view the matter in 
a strict and stiff manner, in order to cause a deterrent for those people who are incarcerated in Prince 
Albert, in Regina and in other provincial jails. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Just in answer, broken windows, as you say, are half the charges. Some of the other 
information that I have received about it is burned mattresses, televisions smashed, 

1488 
 



 
March 30, 1977 

 

water pipes torn out and broken, six toilets smashed, radiators smashed, furniture wrecked. The thing I 
find strange in this, Mr. Speaker, is that in that report we just tabled, the beating of children is allowed 
and yet in an institution like this immediately there is charges brought against a guard when he 
technically assaults a man. 
 

POINT OF ORDER ON THE QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to rise on a Point of 
Order. It has occurred to me these last several days, there is a growing tendency to bend the rules in 
respect to the questions and the answers during the Question Period, in several respects. What that does, 
Mr. Speaker, is most of us, who feel constrained to abide by the rules and do abide by the rules, suffer in 
consequence as a result of those who don't. Now the Member for Qu'Appelle (Mr. Lane) referred today 
in Question Period to a document he said he was going to table. As I interpret the rules, that clearly is 
not in order, one doesn't table documents or even refer to documents, at length in the course of asking a 
question. The Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) has been guilty on several occasions, again 
today, of using the Question Period in an improper manner. Those two persons, the two Lanes, the front 
Lane and the back Lane, are being the chief offenders in the course of the Question Period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, those of us who do feel some responsibility to abide by the rules in the Question 
Period, ask of you that when these occurrences happen again that you take a period of three or four days 
and single out the chief offenders and simply ignore them in terms of the Question Period and we may 
straighten this problem out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe that the Member for Regina South raises a valid Point of Order at this 
time. As I am faced with now situations, I will have to improvise as I go along and I know the Members 
will bear with me while I do that. They will have noticed that the Member for Qu'Appelle and the 
Member for Saskatoon-Sutherland were both denied proceeding with certain questions of theirs today. I 
would caution all Members in the future, I invite them as a matter of fact, I beg them to read the rules 
that govern the Question Period. Any Member who may be unsure of the manner in which to ask 
questions should review that from time to time. I would also ask Members to pay attention to what they 
read about hypothetical questions and about debatable questions. I would ask Members to not be tabling 
documents in the period which is supposed to be devoted to questions and not to tabling of documents. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Just on the Point of Order. I wonder if you can refer me to the rules as to 
the Question Period where the petty punishment of not recognizing a speaker, who makes an error in the 
Question Period, is stated. I didn't find that in the rules of the Question Period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The strength of these rules that govern the Legislative Assembly and from whence 
they were handed down, is that they are 

1489 
 



 
March 30, 1977 
 

not petty. If the Members will read the rules they will find that is so. If they believe that a petty situation 
has arisen, my door is always open if they feel that I have created the situation. If they have a genuine 
case which they wish to pursue further, there is plenty of opportunity for the Members to do that under 
the rules. 
 

MOTION 
 

GRANTING OF CERTAIN SUMS OF MONEY 
 
HON. W. E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance) Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 81, an Act for the 
granting of Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the "Fiscal Year ending the 
31st of March, 1978, be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:48 o'clock p.m. the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne 
and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — CONTINUING EDUCATION — Vote 5 
 
HON. D. L. FARIS (Minister of Continuing Education) Mr. Chairman, I think some of the Members 
will know my Deputy, Alex Guy; directly in front of me the Assistant Deputy Minister, Operations 
Division, Lou Riederer; Director of Administrative Services, Frank May; Assistant Deputy Minister of 
Occupational Training Division, Bob Barschel. 
 

ITEM 1 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could make a few remarks 
with regard to Continuing Education. Before I get into that, I would like to make just a few remarks in 
regard to the way we handle Estimates. 
 
I think I indicated a year ago, that it seems to me, that we waste an awful lot of time in the House in the 
way that we handle Estimates. I would hope, since I may not have another opportunity to make this 
comment, that the Rules and Procedure Committee might look at the possibility of Estimates being 
handled concurrently rather than consecutively. There is a tremendous amount of man-hour time given 
up by MLAs who sit and listen to comments about a number of different items under each department. 
We could probably utilize our time far more effectively if we had three or four groups meeting at the 
same time and at least got through to the final vote and brought that all back together in the House. Then 
we would have the opportunity to make our little statements or whatever it was that we wanted to say. 
 
I formed that opinion last year and I still have that opinion after just observing a couple of weeks of 
Estimates this year. I hope that Rules and Procedures might take a look at this and that we might, some 
year, have an opportunity to try  
 

1490 
 



 
Committee of Finance March 30, 1977 
 

 
doing things a little differently. 
 
With regard to Continuing Education I want to join the Minister in welcoming his Deputy and members 
of the department staff. I don't intend to spend many, many hours on this department. I have a point that 
I want to make which I think can be made fairly succinctly. I think there is no reason why we can't move 
this department along fairly rapidly this afternoon. 
 
When one looks at the Department of Continuing Education, Mr. Chairman, one gets the impression that 
there is, for the most part, a stand pat budget. Total expenditures are up $9.6 million or 8.2 per cent. 
Most people would say, that that will account for some salary increases to staff, which would be a 
normal expectation for the staff in that department, I think. Otherwise the things are much the same. 
 
I say that is the sort of impression at first glance. I think one needs to delve a little more deeply into it 
than that. The increase of $9.6 million in expenditure comes at the same time that the capital program to 
universities has been roughly cut in half, from about $15 million to something in the order of $7 million 
and so one needs to keep that in mind. We have a $9.6 million expenditure in all other areas, roughly an 
$8 million drop in spending — $7.5 million I think it is actually, in grants to the universities' capital. 
That means there is roughly a real or practical difference in the two budgets, that is 1976-77 and 
1977-78, of something in the order of $17.1 million or a little under 17 per cent. 
 
I think it is important to note that if one counts the staff permanent positions, Mr. Chairman, that one 
will find a drop in staff. In 1976-77, there was a staff of 799 as I counted them and this year there is a 
drop of 21 to 778. On first glance one could say that the Minister is doing a pretty good job of cutting 
down on personnel within his Department. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — That isn't so. 
 
MR. PENNER: — That is correct, it isn't so, because when one takes a look at the spending for 
temporary positions, one notices that that is up $454,100. If one assumes an average of $15,000 per 
person, that is an additional 30 people in the temporary staff positions. That is an interesting juggling of 
figures and I would expect the Minister would have an explanation that would be realistic and 
reasonable for the House. 
 
Last year we had permanent positions being cut at Kelsey, Wascana and at the Moose Jaw Technical 
Institute, promises being made to people that they were going to be hired by community colleges. These 
promises were not kept. There are people, who to this day, haven't had an acknowledgment to a letter of 
application to the community colleges. They were as much as promised, at the time that the cuts were 
made last year, pretty indiscriminately, that they were going to have an opportunity for jobs. So I am 
interested in how this juggling of figures is supposed to work. The permanent positions are down. What 
program cuts does the Minister intend to have in his department? If there aren't program cuts to be made, 
then how does he intend that additional temporary staff to fill them? 

1491 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

I think it is interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, that in the Executive Administrative Branch of this 
department, in a year in which we have a new Minister, we have an increase in staff of 50 per cent, from 
six positions to nine positions and an increase in total expenditure of 63 per cent. I can only figure out 
two reasons why that would be the case. One, is that with the new Minister, he needed more help in 
order to be able to operate the thing or, in other words, the present Minister is less efficient than was the 
former Minister. The second one is that this Minister, like all other Ministers of the Crown, is interested 
in empire building and the only way that you can do that is to add staff and get more money poured into 
that Executive Administration Branch. I am sure that the Minister will let us know which one of those 
two reasons it is, why the department has increased its staff substantially in this section and increased 
the expenditure in this section. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the amount of money being paid to community colleges continues to go up every year. If 
you add the amount of money for the administration of community colleges plus the grants, we are to 
the point this year, where we are over $5 million — $5,151,121 this year in the two sections for 
community colleges. 
 
I suppose that every Member of the House would agree that it is like motherhood to say that all people 
should have an opportunity to continually be educated. I expect we would have to be bonkers to suggest 
otherwise. Everybody has the right to continue to have an opportunity to be educated once they are 
finished their formal schooling, whether it is Grade Twelve or a university program, or Kelsey, or 
Wascana or whatever it happens to be. But I think that one needs, at some time, to look at government 
priorities in spending. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, for all of the grid roads in Saskatchewan including maintenance, 
regravelling, etc., the total cost is $2,700,000. But in community colleges, for administration and 
programs, we are now to the point where we are spending over $5 million to keep them going. 
 
It is curious that a program that was supposed to be self-generating and grassrootish and was to look 
after itself, continually every year gets a larger number of people in the bureaucracy that is looking after 
it. It is costing the Provincial Treasury every year, more and more money in grants in order to keep it go 
being operated by Kelsey and Wascana and Moose Jaw and in my opinion, more efficiently, more 
effectively; they were better academically handled and were less costly. They were programs, that at one 
time, were being handled by school systems in our urban centres under Adult Education. I don't think 
that this department has been able to come close to matching the efficiency of the operation when it was 
part of what was going on in the school systems. 
 
I notice, Mr. Chairman, that the grants to our universities are up $6.3 million or nine per cent. I am 
assuming that there will be, in addition to that, a fairly substantial increase in student rates in order for 
the Universities' Commission to be able to make ends meet; either that or there is going to be some kind 
of cutback in programming. I am sure that the Minister in his remarks, either now or when we get into 
that Item, will be able to tell us what they envisage. I realize the Minister isn't going to set the increase 
in fees, but he 

1492 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

must have some idea of what the expectation is, or conversely, what kind of program cuts he has in mind 
for the universities this coming year. 
 
I have mentioned earlier, Mr. Chairman, my concern about the fact that we have had changes made in 
the Kelsey, Wascana and Moose Jaw Technical programming and a shift over into community colleges 
and the difficulty that that caused a tremendous number of staff. I am interested in the Minister's reaction 
to that. I have some correspondence here that I may find necessary to read into the records in order to 
make clear my position, but before I do that, before I ask any further questions, I should like to give the 
Minister an opportunity to react to what I have had to say. 
 
MR. FARIS: — The Hon. Member raised a good many questions and I may not be able to deal with 
them all here and my deputy will be looking up some information that pertains to others. 
 
The Member apparently is under some apprehension in regard to the university capital budget. There 
would be in the book an apparent decrease but, in fact, what happened with last year's capital budget to 
universities is that the universities found themselves unable to spend $6.3 million of their allocations. So 
there is a $6.3 million carry over from last year into this year. If you put that together with this year s 
grant of $8.3 million, that comes up to pretty well the same figure as last year. The problem existed 
within the universities' ability to spend money that was allocated to them last year. 
 
The Member also raised questions about the massive increase in expenditures in the Executive 
Administration. I think, if he would apply a little more time in thinking this through, he would realize 
when the Minister of Education, who had the Department of Education, Culture and Youth, lost this 
ministry, we then had a department that had no Minister's office at all and the increase in costs there is 
for two positions in my Minister's office. I don't consider that a massive bureaucracy, but the Member 
opposite may. That is the explanation. 
 
I was surprised by the Member's criticism of the community college system. I think people in 
Saskatchewan, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, will be somewhat amazed to hear a Member of the 
Legislature take that position. It is very apparent to people, who are observers of the continuing 
education field, that prior to community colleges there was, in general, throughout the province, a very 
inadequate job being done in the area of continuing education. The committee, which brought in its 
report after working in 1972 and 1973 on this question, for instance, pointed out that one-third of the 
school units in the province had no adult education offerings at all; that the average expenditure of units 
on adult education, for an entire year, was $300. Now there were some areas where there was some good 
work being done and the Member happens to come from one of those communities. There is no doubt 
about it, the citizens in the cities and, in particular the city of Saskatoon, had a better situation than 
people in the rural areas. 
 
The Community College Program has been, I would say and this is backed up by the comments of 
outside observers connected with continuing education across Canada, a tremendous success. 
Seventy-three thousand people, over 11 per cent of the 

1493 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

adult population of this province, took an offering through the community college system last year. We 
are rather proud that this system is, in fact, decentralized; that we have nearly 600 volunteer contact 
committees involving over 3,000 individuals, spread throughout the province as the base of this system. 
Actually, I hear more people say that this kind of service throughout the province is done in an 
extremely reasonable manner economically, than to hear the kind of criticism I heard from the Hon. 
Member. 
 
The cost of this kind of system is based on the philosophy of using existing structures, as school 
buildings in the evenings and on weekends, church basements, community halls. Compare this with the 
very costly kind of operation that other provincial governments have and I give as an example, the 
Government of Alberta that spends multi-millions of dollars on campuses. I would daresay the interest 
and maintenance of those buildings alone would more than cover the entire expenditure to take the 
programs to the people, according to the philosophy we have uniquely developed in this province. 
 
I can't really understand that criticism at all, I think it is quite incorrect. 
 
The Member asked another question concerning university fees. I only have information, at this point, 
concerning the University of Regina. The Member will be aware that once the University Commission 
gets the grant, that grant is then divided by the University Commission between the campuses; the 
campuses then have a chance to look at that and work out the kind of fee structure that they wish, in 
other words they have the autonomy in that area. The University of Regina increased its revenues from 
fees this year by 9.6 per cent. I understand the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon has not yet 
come to a determination. 
 
The question which I didn't deal with was the question of temporary positions. My officials inform me 
that temporary funds do not have positions, as such, assigned to them. They are calculated in person 
months, and in many cases, it could mean that a 12 person month could mean one person for 12 months, 
or two people each for six months. And in making that sort of calculation, the Member, I think, did not 
take into account that temporary salaries also reflect a salary increase, which came into effect October 1, 
1975, and that funds have been provided for anticipated increases, from October 1, 1976. 
 
MR. PENNER: — If I could make a couple of comments related to the response you made. I'll try to 
take them in order. The first comment had to do with the capital program of the University of 
Saskatchewan. Is the Minister suggesting, Mr. Chairman, that the figure, which is in the Estimates, is an 
incorrect figure, that the figure ought to be $14 million for 1977-78 rather than the $8 million? 
 
MR. FARIS: — No, Mr. Chairman, the figures in the Blue Book are correct. The amount that is in the 
Blue Book last year was assigned to the Universities' Commission for capital purposes. They did not 
spend that amount of money, therefore, they have a carry over of over $6 million which is then added to 
the $8 million of this year. 

1494 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

MR. PENNER: — That is what I thought the Minister would say, Mr. Chairman. In other words, the 
point that I made before is correct, there is a difference between the level of expenditure in 1976-77 and 
1977-78, of something in order of $7 million. 
 
MR. FARIS: — The Member seems to misunderstand. The universities only found themselves able to 
spend last year, something like $7 million or $8 million. The balance which they were unable to spend is 
a carry over this year. They may, in fact, spend that money plus the $8 million; the total actual 
expenditure this year might be almost double last year. Apparently their difficulties in spending the 
money arose due to the very high level of activity in the construction industry in the province. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I don't want to spend a lot of time on a minor item like that. But is the Minister not 
saying, that of the $15.8 million from last year, about $6 million is being carried over from last year? 
You are not saying $8 million in 1977-78 plus $6 million, are you? If you are, then should that figure not 
read $14 million? 
 
MR. FARIS: — The $15.8 million were paid to the University Commission last. That money is not in 
the hands of the Government. Does that clarify your point? 
 
MR. PENNER: — So that accurately projects what the expenditure was last year. Last year you paid 
the University Commission for construction, $15.8 million. This year you are going to pay the 
University Commission for construction, $8.3 million. The difference is $7 million. 
 
MR. FARIS: — That is right. 
 
MR. PENNER: — That is exactly what I said earlier. Now that we have got that straight, another point 
that I want to make, is that the Minister has accepted the second of my two alternatives as to why there 
is an increase in staff, that is, that he has to build a little empire. Six positions weren't enough last year, 
we have nine positions this year, a 50 per cent increase; 67 per cent increase in spending, not because he 
is less efficient, I didn't expect him to admit that that would be the case, but rather because he wants to 
build an empire. 
 
I wonder if the Minister would permit me to clarify a point. Did you say that the increase in fees on the 
Regina Campus is going to be 9.6 per cent, was that what I heard you say? 
 
MR. FARIS: — It was announced by the University of Regina, by the Board of Governors, that the 
total revenues in fees would amount to an increase next year of 9.6 per cent. The fee increase is varied 
according to different categories between full time and part time students. In terms of total revenues the 
fee increase is 9.6 per cent. 

1495 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. PENNER: — You haven't yet been given an indication of what the final decision is going to be 
with regard to the Saskatoon Campus. Is it reasonable to think it is going to be close to that same figure? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I am sorry I can't make an estimate of that. It is the Board of Governors' responsibility 
and they haven't informed us. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Further to that, with regard to university programming, are there any changes that 
the Minister anticipates in so far as university programming is concerned, either in the Saskatoon or the 
Regina Campus next year? 
 
MR. FARIS: — In Regina, the Systems Engineering Program is going ahead and the Energy Research 
Institute is going ahead. They are going to get into more graduate work in education and computer 
science. They are looking at future developments in design, journalism and physical education. At the 
University of Saskatchewan they are tending to improve existing offerings as they have a wider range at 
present. Some examples of this are a newly established school of therapy from the former department of 
physiotherapy, an interdisciplinary group in food science from elements in chemistry, biochemistry, 
engineering and home economics and a disciplinary group in genetics from elements of biology, animal 
science and microbiology. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Would the Minister give us an indication of whether or not the Systems Engineering 
Program that he mentioned that is coming to the Regina Campus, is available on the Saskatoon Campus? 
 
MR. FARIS: — No. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Is there any engineering program on the Regina Campus that is a duplication of a 
program that is available on the Saskatoon Campus? 
 
MR. FARIS: — The first two years of engineering on the Regina Campus are transferable to the 
Saskatoon Campus and this is the existing program. The new Systems Engineering Program, which will 
be third and fourth year, is a unique program. So a student could go to Regina and take the first two 
years of engineering, go to Saskatoon for specialization, or continue the specialization in Systems 
Engineering in Regina. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 

ITEM 2 
 
MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — A question, Mr. Chairman, relating to both Items 2 and 3. 
Could the Minister please tell me why in Item 2, when the staff stays the same, that the two other Items, 
other personal services and other expenses, increased by $2,730? Then in Item 3, the same two Items 
increased by a total of $14,760 

1496 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

when the staff is reduced by one. That kind of budgeting may become more common, but it is very 
difficult to explain what happened there, Mr. Minister. Could you attempt to explain that please? 
 
MR. FARIS: — If the Member would take these figures down, I will explain. I will do this Item by 
Item here. First of all, administrative services for 1976-77 — $169,410; two positions were increased 
over the year, so the adjustment base figure would be $184,190; then there was a salary adjustment of 
$33,220, that is from October 1, 1975; then there were normal increments of $9,210; two positions then 
were deleted for 1977-78, $19,220 for a total of $207,400. Money set aside for possible increases in 
salaries for the coming year would bring it to a total of $223,990. Other personal services, under this 
administrative services vote for 1976-77, $29,150; two positions were reinstated, $8,900. There was an 
increase in casual labor there to handle the overload, $3,800 and that totals $24,050 for 1977-78. For 
student services, the 1976-77 base figure is $132,600, that remained throughout the year. There was one 
position cut, a saving of $6,500. Salary adjustments during the year were another $20,510, that is 
October, 1975 again. Annual increments were $4,040. There is an allowance for an increase in salaries 
this year, bringing the total for the 1977-78 Estimates to $162,700. Under other personal services, 
1976-77, the base figure was $12,280. There was an increase in temporary services of $2,680; an 
increase in seasonal help, $1,050; an increase in casual help of $660 and some was put in for the 
settlement of increases in salaries; total figure for 1977-78, $18,000. That breaks down those two 
categories in both Items. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 

ITEM 3 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — I presume this is the proper place to direct a question 
regarding the regulations you have for the student loans. I would like to point out one particular incident 
that I ran into last year, of a student who was applying for a student loan. What happens when the 
father's income is substantial enough but he is unwilling to share any of his income with his child when 
he goes to either the technical school or the university? Is it possible that a student in such a situation 
can be considered for the loan? To review the situation; where the income into the home is ample but the 
parent refuses to give the boy or girl any of the funds to go, what provisions are there made in this 
particular situation? 
 
MR. FARIS: — This is a problem area. There are a number of problem areas with this program. This 
program, as you probably know, is the Canada Student Loan of the federal Government and federal 
regulations tie us in. They tie us in on this particular point, in regard to father's income, and the theory 
that he would be contributing toward his son's support. Those regulations are binding on us under this 
program. We simply administer it. 
 
Personally, I think this is a very serious problem. I look to programs in other countries and I find that, 
for instance in Norway, they have got away from this sort of thing. 

1497 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

My own feeling is that we should move in that direction. I think it is a very difficult situation for a 
student in that situation, but the present regulations bind us in that regard. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I wholeheartedly agree with the Minister. I wonder, have you made any 
representation to the federal authorities? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I had the privilege of attending the Council of Ministers of Education. I had an 
opportunity at that time to discuss with the Minister responsible for the federal program, a good number 
of the inadequacies of the existing program. There is also the fact — the Member may be aware-for the 
last three years the amount available under the Canada Student Loan has not increased which, as we 
know, makes a very difficult situation for everybody concerned in an inflationary period. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Does Saskatchewan not operate a plan of its own, in addition to the Canada 
Student Loan plan? 
 
MR. FARIS: — We did introduce a Saskatchewan Student Loan program which deals with students 
who don't fit into the federal program in regard to the length of the program and to matriculation 
students. In addition, of course, we have the bursary program which we simply fit on top of the existing 
program. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Well, certainly then, would the Minister not have ample opportunity to put his 
beliefs to work, in making changes in the plan, that is exclusive to Saskatchewan? I would presume that 
any plan that was Saskatchewan operated would then have Saskatchewan guidelines, applicable to that 
particular plan. 
 
MR. FARIS: — This is fine, depending on how many available dollars you have. We have been 
working under the theory that this Canada Student Loan program is a program that is national in scope 
and should apply equally in all provinces. I think once we break down the idea of a national program, 
we have difficulties. But I will admit that there are tremendous tensions in that program right now. I 
know that the federal Government has the plan under review and I hope the Members opposite will 
approach their colleagues in Ottawa so that we can make that kind of change, if you are in agreement 
with it. If we were to simply adjust our program in that sort of way, we would soon be carrying virtually 
the whole burden. Indeed, the rate of increase at which the province is supplying support is increasing 
dramatically. You will be aware that we introduced the Saskatchewan bursary program, which is a grant 
program, for those students with the greatest need. We feel there should be an aspect like that to the 
federal program. Unfortunately, at this point, there isn't. For the Members' information, in the last three 
years the amounts of money granted in Saskatchewan under the federal program increased 3.6 per cent. 
Under our bursary program or grant program, the amount we have spent has increased 46.9 per cent. 

1498 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

MR. STODALKA: — We should have total amounts rather than percentages. It is easier to compare 
total amounts than percentages because percentages can always be used. 
 
MR. FARIS: — The Hon. Member would then like to have the amounts. In 1975-76 the federal Student 
Loan Program expended $5,594,000. In 1976-77 the estimate is $5,800,000. For our student bursary 
program in 1974-75, it was $1,463,000; 1976-77, estimates are $2,150,000. For our program it is a 46.9 
per cent increase, for the federal program a 3.6 per cent increase. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — My reason for bringing this up, as I stated initially, is rather obvious and I would 
hope that the Minister, if he can't bring about the necessary changes and convince his counterparts in 
Ottawa to make the changes, I would hope that he would look at his own particular plan with the idea of 
extending it. I also notice in the Bill that you introduced into the Legislature — I don't know whether 
you wanted to comment or not — but I think the legislation gives you permission to make changes in the 
regulations of the plan. I presume that's the plan that you operate. What changes were you contemplating 
to make with regard to the plan in Saskatchewan? Do you wish to answer that? If you don't, I realize you 
may not have to. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Since that is in the Bill, we could deal with that in second reading if you wish, if you 
want to speed these proceedings up. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 

ITEM 4 
 
MR. PENNER: — Just for clarification, Mr. Chairman. This amount of money, the $5,314,520, is the 
amount of money that is only for the Saskatchewan plan. Is that correct? 
 
MR. FARIS: — No, no that's not correct. It's part of it but I can read through the total figures. There's a 
dozen or so different programs. Would you like me to name them? 
 
MR. PENNER: — Send it over, rather than read it all. 
 
MR. FARIS: — We'll get it to the Member, but there's such things as language bursaries and so on. I 
think he is aware of the full range. 
 
MR. PENNER: — One further question then. The amount of money, the Minister mentioned in 
response to my colleague from Maple Creek, is part of the federal program. Am I correct in assuming 
that that amount of money in the figure just after subvote 28, Item 24, is contained in that federal 
contribution that is listed there? 

1499 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. FARIS: — The way this program works, as I'm sure the Member is aware, is that the loans are 
made directly to the student, therefore, by the federal Government through the banks. Therefore, it does 
not enter into our budgetary figures. 
 
MR. PENNER: — One other question. I may have missed it. I under- stand the position you're in with 
regard to the federal program and that you can't change the fact that they want to know what the father's 
income is, before they'll grant a loan to a student. Is your plan set up now in such a way that that 
question is not asked as it has nothing to do with it and that the youngster can get a loan through the 
Saskatchewan part of the funding without that question being asked? 
 
MR. FARIS: — No. 
 
MR. PENNER: — And is it that you are unable to give any kind of a loan without asking that question? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
MR. PENNER: — And that is because of a federal regulation? 
 
MR. FARIS: — On the Canada Student Loan program it is. On the other, it's because we follow the 
same basic pattern. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, is the Minister prepared to change the basic pattern for Saskatchewan? If he 
admits the federal program is wrong and that it ought to be changed and if he has control over the 
Saskatchewan plan, is he prepared to give us his assurance that he would change the Saskatchewan 
plan? 
 
MR. FARIS: — My first initiatives have been to get the federal Government to change the plan so that 
they'll work in this direction across Canada. In answer to the question, yes, I am willing to have a look at 
changing this in our own plan. This plan is under review in the department at present. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well I am glad that the Minister got to the point or to the nub of the question, 
because I think that's really very significant. I frankly have to say that, if I were the federal Minister in 
charge and someone was complaining to me that there ought to be a change in a plan, that they had the 
authority to change locally and didn't, then I would assume they weren't very serious about it. I really 
think you can strengthen your case against the federal situation by making the change here, where you 
have authority to do so. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Well our program covers only those areas which are not covered by the federal 
program. The great bulk of the students in universities and the institutes are covered by the federal 
program. 
 
MR. PENNER: — But a start is better than 

1500 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

nothing. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Well, the Hon. Member is really suggesting that if we don't like the federal program, 
we should put it aside or get into this area ourselves in a different way and, therefore, relieve them of 
their financial responsibilities. I say, if they're going to have a national Canada Student Loan program, 
they should listen to what the provinces have to say and work with us, towards a good plan for all of 
Canada. That's my initiative at this point. I will say, too, that we're working towards improving all of 
these programs and I hope, in the coming year, that there will be substantial changes made, particularly 
in our bursary programs and so on. I hope, soon, to be able to announce some changes in the House. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Good, I want the Minister to understand that we support your position in attempting 
to get the federal program changed, but don't hide behind the federal one in making changes locally or 
provincially. That's all we're saying. We don't want to hurt your chances of getting federal money into 
Saskatchewan. Don't ever suggest that, but we are suggesting that you ought to supplement it under our 
own conditions, according to our own beliefs where it's possible. 
 
MR. FARIS: — I thank the Hon. Member for suggesting this so that I didn't have to. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 

ITEM 5 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister would explain to the House, why there is an 
increase, a substantial increase in the spending for permanent positions, an increase in staff from three to 
five? What has happened during the year to create that kind of change in the program development 
section? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I can give the Hon. Member the figures in detail through permanent positions and other 
personal services if he wishes, but I can say that this is a new area that is just developing. The work that 
this area is involved with is basically the modularisation of courses in our technical institute courses 
down into shorter courses, so that these courses can be delivered out into the country through the 
delivery system of the community college. The community college does this on a contract basis with the 
institutes. It also, I believe, will give increasing flexibility to the programming of the institutes, in that 
students who are not able to come in and take a six or eight month course, would be able to come in and 
take at portions of a course are available to them and, therefore, over a period of years, gain credit 
through the institute for these areas. I think it's a very exciting development. It's one, by the way, in 
which we have worked very closely with the community college in the Lloydminster area and the 
Vermilion Community College in Alberta. They've given us tremendous assistance in this and it's a good 
example of interprovincial co-operation. 

1501 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. PENNER: — I'm glad the Minister is high on interprovincial co-operation. Is the Minister of the 
view, or is his department of the view, that this is in a transition period? In other words, is this part of 
your program likely to grow and develop or is it reaching a plateau and levelling off? I expect part of 
that answer is going to relate to need, as you see it, or as it's seen in the rural part of the province. 
 
MR. FARIS: — I'm advised that it's unlikely there will be any dramatic growth in this area, but there 
will certainly be an increasing workload and there is an increasing demand for these modularised 
courses from the community colleges. One of the changes in the pattern of the community college 
system is that there is more demand for courses from the technical institutes and the universities to be 
delivered in parts of rural Saskatchewan, where previously, people didn't have these opportunities. 
 
There's another potential area of growth here. There seems to be a tendency for a growth in the 
manpower program area of on-the-job training programs. The modularisation, which springs from this 
work, and the co-operation with the technical institutes allow people to move in and out of their job 
situation with more flexibility and, therefore, this is going to have considerable impact in the coming 
years. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I wonder, does the Minister anticipate a change in the kind of person who would fill 
these positions? I note, for example, that the average salary last year was something in the range of 
$15,600 and this year the Budget figures would indicate an average salary of something over $20,000. 
Now that's a substantial increase, if it's related only to the cost of living. I'm wondering, have you 
changed the people in the positions because of a need for some kind of expertise, that those positions 
formerly did not have? 
 
MR. FARIS: — This area is a good example of an area where we have people with technical and 
professional expertise. They are not in the lower ranges of salary by any means. But if the Member 
wishes I can give him the breakdown of salaries for the permanent positions in this Budget and he can 
work on it in more detail. But there were, as you are aware, salary adjustments last year and increments 
and there is an allowance here for increases next year. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Please, I appreciate all of that, but when you divide three into $47,190 you get 
$15,730 and then divide five into $103,490 you get $20,698. That is a difference of $4,968. Now surely 
you're not suggesting a 33.3 per cent adjustment in salaries from one year to the next, per individual. 
 
MR. FARIS: — I'll just give you the total figures, you can work it out here. Permanent positions for 
1976-77, $47,190. There was a position reinstated during the year at $19,850. There was a transfer from 
another area which accounts for another $18,000, for an adjustment base of $85,040. The salary 
adjustment during the year, $8,230; increments, $2,550. If we add it all up including the projection, 
some allowance for salaries next year, 

1502 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

we have $103,490. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Okay, so in effect, the average salary is going to be close to $20,000. Well, it's got 
to be $20,000. There are five positions and divided into that amount, it's going to be around $20,000 and 
last year it was around $15,600. 
 
MR. FARIS: — As I suggested to the Member, these are professional positions. They are very 
comparable to that of professionals with whom the Member deals himself in the school system. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Exactly. Our average salary in our school system is $16,000. That was why I asked 
the question whether there was a change in job specifications, whether there was some kind of expertise 
required this year that hadn't been there last year, to create this jump from an average salary of $15,600 
last year to $20,600 this year. I take it that there is no other explanation other than the fact that the 
salaries are going up that amount, for whatever the reason. I still don't know what it is. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 

ITEM 6 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Minister would explain why, with a drop of one 
position in this section, there is a corresponding increase of $100,000 in expenditures for permanent 
positions, based on $274,000? 
 
MR. FARIS: — The Member has his pencil please. I'll read you the figures. In 1976-77, the base figure 
was $274,170; salary adjustments were $36,460; increments were $9,560; staff deletion was $19,610; 
plus an allowance for increase gives a total of $324,630. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I was interrupted and I didn't hear the figures, I wonder.. No I don't want you to read 
them again. I wonder if the Minister would consent to sending them over to me please. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, we'll get this to you. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 

ITEM 7 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, I could ask this question, I suppose, just as easily on Item 8 as on 
Item 7. Maybe we could have an understanding that we'll just ask questions directly about community 
colleges now and once we're done the two items will go. 
 
The Minister put words in my mouth in his response to my initial comment about community colleges. I 
didn't for a minute suggest that there ought not to be such animals around and I 

1503 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

think I indicated that anybody who thought there shouldn't be community colleges would be bonkers and 
I think that was the word I used. It's like saying we ought not to have motherhood or fatherhood or 
whatever. Of course, everyone agrees that there ought to be opportunities for people to continue their 
education in one way or another. I still don't understand why the Minister admits that in Saskatchewan, 
for example, there was an excellent adult education program available and having recognized that, it was 
wiped out and a community college put in its place to do its job. Now would the Minister care to 
comment on that? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Well, first of all, the Member is putting words in my mouth. I would not say that the 
program in Saskatoon was excellent. I would say that for a goodly number of years, it was probably the 
best in the province, but it certainly had a long way to go. Many of the people involved in the program 
in Saskatchewan would be the first to admit that it had certain inadequacies. Some of those inadequacies 
were, for instance, in the area of co-ordination of programs. There were a good many agencies involved 
but they did lack co-ordination and one of the major functions of the community college system in 
Saskatoon is co-ordination. I may say, however, in some areas of Saskatoon, in terms of what is 
described as a community development approach, I think the former institutions simply weren't dealing 
with some of the needs that were there. I feel that the mechanism, the flexibility, the community 
development philosophy of the college, have strengthened this area and will continue to strengthen it. I 
invite the Member, if he's not aware of some of the new program areas in the Saskatoon college system, 
to drop in and talk with the staff and board members and so on and find out what they are doing, because 
I think he'd find it of considerable interest. There are some new thrusts, as well as the co-ordination 
function. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, of course, one doesn't need to be around very long to get some kind of feeling 
for what the community colleges are doing. There are all kinds of program offerings that are available 
that range from some of the things that were being done by Kelsey and Wascana and so on, depending 
on what part of the province you are in, to basket weaving and whatever other needs somebody drums 
up, by being in the bushes long enough to get the need there. There are some people in Saskatchewan 
who are of the opinion that Government priorities are a little wet when they are spending over $5 million 
doing that kind of thing and at the same time, there is only $2.2 million spent on the entire grid road 
system in the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear. 
 
MR. PENNER: — One begins to wonder some times about priorities. I am not going to back down to 
anybody when it comes to talking about priorities or the kinds of words the Minister was attempting to 
put in my mouth a while ago. Would the Minister tell us please whether the office of the Saskatoon 
Community College is expected to remain in its present location after June of this year? 
 
MR. FARIS: — First of all I would just like to say to the Member that on the one hand he said it would 
be bonkers to criticize 

1504 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

the community college system and then on the other hand he suggested that it is just offering basket 
weaving and drumming up courses and so on. I think people understand that you cannot really hold both 
positions at once. In regard to the offices of the Saskatoon Region Community College, it is a board 
decision as to where they locate and I have no information. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Would the Minister tell me what the rental rate per month is for the Saskatoon 
Community College office on 24th Street? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I am sorry I don't know what that figure is, we give them a total grant. That is the 
responsibility of the Saskatoon Community College Board. I am sure they can provide you with that 
information. We give them a grant and they allocate the money according to their own priorities. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, I understand that. I am surprised, frankly, that the Minister wouldn't have that 
figure or that he wouldn't know roughly what it is. 
 
MR. FARIS: — I can get it for you, just as the Member himself could get the information by asking the 
Saskatoon Community College Board. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Yes, okay. I think I have an idea of what it was. I just wondered if the Minister 
knew what it was. I understand that the principal of Kelsey offered to the Community College last year 
the use of the facilities for the continuation of the programs that were withdrawn. I am getting back to 
this point about programs and staff that, at budget time a year ago, were chopped out of the institutes 
and transferred to the responsibility of the community colleges. I am sure the Minister can appreciate the 
staff, who have been carrying on those programs, was much concerned, albeit some of them were 
temporary positions. Now the Community College in Saskatoon chose not to accept the offer of the 
principal for use of the facilities at Kelsey. Instead they did without and rented a basement in an old 
bank and rented a deserted store. They went to the expense of making makeshift classrooms and 
purchasing new equipment and paying rents much higher. Could the Minister explain why that would be 
the case? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I am not aware of the statement that the principal made this offer but it is the 
responsibility of the Saskatoon Community College Board to locate its activities where it desires. The 
board members are not directed where they must do this, that is within their area of decision making. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I don't want to interrupt my colleague but I want 
to ask a question. I have heard the same kind of response from the Ministers of Continuing Education 
for three years, when anybody starts talking about this sacred cow of a community college program. I 
think it is about time that the NDP Government  
 

1505 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

stopped making it a sacred cow. It is about time that you turned around and did an evaluation of the 
community college program. Is it providing the same quality of adult education as was being provided in 
the Kelsey Institution? Is its waste being generated? Are community colleges in Saskatchewan going out 
and generating programs that are of no practical use, either from a cultural view point or anything else? 
How many millions or thousands of dollars are actually being put to use in an education or a cultural 
development program? What is the total concept? What is the evaluation of this program? Is it a good 
program or is it a bad program? Has the quality of adult education in Saskatchewan deteriorated since 
the inauguration of the community colleges from the extension programs and adult programs provided 
by institutes? These are questions that we have a right to know. The people have a right to know. But 
every time, somebody says that, oh no they don't tell the community college anything. They tell us to 
ask the Community College Board. It is about time that the Department of Continuing Education, that 
funds millions of dollars or hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars to adult education programs 
through the community colleges in this province, has a responsibility to determine the answer for us. It 
is not that we are being overly critical, but maybe we want to be critical, maybe we want to know the 
answer. Is adult education in the Province of Saskatchewan on the upgrade, is the quality improving or 
is it deteriorating? I have many people tell me that it is deteriorating, that the quality of the adult 
education is not as good as it was in the Kelsey Institute. I have many people who insist that is true. I 
think it is your job, if you are going to fund community colleges, to do an evaluation and quit this 
business of making this community college program a sacred cow. It has been in operation now three or 
four years. It should have its feet on the ground. It is about time that people now did an evaluation and 
an assessment of whether it is good or bad, and for goodness sake stop saying, "Oh ask the community 
college", we don't interfere with them". It is about time you interfered with them. I don't mean for you to 
interfere with the program, I mean it is time that you evaluated and assessed the quality off the education 
program that exists and the value you are getting for the dollar. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Mr. Speaker, it is very revealing when the Member suggests it is time we interfered 
with them. We get all this talk from the Members opposite about autonomy, decentralization, and so on, 
and now we are told it is time we should interfere with them. I can tell the Member that the community 
college plan is an excellent system and is doing excellent work. And fair minded adult educators all 
across Canada will tell you exactly the same thing. This is a program that is the envy of Canada. It has 
been studied as far away as Africa and Australia. Now if you want to know, the program is under 
constant evaluation. If the Members have pencils and they want to take down a few figures about what is 
going on in the college system, I will tell them if they want to listen. Last year in the adult basic 
education area, 5.3 per cent of the offerings were in this category — the number of people was 3,878; 
university transfers, 1,156 people, that is 1.6 per cent of the offerings; occupational training 908 people, 
1.2 per cent; the social demand area, homemaking skills 19,813 people, 27.1 per cent; applied arts and 
crafts 10,125 people, 13.9 per cent; intellectual skills and development 4,683 people, 6.4 per cent; 
business skills and knowledge 4,582 people, 6.3 per cent; vocational improvement 10,209 people, 14 per 
cent; health, physical education 

1506 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

7,841 people, 10.7 per cent; family life education 1,596 people, 2.2 per cent; animal training 227 people, 
.3 per cent; community service 1,474 people, 2 per cent; agriculture 3,174 people, 4.3 per cent; institute 
extension, 2,187 people, 3 per cent; university certificate — non credit 791 people, 1.1 per cent; private 
training purchases 333 people, .5 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have had, not only this year but in past years, this kind of criticism about the kind 
of courses we are offering. I want to tell the Hon. Member those are the courses that the people of 
Saskatchewan asked for, and if you have an arrogant know-it-all kind of attitude to put down what the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking for and if you don't think it is important that they get those kind of 
courses, you go out there and tell them that those aren't important courses. 
 
I want to tell you that when I was visiting the community college system recently in the city of 
Weyburn, I was invited into the back to see an upholstery course. The Member may say that is not very 
important, but I want to tell you I was extremely impressed by the attitude of those people there. They 
came up to me and they said, "Thank you very much. This is terrific". They had done a piece of work 
stuffing a chair, which was terrific in my estimation. It was better than professional. They were going to 
take it home and they were full of pride. They had accomplished a new skill and I want to say that I was 
proud that we have a community college system that will answer their requests in that way. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, that is the same kind of gobbledygook that I have been talking 
about. The Minister gets up in his sanctimonious, almost idiotic way and talks about somebody stuffing 
chairs. That has been available in adult education in Saskatchewan for years. Now that is the point that 
we are trying to talk about here, what the Minister should do — and he should give an honest answer. 
We are not talking about interference, we are saying that the NDP Government and the Department of 
Continuing Education, have a serious responsibility, a responsibility to find out if you are getting value 
for your dollar. Don't say that it is the envy of Canada because the other Canadians have no idea whether 
the program is good or bad. They think the concept has some value, and I don't disagree. I think the 
concept has some values. Don't tell me about the people of Saskatchewan, the community colleges have 
a few people who go out and generate courses. Don't tell me it is the people of Saskatchewan, it is the 
community college generating courses and generating the expenditure of money in many cases, and you 
know it, as well as I do. But it is time we started to find out, and find out very quickly if we are getting 
value for our dollar. For example, you talk about vocational skills, how many people who took those 
vocational skills are actually employed in those vocational skills? How many went on to further 
education after they got basic educational skills? In other words, what I am trying to say is, let's find out 
the quality and the direction and the advantage of the community college program for the people of 
Saskatchewan, by doing an evaluation on it, by doing a survey of it. Somebody should do an honest 
assessment of it and stop giving us this stuff that we have been listening to for three years that it is the 
envy of Canada and all the provinces. I sat in on community college planning when the other provinces 
came to assess the concept. That has got nothing to do with the quality, 

1507 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

nothing to do with the quality of the program. What I am talking about is, let's find out if there is quality 
education. Let's find out if it is as good as the education that was being offered before. That should not 
be difficult for the Department of Continuing Education and might end up saving the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan millions of dollars. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Mr. Chairman, the program is saving the taxpayers millions of dollars. He was a 
Member of the former government, which had plans to build campuses in a few centres of this province, 
the interest and maintenance of which wouldn't have financed our present program. Seventy-three 
thousand people in this province say it is a good program. I know the Member laughs and smiles about 
the upholstery course, but I want him to know that that course was not available in Weyburn before. It 
may have been available in Saskatchewan, yes maybe there was availability of that course in .Saskatoon. 
Why didn't those people in Weyburn have the good sense to go up there and take it? I will tell the 
Member that the instructor of that course told me, that to learn upholstery, she had to go down to 
California to learn the skills and prior to the community college course, there wasn't a mechanism 
available for her to share those skills with her neighbors. Now these are good things and the word I get 
from all across this province I that it is of a high calibre. I can tell you that our department is constantly 
evaluating these programs. We went through the Item for the research and planning branch. That is one 
of its functions. These programs are under continuous research. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I would hope that the Minister is not going to say that there weren't upholstery 
classes and other such classes around the province of Saskatchewan and you had to go to the cities in 
order to enrol in such types of classes. It all depended on the local school jurisdiction as to whether or 
not there were any adult education courses offered in the communities before the concept of community 
college was introduced. But I have a question that I would like to direct to your department. Last April 
26, almost one year ago, we tried to find out a few things about one of the community colleges. A few of 
us sat down and thought we would like to do our own little evaluation as to what was happening in the 
community colleges. We chose one of the colleges with which we were a bit familiar, that being the 
Cypress Hill Community College in Swift Current. We have often been told by the Minister that if we 
want to get answers we shouldn't be asking them in the Question Period, we should be putting them on 
the Order Paper. This question was put on the Order Paper last April 26, almost a year ago and it reads: 
 

With regard to the courses sponsored by the Cypress Hills Community College during the 1974-75 
fiscal year: — (a) Give us the name of the course, the location where the course was offered, the 
duration of the course in hours, the enrolment in the course, the cost including instructional fees, rent 
and travel fees per course, fees collected for the course. 

 
Mr. Chairman, these statistics that the Minister was giving can often be deceptive. Some of the courses 
had been held off, some lasted for one afternoon, consisting of two hours. When you start listing courses 
and how many numbers and what the 

1508 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

enrolment is — they are almost irrelevant figures, unless you know how many hours of course that were 
held and how many students who were enrolled in those courses. Then you can probably sit down and 
give some sort of financial evaluation. There was also a second question on the Order Paper that the 
Minister can road as well. I wonder why we have not yet received an answer to those questions that were 
placed on the Order Paper one year ago? 
 
MR. FARIS: — My officials inform me that for this answer, they had to go to the community college to 
get all the details because the board administers the program on a regional basis, but that will be very 
soon forthcoming. If the Members want more information about the community college system I would 
be very pleased to set up a meeting between my officials and themselves to give them an overall picture. 
All of a sudden they seem interested in research and so on. I am quite willing to share this information 
and I can tell you that if you want program hours and program activity in regard to each community 
college region, I can give you that figure right now. But let's get back to what the situation was, prior to 
the community college system. 
 
One third of the school units of this province had no programs at all, none at all. The average 
expenditure in school units, in the year prior to the community college system, for adult education 
courses was $300. Just ask the people in your areas whether it has made any difference at all to have 
community colleges. It has made a tremendous difference. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — The Minister has not answered my questions. Surely this question was not that 
complicated that it would take 11 months to go out and gather the information from Swift Current. Why 
haven't we had the results a little bit sooner? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I understand the question was asked towards the end of June and the figures were not 
necessarily available at that date from the community college system. We had to wait for their annual 
report to answer those figures. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — The figures were for 1974-75 and the question was asked on April the 26th, not 
in June. 
 
MR. FARIS: — It will be in very soon. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, that is just exactly what I am talking about, 
information, and you start talking about $300 a unit. Are you counting that money from the extension 
department of the universities in Saskatoon and Regina? Are you counting the money from adult 
education in Kelsey and the technical institutions in Saskatchewan, or is the $300 just from the school 
units? Now let's get all the information on a factual basis. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Well, Hon. Member when you were asking about the community college system, did 
you include all the figures for Kelsey and the institutes and so on? No you didn't. I was 

1509 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

comparing the community college grant to what was actually spent by the unit boards. Those other 
figures which you said I didn't include, you didn't include them in discussing community colleges. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — What I am trying to say is the adult education programs that you have taken 
over from the university and Kelsey and the other things are part of the dollars that were spent. You get 
up and try to mislead the House and say it was $300 and it wasn't. It's the same thing as when a Member 
asks for some important information and you get up and you tell us, "It's the envy of all of Canada". It is 
time you started providing some information to this House so that we can judge whether it is the envy of 
all of Canada. 
 
MR. W. H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — I would like to ask the Minister, in respect to the answers 
to the questions I have been given, have you a written copy and if so when did you receive it? The 
reason for asking those questions was that when we got into Estimates this year, we could use them 
when we got to the section and we were studying the Estimates of the community college system. When 
were they prepared, when did you receive them from Swift Current? 
 
MR. FARIS: — As a matter of fact my officials have not yet prepared No. 64, and No. 65. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Could I ask you what system you have of informing the public? Do you publish 
the financial statement of these community colleges? Are they bound as/for example, school units are, 
once a year when the financial audit has taken place, to place an ad in the local newspaper? Do you have 
any way in which your community colleges are accountable to the public? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Annual reports and audited financial statements are available for all of the community 
colleges in the province. If the Member cares we could gather them together for him, or if he is 
interested, he could do it himself. 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, could the Minister tell me if it is the 
policy of community colleges throughout the province to own their own facilities, or do you lease or do 
you normally go into existing Government office space? What is their general policy in this matter? 
 
MR. FARIS: — This is up to the boards of the colleges. My experience is that they tend to lease and 
use existing facilities. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Could the Minister, on consultation with his officials, tell me from whom you 
lease in the city of Moose Jaw? 
 
MR. FARIS: — We don't lease from anybody. The Moose Jaw or Coteau Range Community College 
leases. 

1510 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Do you approve of the lease in the amount of money and the expenditure of the 
dollar value? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, the leases are approved under regulations. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Could you tell me from whom you lease in Moose Jaw, what company or what 
individual that the Coteau Range Community college leases from? 
 
MR. FARIS: — We don't have that written down but we can get that information to you if you request 
it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I require it. Why don't you send one of them out for it right now and we can 
move along? What does the shrug mean from the Minister? Does that mean you will provide it or you 
won' t? 
 
MR. FARIS: — We will provide it. Are you suggesting that you want one or my officials to leave now 
and go and get it for you? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — If you think that you can possibly get along without one of them, yes, I would. 
Now mind you, I don't want to leave you short staffed, you've only got one, two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, eight, nine of them with you, facing a very small bunch here. Now if you think you can get along 
with one less, yes, I would like him to. 
 
MR. FARIS: — You want to know the name of the person from whom the community college 
headquarters are leased in Moose Jaw? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And the amount of rent they are paying? 
 
MR. FARIS: — And the amount of rent they are paying. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And the length of the lease? 
 
MR. FARIS: — We'll get that for you. 
 
MR. PENNER: — We'll stand this Item, Mr. Chairman, if we may and Item No. 8 as well and move on 
to Item No. 9 and then we can come back and pick them up later. 
 
Items 7 and 8 stood. 
 

ITEM 9 
 
MR. G. H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Could the Minister tell me to whom these grants are 
given? You know, I don't want a long list but what goods are we talking about? 

1511 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. FARIS: — Do you want the amounts or just the names: — Campion College, Luther College, St. 
Thomas More/Indian Federated College, College of Emmanuel, St. Chad's, Lutheran Theological 
Seminary, St. Andrew's College, St. Joseph's College, St. Peter's College, Notre Dame College, 
Canadian Theological College. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Is there any special reason why all other parts of the spending of this department 
show an increase from one year to the next and this one doesn't? 
 
MR. FARIS: — The figure for 1976-77 which was actually paid out was $1,744,710, the approved 
figure for next year is $2,167,800. Now that is an increase. The situation is that some of these colleges, 
some of the affiliated colleges, are having lower enrolments. 
 
Item No. 9 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 10 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I believe until we get that answer, we should perhaps leave that 
Item and come back to it. We could perhaps proceed while we are waiting in view of the fact the 
Minister is obtaining an answer. 
 
MR. PENNER: — We did flag it. We have moved on now to Item 10. 
 
Item No. 10 agreed to. 
Item No. 11 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 12 
 
MR. PENNER: — This is another Item where the increase in per person salary is substantial. We had 
an Item earlier where the increase had gone from $15,600 per person to $20,600 per person and here we 
have an Item that has gone from an average last year of $16,009 to an average salary this year of 
$21,480. Would the Minister care to explain why that should be the case? 
 
MR. FARIS: — It is the same explanation as in the last one. This is a professionally oriented program, 
we require professionally trained people. I can give you the figures right now if you wish. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I'm not interested in the exact figures. What I am interested in, is knowing whether 
the professionally trained people have any different requirements this year than was the case last year? 
 
MR. FARIS: — If I give the detailed figures, the explanation will be apparent. If you wish those 
figures, I will give them to you. 

1512 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

MR. PENNER: — Well, maybe I can get at it a different way. Last year there were eight people, this 
year there are ten. Are last year's eight in this year's ten? In other words, it is fair to assume that the 
average salary of the same people is going to jump from $16,900 to about $21,400. For what reason are 
the salaries of people in your department able to go up these substantial rates, when that isn't the case 
with other sectors of our economy? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I think the Member keeps running into the same problem and if he will take down the 
figures that I give him he will understand that because there was not a salary settlement included in last 
year's figures, both last year's and this year's are included in this year's figures. We have done this about 
three times but I will give you the figures here. In 1976-77 the base figure was $135,000; two midterm 
re-instatements, $27,550; one position transferred, $18,000; the salary increase, $20,770; annual 
increments $5,240; one position cut is a deletion of $7,870; an allowance for next year's salary increase, 
bringing the total to $214,800. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Will the Minister tell us please, what the actual figure was for 1976-77 under other 
personal services for the Item? 
 
MR. FARIS: — The base figure was $51,000. There was a decrease in temporary salaries of $8,640 for 
this year's estimate of $42,360. 
 
MR. PENNER: — So in other words, what the Minister is saying is that last year the contention, that at 
least this part of the Opposition maintained, that you had in fact deflated not just your department but all 
departments of Government, deflated the salary costs, was, in fact, correct? The figures last year did not 
include increment for the 1976-77 year, that's what happened, is it? 
 
MR. FARIS: — There were increments but not salary settlements because that wasn't done at that time. 
We have this figure in there for this year. 
 
Item No. 12 agreed. 
 

ITEM 13 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, this represents a substantial increase in expenditure over a year ago 
from $2.6 million to $6.6 million. Would the Minister please indicate what has caused that change? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, the major increases in this area are under the Occupational Training Act from 
1976-77 of $324,000 up to $1,877,000 this year and the Saskatchewan Indian Community College. 
That's recoverable and, the Saskatchewan Indian Community College, which went from $283,000 up to 
$1.8 million, 

1513 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

is too. The college just started in that year, it will be in full operation this year. 
 
MR. PENNER: — When the Minister indicates that the costs are recoverable are you suggesting then, 
that that is shown as a provincial expenditure and you are actually getting the money from the Federal 
Government? You are acting as the agent for the money, is that correct? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, this is part of the gross budgeting procedure. We claim on the Department of 
Manpower and Immigration and Indian Affairs and those figures are shown there to show what our 
gross expenditures are. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 15 
 
MR. PENNER: — If I may, Mr. Chairman. I made some comments earlier about what has happened 
with regard to permanent positions and temporary positions in the department. One of the areas that are 
specifically affected is the institutes, the Wascana and the Kelsey in Moose Jaw, where in some 
instances it shows a drop in permanent positions but a substantial increase is evident in temporary 
positions. The overall rate in the department, I suggest, is at an annual rate of $15,000 per person but 
there is an increase of $454,010 in temporary positions overall. A good portion of it is right here, when 
one looks at other personal services, from $1.1 million to $1.3 million. Would the Minister care to 
comment why it is that the department or the institute is showing a drop in permanent positions and at 
the same time there is a substantial increase in temporary positions? 
 
MR.  FARIS: — The details on this are that the 1976-77 base figure is 51,143,000. There is a decrease 
in temporary salaries this year of $348,000; an increase in casual salaries of $10,000; an increase in 
hourly and day labor of $414,000; an increase in part time of $88,000; an increase in educational leave 
of $25,000; for a total of $1,333,000. Now the explanation for this is that there are a lot of courses 
offered there, particularly in the manpower training area, which are not full year courses. The people 
available for training and so on, come in and out. In this particular case, the area in particular is the 
agricultural manpower program because Wascana runs the agricultural manpower program for the entire 
province. 
 
MR. PENNER: — It doesn't make any difference how you cut it or what you call them. While there is a 
decrease in the number of permanent positions, there is an increase in temporary whether they are hired 
by the month, the hour or the minute or the second or however. There is an increase in temporary 
positions that is substantial in that Item. Is that correct? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Yes, that's right, I am not quibbling about what 

1514 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

you call it but the reason I gave you is the explanation These people who are not there full year round, 
for instance on the agricultural extension courses and so on, are not permanent positions; they are met 
through these various categories that, if you want to lump together, could be called temporary. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Does the Minister or his officials have any plans this year to release staff the way 
they did a year ago, in what I consider to have been an extremely cold-blooded and heartless kind of 
way? People who had been working, many of them for many, many years for this institute and others, 
were just simply cut loose. They were given some suggestions that they would be hired by the 
community colleges when, in fact, there was no intention of doing that. They were given no reason 
either for the dismissal. Is it your intention to do that again this year? 
 
MR. FARIS: — I think the Member, rhetoric aside, is asking for cuts this year in staff and so on, is that 
correct? 
 
MR. PENNER: — Give more totals for all of them to begin with, at least 
 
MR. FARIS: — Wascana Institute, seven deletions of positions this year; Kelsey Institute 16; five in 
Saskatchewan Technical Institute. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Would the Minister care to explain why those cuts have been made please? 
 
MR. FARIS: — In the Wascana Institute there were four instructors, one clerk steno, one certified 
dental assistant and one clerk 1. In the Kelsey Technical Institute there were seven instructors, one stock 
clerk 1, one library technician 1, one truck driver, two clerk stenos 2, two clerk typists 2, one accounting 
clerk 1, one clerk 1. In the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, there were two instructors, one engineering 
assistant 2, one clerk 3, one radio technician. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Would the Minister comment or not these cutbacks and I am really more concerned 
at the moment about the instructional people than I am about the paraprofessional people, or secretarial 
people, are a result of attrition or program cuts? What is the reason? 
 
MR. FARIS: — It is a variety of reasons. There are changes in this part of the educational system just 
as there are in any other. And if a person is an instructor in one particular area and the demand goes 
down for that area, then this kind of decision has to be made. 
 
MR. PENNER: —  Are any of the programs involved here being transferred to community colleges this 
year? 

1515 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

MR. FARIS: — The answer is, No. 
 
Items 15 and 16 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 17 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I see that you are allowing about $680,000 on 
personal services, in this particular Item. Would you perhaps explain why such a high volume is 
necessary? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Basically, the explanation is the same with regard to Wascana. These are people 
teaching in programs which are not full year programs. There are a lot of manpower programs, a lot of 
extension type programs, that are not simply year round. 
 
The 1976-77 the base figure is $476,000; the increase in temporary is $65,000; increase in seasonal is 
$28,000; increase in casual is $9,000; increase in labor services is $100,000, giving you the total of 
$680,000. 
 
There are also the salary increases in both cases. 
 
Item 17 agreed to. 
 

ITEM 18 
 
MR. FARIS: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we might deal with this Item and deal with the University 
section, the departmental responsibilities, before we move back to this one. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Why? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Well, it is just that we then will free some of my departmental staff. 
 
MR. FARIS: — Will we finish before 5: — 00? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Oh, I don't know, if it is important to the Member. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — I may not be here at some other time and I know that would bring a great deal 
of pleasure to Members opposite, but perhaps I could ask my brief question in reference' to Item 18. 
 
The Minister is aware of the continuing difficulty, if I may put it that way, of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Artists and Educators who seek to become adhered, if I may put it that way, to the media, 
SaskMedia, so that they may become used by SaskMedia and paid the union rate for that group. I am 
surprised, Mr. Chairman, to find that while the Government claims that part of the reason that they use 
the agencies that they use is because they are the only people who are adhered to ACTRA and, therefore, 
are using the trade union, which to the great horror of the Member for Thunder Creek, I belong to. Do I 
get drummed out of the caucus for that? 
 
The Government, in fact, told one agency in town, Foster 

1516 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

Advertising, that they could not expect to receive any government work whatsoever, unless they became 
adhered to ACTRA and became a closed shop union organization. They gave in, if I may put it that way, 
to the Government request but I don't know whether that has resulted in their receiving any government 
work. I don't recall Foster's receiving any government work. They are now a closed shop union 
organization so that they may only deal with people who are ACTRA members. If they deal with people 
who are not ACTRA members, they have to obtain from ACTRA, a clearance to use a non-ACTRA 
member and they have to pay the union rates of ACTRA which are more expensive than the rates, for 
instance, that CKCK Television would pay if they make an advertisement. 
 
I wonder why, Mr. Minister, there is a different approach between what the Government says they are 
doing, when they deal with agencies and deal with Foster's and when they deal with their own 
SaskMedia Corporation, but they are far from saying that they won't make it an exclusive union 
organization; they won't even go so far as to say that they will deal with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Artists and Educators and they won't even negotiate with them. I wonder if the Minister would tell me 
why? 
 
MR. FARIS: — Since the Hon. Member informed me that he is a member of ACTRA, I really don't 
think that I should negotiate with him in the Legislature. I would say that this is a matter which is 
between the board of directors of the corporation and anybody who wants to open discussions, or to call 
a negotiation. I just simply point out that the people who are raising these questions are not employees 
— this is a very important point — they are not employees of the SaskMedia Corporation. They are 
freelancers who are asking to enter into a sort of contractual relationship and I think that is a different 
kind of situation. It is my understanding that there is, or have been in the past, some discussions between 
the chairman of the Board and representatives of this group. The results were not mutually acceptable 
conclusions but that is the situation as it exists. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Yes, it is fine to say that the union hasn't come in and signed up the people in 
the SaskMedia Corporation, but in fact, that is not the way that the SaskMedia Corporation operates. 
You don't have a clump of employees that you can see are used on a continuous basis. It is not possible 
to go in and get the cards from the man in the factory or the women in the woollen mill, or whatever, in 
the ordinary union way. So the only way, probably, that SaskMedia is going to become an adhered 
agency is if the Government allows them to become an adhered agency voluntarily. 
 
I am not particularly, in my own capacity, suggesting that that is the right direction to go, but I am 
shocked to find your Government working so hard to keep SaskMedia from becoming a union 
organization; a government that tells me that they are a pro-union government; a government that in all 
other areas tends to take sides. We say the matter between union or non-union is a neutral matter and the 
Government should not become involved. The NDP doesn't seem to view it that way. So here I have a 
situation where SaskMedia will never become unionized unless the Government voluntarily makes it a 
union organization. The Government, in other areas, dealing with the 

1517 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

advertising agencies that are in the same situation, would not be unionized unless the Government 
voluntarily made them unionized, and made them closed shop union organizations. The Government 
took that step with three agencies and said that they must become closed shop union organizations. Then 
with their own organization they say, "No, go out and get the card support from people". They know that 
person can't get out and get the card support. 
 
I just suggest to the Minister that is very inconsistent with the attitude that the Government takes in its 
other dealings with the media. 
 
MR. FARIS: — I say that the Member, again, confuses people who want to, individually on a part time 
basis, have a contractual relationship with people who are the employees of the SaskMedia Corporation. 
There are 50 full time SaskMedia Corporation employees. It is up to them and it is their right to organize 
or unionize as they wish. That is consistent with the attitude of this Government. 
 
I want to point out that the STF is not part of the Saskatchewan Association of Artists and Educators, 
and that is a major group. I also want to point out that we are not looking forward to a closed shop 
because what this does is shut out and restrict the talent pool in Saskatchewan, a great many more 
people throughout this province who might very well object to a closed shop arrangement. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Chairman, I should like to introduce a young man 
who is visiting here from Manchester, England, Neil Standring. Will you please stand, Neil. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — He is accompanied by my sister and brother-in-law Mr. & Mrs. Robert Armitstead, 
from Abbottsford, British Columbia as well. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — They are visiting here from Bennett-land and they have saved a little money, after 
they have paid their car insurance, in order to make the trip. 
 
I should also like to introduce my Nanny, who takes care of my kids, she is also my wife. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear. 
 
Revert back to items 7 and 8 — Continuing Education 
 

ITEM 7 
 
MR. FARIS: — The information is that the property is rented by IMC Services and the principal 
shareholder of IMC Services is 

1518 
 



 
Committee of Finance  March 30, 1977 

 

Tom Gifco; the rental is from October 1, 1975, for five years at 53 Stadacona Street West, the New 
Horizon Building. The rental rate, which I think was requested-total monthly rent is $1,250, total yearly 
rent is $14,580, which works out to $4.95 per square foot, all services included, light and water. This 
base is in a prime area in the heart of Moose Jaw as the Member knows. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it is very interesting. As the Minister indicated IMC 
holdings are controlled, probably owned outright, by one Thomas Gifco, who I am sure is known to 
most Members in the Assembly. He has got a few other things from this Government. He has an SGIO 
Agency. He does pretty well in that building because, not only is the community college there, but also 
the Department of Public Health which occupies quite a bit of space. 
 
This building, that Mr. Gifco and IMC holdings own and lease to the community college, was purchased 
from this Government. It was purchased for the price of some $50,000. That is the figure that 
Government Services provided to me on the Order Paper, about one year ago, in case you would care to 
check. And the Minister has just now informed the Assembly that Mr. Gifco has a lease, or just a portion 
of it, not the whole thing, that is worth $72,900 over five years. That is just not that bad a return on 
money. Does anybody know where there are any more investments like that around? 
 
Who is Tom Gifco? I am sure everybody in this House knows Tom Gifco. In 1971 he was a defeated 
NDP candidate. From this sanctimonious crew across here that is passing judgment on every one, we see 
here, right now, one of the rankest, rottenest, smelliest deals any government anywhere could dream of. 
We will find out just exactly how much Mr. Gifco is receiving from . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, I would just like to remind the Hon. Member to try and keep his remarks 
to a level of where the decorum of the House doesn't deteriorate any worse than it has, please. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — It is a funny thing, Mr. Minister, it seems somebody can shoot anything across 
from that side and it always seems to go unnoticed. But when it comes from this side, we seem to get 
called to order rather quickly. But I shall confine it to the parameters that you have suggested. 
 
When we come to the Department of Health we will see exactly how much this defeated NDP candidate, 
Mr. Gifco, is in fact realizing. Let's assume that he gets no revenue whatsoever from the rest of his office 
space. He now sits with a lease worth $72,900 on an initial investment of $50,000. The Government sold 
it to him and the Government directly or indirectly turns around and re-leases it from him. That is not a 
bad situation. The rest of you Members, what did you win your election for? Actually you fellows who 
won the election are the ones that are discriminated against. I think when it comes to financial sense, our 
friends across the way could perhaps take a lesson from Mr. Gifco. He has an SGIO agency out of which 
the Department of Public Health and the Department of Continuing Education operate. I am sure that the 

1519 
 



 
March 30, 1977 Committee of Finance 
 

Minister being a man of the cloth and a very sanctimonious individual . . . 
 
MR. FARIS: — Mr. Chairman, on a Point of Order. He has ascribed the Department of Continuing 
Education as operating out of there, the Department of Continuing Education does not operate out of 
there. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I believe you said a little while ago that you approved the lease. Anyway you cut 
it, you are responsible for it. 
 
As I indicated, the Minister, being a very sanctimonious individual, and now that these facts have been 
brought to his attention, will no doubt want to deal with this. Of course, I don't expect you to do it 
tomorrow but perhaps the day after. I am sure that you will want to take a look at this. 
 
This has to be one of the rankest, political payoffs that is in operation in Saskatchewan. I suppose the 
main question, as you stumble over these, is how many others are you never going to find. How many 
others like this do you have for your defeated candidates? If positions were reversed, I can just see the 
sanctimony that would be streaming across the House onto this side. 
 
That is just not a bad position; you have $72,000, you recapture your original investment in five years 
and that is only a portion of it. We will have a look at the rest of it when the Department of Health 
Estimates come up. I can only say to the Minister, surely to goodness, someone who has exhibited the 
sanctimony that you have since I have been in this House, can be trusted to look at this no later than the 
day after tomorrow. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
Item 8 agreed. 
Item 19 agreed. 
Item 20 agreed. 
Item 21 agreed. 
Item 22 agreed. 
Item 23 agreed. 
Item 24 agreed. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
 
MR. PENNER: — I will make just one comment Mr. Chairman. When we began this afternoon we 
indicated to the Minister that in our opinion there were branches of his department that were growing. 
Administrative branches of his department were growing that we didn't feel necessary. The 
Supplementary Estimates simply confirm what we said earlier. Not only is there an increase of 50 per 
cent in executive administration, but they have seen fit, since the Blue Book was printed, to have another 
one added to that department. Not only has community college administration increased, it has increased 
again in the Supplementary Estimates. I think it is unfortunate that the services part of the program can't 
go ahead without continuing to increase staff. I am still of the view that this is not necessary and I 
consider it to be very unfortunate. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
Supplementary Estimates agreed. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:48 o'clock p.m. 

1520 
 


